=== 1 | 1 ===
Rabbi Hoshaya the Great began: “I1The speaker is Wisdom (the Torah) personified. was with Him as an amon, a delight day after day…” (Proverbs 8:30) – amon means a child’s caretaker, amon means covered, amon means hidden, and some say amon means greatness. Amon means a child’s caretaker, as it says: “As a caretaker [omen] carries a nursing child” (Numbers 11:12). Amon means covered, as it says: “Those covered [ha’emunim] in scarlet…” (Lamentations 4:5). Amon  means hidden, as it says: “He was omen2This is expounded to mean that Mordekhai hid Esther from the emissaries of Aḥashverosh. Hadassa” (Esther 2:7). Amon means great, as it says: “Are you better than No Amon [which sits in the rivers]?” (Nahum 3:8), which we translate in Targum as: Are you better than the great city of Alexandria,3No (or No Amon) is the name of a city in Egypt. Targum identifies this city as Alexandria, and explains Amon to mean great. which is located among the rivers? Another matter, amon means artisan [uman]. The Torah is saying: ‘I was the tool of craft of the Holy One blessed be He.’ The way of the world is that when a flesh-and-blood king builds a palace he does not build it based on his own knowledge, but rather based on the knowledge of an artisan.4A professional builder. And the artisan does not build it based on his own knowledge, but rather, he has [plans on] sheets and tablets by which to ascertain how he should build its rooms, how he should build its doors. So too, the Holy One blessed be He looked in the Torah and created the world. The Torah says: “Bereshit God created” (Genesis 1:1), and reshit is nothing other than the Torah, as it says: “The Lord made me at the beginning of [reshit] His way” (Proverbs 8:22).5Be-reshit is interpreted as ‘by means of the Torah.’
Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin began in the name of Rabbi Levi: “The power of His deeds6The account of Creation. He told to His people, to give them the inheritance of nations” (Psalms 111:6). What is the reason that the Holy One blessed be He revealed what was created on the first day and what was created on the second day? It is due to the idolaters, so they could not rebuke Israel and say to them: ‘You are a nation of robbers.’7By your conquest of the land of Israel from its original inhabitants. Israel responds to them and says to them: ‘And you, is it [your own land] not in your hands by robbery? Is it not so that: “Kaftorim, who emerged from Kaftor, destroyed them [the Avites], and settled in their place”? (Deuteronomy 2:23). The world and all its contents belong to the Holy One blessed be He. When He wished He gave it to you, and when He wished He took it from you and gave it to us.’ That is what is written: “[The power of His deeds He told to His people,] to give them the inheritance of nations…” – He told them [the history of] all the generations.8So that they should see clearly that peoples have often conquered other peoples.
“In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth” (Genesis 1:1). “In the beginning, God created” – Rabbi Tanḥuma began: “For You are great and perform wonders” (Psalms 86:10). Rabbi Tanḥum said: A wineskin, if it has a hole as small as the point of a needle, all its air will escape from it.9When one inflates it to determine whether there are any holes. Yet a human is made with numerous cavities and orifices, but his air does not escape from him. Who can do so? It is “You, alone, are God” (Psalms 86:10). When were the angels created? Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The angels [malakhim] were created on the second day. That is what is written: “He covers His upper chambers10The heavens. with water…”11This is what God did on the second day (Genesis 1:6–7). (Psalms 104:3), and it is written: “He makes the winds His messengers [malakhav]” (Psalms 104:4). Rabbi Ḥanina said: The angels were created on the fifth day. That is what is written: “Let birds fly [yeofef] over the earth…” (Genesis 1:20), and it is written [of the angels]: “And with two12The seraphim had six wings, using two of them for flight (Isaiah 6:2). it would fly [yeofef]” (Isaiah 6:2). Rabbi Lulyana bar Tavrin said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: Both according to the opinion of Rabbi Ḥanina and according to the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan, everyone agrees that none were created on the first day, so people should not say: Mikhael was pulling at the south side of the heavens and Gabriel at its north side, while the Holy One blessed be He straightened it out in the middle. Rather, “I am the Lord, who made everything; who stretched out the heavens alone…by Myself [me’iti]” (Isaiah 44:24) – it [the last word] is written [as two],13Although the word is pronounced (keri) me’iti, in the biblical text it is written (ketiv) as two words, mi iti. “who is with Me [mi iti]?” Who was partner with Me in the creation of the world? Another matter, “for You are great and perform wonders” (Psalms 86:10) – the way of the world is that a flesh-and-blood king, when he is receives praise in the province,14For its magnificent buildings or for its proficient administration. the prominent leaders of the province receive praise along with him, as they bear the burden [of governing] with him. But the Holy One blessed be He is not so; rather, He alone created the world, He alone is lauded in the world, He alone is glorified in the world. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: “For You are great and perform wonders” – why? It is because “You, alone, are God” – You alone created the world.
“In the beginning, God created” – six items preceded the creation of the world; some of them were [actually] created, and some of them God contemplated creating, [though He did not actually do so]. The Torah and the Throne of Glory were created. Torah, from where is it derived? As it is stated: “The Lord made me15The speaker is Wisdom (the Torah) personified. at the beginning of His way” (Proverbs 8:22). The Throne of Glory, from where is it derived? “Your throne stands firm from earliest time, [You are from eternity]” (Psalms 93:2). The patriarchs, Israel, the Temple, and the name of the messianic king – God contemplated creating them [before the world, but did not]. The patriarchs, from where is it derived? “Like grapes in the wilderness [I found Israel, like a first fruit on the fig tree, at its beginning [bereshitah] I saw your fathers]” (Hosea 9:10). Israel, from where is it derived? “Remember Your congregation, that You acquired from old times” (Psalms 74:2). The Temple, from where is it derived? “Throne of glory, exalted from the beginning, [is the place of our Temple]” (Jeremiah 17:12). The name of the messianic king, from where is it derived? “May his name endure forever. His name is praised before the sun”16The Midrash expounds “before” to mean prior to. (Psalms 72:17). Rabbi Ahava ben Rabbi Ze’eira said: Repentance as well, as it is stated: “Before the birth of mountains” (Psalms 90:2), and at that same time, “You bring man down until he is crushed, [and then You say: Return, sons of man]” (Psalms 90:3). But I do not know which of them17The two things that were actually created before the world. was first – did the Torah precede the Throne of Glory, or did the Throne of Glory precede the Torah? Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: The Torah preceded the Throne of Glory, as it is stated: “The Lord made me at the beginning of His way, [before His undertakings of old times]” (Proverbs 8:22) – before that in whose regard it is written: “Your throne stands firm from earliest time” (Psalms 93:2). Rabbi Huna and Rabbi Yirmeya said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Rabbi Yitzḥak: The contemplation about [creating] Israel preceded all other things. This is analogous to a king who married a noblewoman, but did not have a son from her. Once the king was found passing in the marketplace. He said: ‘Take this ink and inkwell for my son.’ Everyone was saying: ‘He has no son and yet he says: Take this ink and inkwell for my son?’ Then they said: ‘The king is a great astrologer, had it not been that he is destined to beget a son from her, he would not have said: Take this ink and inkwell for my son.’ So, too, had it not been that the Holy One blessed be He foresaw that after twenty-six generations Israel was destined to receive the Torah, He would not have written in the Torah: “Command the children of Israel”; “speak to the children of Israel.” Rabbi Banai said: The world and its contents were created only due to the merit of the Torah, as it is stated: “The Lord founded the earth with wisdom [beḥochma]”18Beḥochma could also be translated “for the sake of wisdom” – wisdom, throughout Proverbs, refers to the Torah. Similarly, the Midrash is interpreting Bereshit as “for the sake of Reshit” – God created the heavens and the earth for the sake of that which is called Reshit. (Proverbs 3:19). Rabbi Berekhya said: It was due to the merit of Moses, as it is stated: “He saw the first [reshit] for himself, [as there the portion of the lawgiver is hidden]” (Deuteronomy 33:21).19Moses, the lawgiver, is called Reshit, the first one. Rav Huna said in the name of Rav Matana: The world was created for the sake of three things: For the sake of ḥalla, for the sake of tithes, and for the sake of first fruits. What is the source? “In the beginning, [bereshit]20Or, for the sake of reshit. God created,” and reshit is nothing other than ḥalla, as it is stated: “The first of [reshit] your kneading basket” (Numbers 15:20). Reshit is nothing other than tithes, as it says: “The first [reshit] of your grain” (Deuteronomy 18:4). And reshit is nothing other than first fruits, as it is stated: “The choicest of [reshit] the first fruits of your land…” (Exodus 23:19).
Rav Huna began in the name of bar Kapara: “May they be silenced [te’alamna], those lying lips [that speak harsh words against the righteous one with arrogance and contempt]” (Psalms 31:19) – may they be bound up, may they become mute, may they be silenced.21The word te’alamna can have all these three meanings, as the Midrash goes on to show. May they become mute – as it says: “Who gives a mouth to a person, or who renders one mute [ilem] or deaf, or sighted or blind? Is it not I, the Lord?” (Exodus 4:11). And [may they be bound up,] as it says: “Behold, we were binding [me’alemim] sheaves in the field and behold, my sheaf arose” (Genesis 37:7). May they be silenced – that is its plain sense.22That is the literal translation of te’alamna. “That speak…against the Righteous One” (Psalms 31:19) – [this refers to] Him of eternal life.23The “righteous one” refers to God. “Harsh words [atak]” (Psalms 31:19) – matters that He concealed [shehe’etik] from His creations.24They speak out loud and expound on the secrets of Creation. “With arrogance” (Psalms 31:19) – this is an expression of bewilderment:25Can it be that someone would do such a thing out of arrogance? [Do they do this] in order to boast arrogantly: I am expounding the act of Creation? “And contempt” (Psalms 31:19) – this [too] is an expression of bewilderment: Is it in order to show contempt for My honor? As Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: Anyone who attains honor through the degradation of another person has no portion in the World to Come; how much more so is this so regarding the honor of the Omnipresent. What is written following this? “How great is the goodness You have in store for those who fear You” (Psalms 31:20) – for those who fear You, but not for those who demean the [awesome] fear of You. They will not be included in: “How great is the goodness.” The way of the world is that when a flesh-and-blood king builds his palace in [a location that had been] a place of sewers, a place of refuse, and a malodorous place, anyone who comes and says: ‘This palace was built in a place of sewers, a place of refuse, and a malodorous place,’ is this not an insult? So, too, anyone who comes and says: ‘This world was created from emptiness and disorder,’ is this not an insult? This is a rhetorical question. Rav Huna said in the name of bar Kapara: Were the matter not written explicitly it would not have been possible to say it: “In the beginning, God created” (Genesis 1:1) – from what? “The earth was emptiness and disorder” (Genesis 1:2).
Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon began: “He reveals the deep and the hidden [umsatrata]” (Daniel 2:22). “He reveals the deep” – this is Gehenna, as it is stated: “He does not know that the ghosts are there; [her guests are in the depths of the netherworld]” (Proverbs 9:18). And it says: “He deepened [he’emik] and widened” (Isaiah 30:33). “And the hidden [umsatrata]” – this is the Garden of Eden, as it is stated: “For protection and refuge [ulmistor]” (Isaiah 4:6). And it says: “Conceal them [tastirem] in the hideaway of Your presence” (Psalms 31:21). Another matter, “He reveals the deep and the hidden [umsatrata]” – these are the actions of the wicked, as it is stated: “Those who go deep from the Lord” (Isaiah 29:15). Umsatrata – these are the actions of the wicked, as it is stated: “To conceal [listor] counsel” (Isaiah 29:15). “He knows what is in the darkness” (Daniel 2:22) – these are the actions of the wicked, as it is stated: “Their actions are in the darkness” (Isaiah 29:15). “And the light rests with Him” (Daniel 2:22) – these are the actions of the righteous, as it is written: “But the path of the righteous is like a dawning light” (Proverbs 4:18), and it says: “Light is sown for the righteous…” (Psalms 97:11). Rabbi Abba Sarongaya said: “And the light rests with Him” – this is the messianic king, as it is stated: “Arise, shine, [for your light has come and the glory of the Lord has shone upon you]” (Isaiah 60:1), etc. in Pesikta. 26The Midrash refers us to Pesikta Rabati parashat Kumi ori, where the idea of light representing the Messiah is expounded further. (According to some, the word בפסיקתא is a scribal error and should be deleted.) Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: From the beginning of the creation of the world, “He reveals the deep and the hidden” (Daniel 2:22). [The verse states:] “In the beginning God created [the heavens]” (Genesis 1:1) – but it did not elaborate.27As to how they were created. And where did it elaborate? It was elsewhere: “Who spread the heavens like a curtain” (Isaiah 40:22). [It states further:] “And the earth” (Genesis 1:1) – but it did not elaborate. And where did it elaborate? It was elsewhere: “For He says to the snow: Become the earth” (Job 37:6); “when the dust consolidated into a mass…” (Job 38:38). [It states:] “God said: Let there be light” (Genesis 1:3) – but it did not elaborate. Where did it elaborate? “Enveloping with light as if with a cloak” (Psalms 104:2).
Rabbi Yitzḥak began: “The beginning of Your word is truth…” (Psalms 119:160) – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Right from the beginning of the creation of the world [it can be seen that] “the beginning of Your word is truth” – “in the beginning, God created.” “But My Lord God is truth” (Jeremiah 10:10),28This verse shows that God is the epitome of truth, and it is fitting that He should establish this truth right at the beginning of the Torah. This truth is the unity of God, as the Midrash goes on to explain. “All Your righteous laws are eternal” (Psalms 119:160) – as each and every edict that You decree upon Your creations, they accept the judgment upon themselves and receive it faithfully, and no person can come and say that two authorities created the world:29Other versions add: Or that two authorities gave the Torah. “God [Elohim] spoke [vaydaberu]” is not written here [in plural], but rather [in singular], “God spoke [vaydaber];”30Although the word Elohim is grammatically a plural form, the Torah constantly uses singular verbs with it, proving that God is indeed one.  “God [Elohim] said [vayomeru]” is not written here [in plural], but rather [in singular], “God said [vayomer]”; “In the beginning God created [bare’u]” is not written here [in plural], but rather [in singular], “God created [bara].”
Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said in the name of Rabbi Levi: A builder requires six items: Water, dirt, wood, stones, reeds, and iron. If you say that he is wealthy and does not need reeds [to build with], he still needs to use them as a measuring rod, as it is stated: “A linen thread and a measuring rod” (Ezekiel 40:3). So, too, the Torah employed these six expressions of precedence: “Of old [kedem]…from earliest time [me’az], from ancient times [meolam]…from the beginning [merosh], from before [mikadmei]…” (Proverbs 8:22–23) – which counts as two,31Since mikadmei is a plural form. in the section of “the Lord made me” (Proverbs 8:22).
A certain philosopher once asked Rabban Gamliel, saying to him: ‘Your God is a great artist, however he found many excellent raw materials that helped him: Emptiness, disorder, darkness, wind, water, and depths.’ He said to him: ‘May the spirit of that man depart from him; regarding all of them, creation is written.’32God did not “find” these materials; He created them Himself. Emptiness and disorder, as it is stated: “Who makes peace and creates evil” (Isaiah 45:7). Darkness, “who forms light [and creates darkness]” (Isaiah 45:7); water, “Praise Him, heavens on heavens, and the water [above the heavens]” (Psalms 148:4). Why? “For He commanded and they were created” (Psalms 148:5). Wind, “For behold, He forms mountains and creates wind” (Amos 4:13); depths, “when there were no depths, I generated” (Proverbs 8:24).
Rabbi Yona said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Why was the world created with the letter beit?33It is the first letter of “bereshit – in the beginning.” It is because just as the beit is closed on all [three of] its sides but open in its front, so, you do not have permission to ask: What is below, what is above, what was before, and what is after,34Ḥagiga 2:1. One should not ponder what is above the firmament and what is below the earth, what was before Creation, and what will be after the end of the world. but only from the day when the world created and onward. Bar Kapara said: “For ask now of the early days that were before you, from the day [that God created man upon the earth]” (Deuteronomy 4:32) – from the day they were created, you may inquire, but you may not inquire what was before that. “From one end of the heavens to the other end” (Deuteronomy 4:32), you may inquire and investigate, but what is beyond that you may not investigate. Rabbi Shimon ben Pazi expounded regarding the act of Creation together with bar Kapara: Why was the world created with the letter beit? It is to inform you that there are two worlds,35The numerical value of beit is two. this world and the World to Come. Another matter, why with a beit? Because it alludes to an expression of blessing [berakha]. And why not with an alef? Because it alludes to an expression of curse [arira]. Another matter, why not with an alef? It is to avoid giving recourse to the heretics to say: How can the world endure, as it was created with an expression of curse? Rather, the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Behold, I will create it with an expression of blessing, and there is hope that perhaps it will endure.’ Another matter, why with a beit? It is because just as the beit has two protrusions, one above it and one below and behind it, if one says to the beit: ‘Who created you?’ It points with its upper protrusion, saying: ‘That One who is above created me.’ ‘And what is His name?’ It points with its rear protrusion and says: ‘The Lord [Adonai] is His name.’36It points to the letter that is behind it, the alef, which is the first letter of Adonai, one of God’s names. Rabbi Elazar bar Ḥanina said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: For twenty-six generations37This is the number of generations that passed from Creation to the giving of the Torah. the alef complained before the throne of the Holy One blessed be He. It said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, I am the first of the letters, but You did not create Your world with me.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to it: ‘The world and all its contents were created only for the sake of the Torah, as it is stated: “The Lord founded the earth with wisdom…”38See earlier, section 4. (Proverbs 3:19). Tomorrow, I will be coming to give the Torah at Sinai, and I will open it at its beginning only with you, as it is stated: “I [anokhi] am the Lord your God”’ (Exodus 20:2). Rabbi Hoshaya says: Why is it called alef? It is because He consented concerning a thousand, as it is stated: “The word that He commanded for one thousand [elef] generations” (Psalms 105:8).39The Torah was originally supposed to be given to the thousandth [elef] generation (Bereishit Rabba 28:4). The first letter of that Torah was therefore given the name alef.
Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: [The alternative forms of the letters] Mem, nun, tzadi, peh, kaf,40These letters have different forms depending on whether they appear in the beginning or middle of a word, or at its end. the prophets said them, though it was a halakha transmitted to Moses at Sinai.41The existence of these alternative forms was transmitted to Moses, forgotten, and the prophets restored them. Rabbi Yirmeya said in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba: What the prophets instituted.42The letters are not listed in the order they appear in the alphabet, and the list can be read as min tzofakh – from your prophets. It once happened that there was a stormy day and the Sages could not gather at the house of assembly,43The bet midrash, where the Torah was expounded. but there were some children there. They said: ‘Let us make our own house of assembly.’ They said: ‘What is the reason that it is written mem mem,44Why are there two forms with which to write mem, and so on. nun nun, tzadi tzadi, peh peh, kaf kaf ? It is for this reason: [To allude to the fact that the Torah was transmitted] from utterance [ma’amar] to utterance, from a faithful one [ne’eman] to a faithful one, from a righteous one [tzadik] to a righteous one, from mouth [peh] to mouth, from hand [kaf] to hand. From utterance to utterance – from the utterance of the Holy One blessed be He to the utterance of Moses; from a faithful one to a faithful one – from the Holy One blessed be He, who is called ‘God, faithful King’ – to Moses who is called faithful, as it is written: “In all My house he is faithful” (Numbers 12:7); from a righteous one to a righteous one – from the Holy One blessed be He, who is called righteous, as it is written: “Righteous is the Lord in all His ways” (Psalms 145:17), to Moses, who was called righteous, as it is written: “He performed the righteousness of the Lord” (Deuteronomy 33:21); from mouth to mouth – from the mouth of the Holy One blessed be He, to the mouth of Moses; from hand to hand – from the hand of the Holy One blessed be He, to the hand of Moses.’ They [the Sages] took note of them [the children], and [ultimately] great sages in Israel emerged from among them. Some say they were Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Yehoshua, and Rabbi Akiva. And they applied to them the verse: “Even a boy is recognized through his deeds, if his action is pure or upright” (Proverbs 20:11). anokhi of Rabbi Meir…>45These words are a scribal error and should be deleted (Matnot Kehuna). 
Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Akilas: To this One it is fitting to call God. The ordinary way of the world is that a flesh-and-blood king is praised in his province though he has not yet built any public baths in it and has not yet built private baths in it.46That is, without yet having provided anything for his subjects. First he proclaims his name and then presents his works. The Unique One of the world, however, first acted and then He was praised. Shimon ben Azai says: “Your humility has made me great” (II Samuel 22:36) – a flesh-and-blood [king] mentions his name first and then his title of praise: So-and-so Augustoli,47A title of great rank. So-and-so Pro titulo.48Meaning, whatever the title may be. But the Holy One blessed be He is not so; instead, after creating the needs of his world, only then does He mention His name: “In the beginning…created [bereshit bara]” and then “God [Elohim].”
Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: From where is it derived that a person should not say [when consecrating an offering]: ‘To the Lord, a burnt offering,’ ‘To the Lord, a meal offering,’ ‘To the Lord, a peace offering,’ but rather: ‘A burnt offering to the Lord,’ ‘A meal offering to the Lord,’ ‘A peace offering to the Lord’?49As a precaution, one should not say “to the Lord” before stating the offering in question, to avoid a situation where one might say “to the Lord” and fail to complete the statement. As the verse states: “An offering to the Lord” (Leviticus 1:2).50This is another explanation as to why the first verse of the Torah mentions God’s name only as the third word. A lesson can be derived from this by a fortiori: If, even of one who is about to consecrate something, the Torah says: Let the name of Heaven not be desecrated through the sacrifice; then those who curse, blaspheme, and engage in idol worship,51Engaging in actual desecration of God’s name. all the more so that they will be eradicated from the world. The Rabbis say: When a flesh-and-blood person builds a building, if the building process goes well, he makes it broad on top, but if not, he must make it broader on the bottom and narrower at the top.52If he sees that the foundations are not so sturdy, or the building materials are inferior, he must make the building narrower as it rises, for structural integrity. But the Holy One blessed be He is not so, but rather “[God created] the heavens”53With the definite article, alluding to an item that is already known. – those heavens that He had previously planned; “and the earth” – that earth that he had previously planned. Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili: Even those things, about which it is written: “For, behold, I am creating new heavens [and a new earth]” (Isaiah 65:17), [they] were already created since the six days of Creation. That is what is written: “For just as the new heavens and the new earth” (Isaiah 66:22); “[new heavens] and a new earth” is not written here, but rather, “the new [heavens and the new earth].”54The addition of the definite article indicates that it refers to earth and heavens that are previously known.
Rabbi Yishmael asked Rabbi Akiva, saying to him: ‘Because you studied under Naḥum of Gam Zo for twenty-two years, [who taught:] The words akh and rak are restrictive expressions, et and gam are inclusive expressions, [I ask you:] What is the meaning of the et that is written here [twice]?’55Et hashamayin ve’et haaretz. He said to him: ‘Had it been stated: “In the beginning God created heavens and earth [bereshit bara elohim shamayim vaaretz]” – we might have said that the heavens and the earth are deities.’56It could have been interpreted: ‘God, who is heavens and earth, created.’ The word et, however, indicates that what follows is the direct object of the verb. He [Rabbi Yishmael] said to him: “For it is not an empty matter for you [mikem]” (Deuteronomy 32:47) – if it is empty, it is because of you [mikem],57If you find something in the Torah that appears devoid of significance, it is because of your own ignorance. because you do not know how to expound, because you do not exert yourself in its regard. “As it [the Torah] is your life” (Deuteronomy 32:47) – when is it your life? It is when you exert yourself in its regard. Rather [the explanation is]: “et hashamayim” – to include the sun, the moon, and the constellations; “ve’et haaretz” – to include trees, vegetation, and the Garden of Eden. Rabbi Tanḥuma said in the name of Rav Huna: “Betzalel, son of Uri, son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, did everything that the Moses commanded him” is not stated, but rather, “everything that the Lord commanded Moses” (Exodus 38:22). Even matters that he [Betzalel] did not hear from his teacher, his perception corresponded to what was stated to Moses at Sinai. Rabbi Ḥonya said in the name of Rabbi: “The Torah of truth was in his mouth” (Malachi 2:6) – these are matters that he heard directly from his teacher.58The following line should be added here (Matnot Kehuna): “and falsehood was not found on his lips” (Malachi 2:6) – these are matters that he did not hear from his teacher. The Rabbis say: “For the Lord will be your hope [bekislekha]” (Proverbs 3:26) – even matters that you are a fool [kesil] in their regard, “He will protect your foot from being ensnared” (Proverbs 3:26).59If you make a concerted effort to understand, God will assist you, even regarding matters that you do not know about, so that you will not be caught up in any misstep.  Rabbi Dosai said: From promulgating [mistaken] teachings. Rabbi Abahu said: From transgressing. Rabbi Levi said: From malevolent spirits. Rabbi Avdimus said: If you gave charity from your purse [kis-lekha], the Holy One blessed be He will protect you from being charged unjust security taxes, fines, head taxes, and property taxes.
Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel, Beit Shammai say: The heavens were created first and the earth was created thereafter. Beit Hillel says: The earth was created first and the heavens thereafter.60One verse puts the order as “God created the heavens and the earth” (Genesis 1:1), but another has the opposite: “On the day that the Lord God made earth and the heavens” (Genesis 2:4). Which is the true chronological order? These cite a reason for their position and those cite a reason for their position. According to the opinion of Beit Shammai, who say that the heavens were created first and the earth thereafter, it is analogous to a king who had a throne made, and once that was made he had its footstool made. So, the Holy One blessed be He said: “The heavens are My throne and the earth is My footstool…” (Isaiah 66:1). According to the opinion of Beit Hillel, who say that the earth was created first and the heavens thereafter, it is analogous to a king who built a palace; first he built the lower sections and then he built the upper sections, so, “on the day that the Lord God made earth and the heavens” (Genesis 2:4).61The earth first, then the heavens. Rabbi Yehuda bar Ilai said: This verse, too, supports Beit Hillel: “You laid the foundations of earth in times past” (Psalms 102:26), and then, “the heavens are the work of Your hands” (Psalms 102:26). Rabbi Ḥanin said: From the same place where Scripture supports Beit Shammai,62"God created the heavens and the earth” (Genesis 1:1). from there, Beit Hillel refute them: “The earth was” (Genesis 1:2) – it already was. Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of the Sages: In terms of Creation, the heavens were first, but in terms of completion, the earth was first. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: I will say the source; in terms of Creation, the heavens were first, as it is stated: “In the beginning, God created [the heavens].” In terms of completion, the earth was first, as it is stated: “On the day that the Lord God made earth and the heavens.” Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: I am surprised how it is that the fathers of the world, Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel, disagreed regarding the creation of the heavens and the earth. It is, rather, as I say, that both of them were created [at the same time,] like a stewpot and its lid, as it is stated: “[My hand also laid the foundation of the earth and My right hand measured the heavens]; I appointed them; they arise together” (Isaiah 48:13). Rabbi Elazar ben Rabbi Shimon said: If it is in accordance with the opinion of my father, why is it that at times the earth is mentioned before the heavens and at times the heavens are mentioned before the earth? Rather, it teaches that both of them are equal in importance to one another.  In every place Abraham is mentioned before Isaac and Jacob, but in one place it says: “I will remember My covenant with Jacob, [and also My covenant with Isaac, and also My covenant with Abraham]” (Leviticus 26:42). This teaches that the three of them are equal in importance to one another.  In every place Moses is mentioned before Aaron, but in one place it says: “It is Aaron and Moses” (Exodus 6:26). This teaches that both of them are equal in importance to one another.  In every place Joshua is mentioned before Caleb, but in one place it says: “Except for Caleb son of Yefuneh the Kenizite and Joshua son of Nun” (Numbers 14:30, Numbers 32:12).63The citation in the Midrash is actually an amalgam of these two verses. This teaches that both of them are equal in importance to one another.  In every place turtledoves are mentioned before young pigeons, but in one place it says: “And a young pigeon or a turtledove as a sin offering” (Leviticus 12:6). This tells you that both of them are equal in importance to one another.  In every place, honor of the father is mentioned before the mother, but in one place it says: “Each of you shall fear his mother and his father” (Leviticus 19:3). This tells you that both of them are equal in importance to one another. However, the Sages said: The father takes precedence over the mother, because both he [a son] and his mother are obligated to honor his father. In every place the creation of the heavens is mentioned before the earth, but in one place it says: “On the day that the Lord God made earth and the heavens.” This tells you that both of them are equal in importance to one another.

=== 2 | 2 ===
“The earth was emptiness and disorder, and darkness was upon the face of the depths, and the spirit of God hovered over the surface of the water” (Genesis 1:2).  “The earth was emptiness and disorder [tohu vavohu]” – Rabbi Berekhya began: “Even a boy is recognized through his deeds” (Proverbs 20:11) – Rabbi Berekhya said: While the plant was still immature, it produced thorns.1This is a saying. Even before the plant produces flowers or seeds, it begins to produce small thorns, foreshadowing the deleterious nature of the plant in the future.  This is what the prophet would one day prophesy in its regard: “I have seen the land, and behold, it is emptiness and disorder” (Jeremiah 4:23).
Rabbi Abahu and Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon, Rabbi Abahu said: This is analogous to a king who purchased two slaves for himself, both of them with one bill of sale and with one sum. He decreed for one of them that he should be supported from the royal treasury, and for the other that he would have to toil to eat. That one sat, bewildered and astonished [toheh uvoheh]. He said: ‘Both of us were purchased with one bill of sale and one sum, yet this one is supported from the royal treasury, and I, if I do not toil, I do not eat?’ So, too, the earth sat bewildered and astonished. It said: ‘The celestial beings and the terrestrial beings were created simultaneously. The celestial beings are sustained from the radiance of the Divine Presence; as for the terrestrial beings, if they do not toil they do not eat.’  Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: It is analogous to a king who purchased two maidservants, both of them with one bill of sale and with one sum. He decreed for one of them that she should not depart from the palace, and for the other he decreed banishment. That maidservant sat bewildered and astonished [toha uvoha]. She said: ‘Both of us were purchased with one bill of sale and one sum, and this one does not go out and depart from the palace, but for me he decrees banishment?’ So, too, the earth sat bewildered and astonished [toha uvoha]. It said: ‘The celestial beings and the terrestrial beings were created simultaneously. The celestial beings live forever and the terrestrial beings die.’ That is why “the earth was emptiness and disorder [tohu vavohu].” Rabbi Tanḥuma said: It is analogous to the son of a king, who was sleeping in his cradle, and his wet nurse was bewildered and astonished [toha uvoha], as she knew that she would ultimately receive her punishment on his account.2When the child misbehaves, the nurse is blamed. Even before the child awoke this thought troubled her. So, the earth foresaw that it was destined to receive its punishment on account of man, as it is stated: “Cursed is the ground on your account” (Genesis 3:17). That is why “the earth was emptiness and disorder [tohu vavohu].”
Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon interpreted the verses regarding the generations. “The earth was emptiness and disorder” – this is Adam the first man, who became oblivion and nothingness. “And disorder” – this is Cain, who sought to restore the world to emptiness and disorder. “And darkness” – this is the generation of Enosh,3They profaned God’s name (Genesis 4:26; Bereshit Rabba 23:7).  based on the verse: “Their actions are in the dark and they say: Who sees us and who knows of us?” (Isaiah 29:15). “Upon the face of the depths” – this is the generation of the Flood, as it is stated: “On that day all the wellsprings of the great depths were breached” (Genesis 7:11). “And the spirit [ruaḥ] of God was hovering over the surface of the water” – based on the verse: “God passed a wind [ruaḥ] over the earth” (Genesis 8:1).4Ruaḥ, too is an allusion to the Flood. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Until when will the world conduct itself in darkness?5In the darkness of idol worship. Let some light come.’ “God said: Let there be light” (Genesis 1:3) – this is Abraham. That is what is written [regarding Abraham]: “Who roused [he’ir] righteousness from the east?” (Isaiah 41:2). Do not read it as he’ir,6Spelled with an ayin, meaning roused. but rather, he’ir.7Spelled with an alef, meaning illuminated.  “God called the light, Day, and the darkness, He called Night. It was evening and it was morning, one day” (Genesis 1:5). “God called the light, Day” – this is Jacob. “And the darkness, He called Night” – this is Esau. “It was evening” – this is Esau; “and it was morning” – this is Jacob. “It was evening” – the evening of Esau;8The period of Esau’s waning power. “and it was morning” – the morning of Jacob.9The period of Jacob’s rising power. “One day” – as it is stated: “There will be one day, it will be known to the Lord, that is not day and not night…” (Zechariah 14:7).10This is an allusion to the ultimate redemption, when Jacob’s ascendance over Esau will be asserted. Alternatively, “one day” – which the Holy One blessed be He provided him. Which is that? It is Yom Kippur.11Even in this world there is one day when there is light for Jacob and darkness for the forces of evil.
Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish interpreted the verses regarding the [four] kingdoms.12The kingdoms that subjugated Israel, as described in Daniel chapters 2 and 7, and identified by the Rabbis as Babylonia, Media, Greece and Edom (Rome was seen as the descending from Edom). “The earth was emptiness” – this is the Babylonian kingdom, as it is stated: “I have seen the land, and behold, it was emptiness and disorder” (Jeremiah 4:23). “And disorder [vavohu]” – this is the Median kingdom, [as it is stated:] “They hastened [vayavhilu] to bring Haman” (Esther 6:14). “And darkness”– this is the Greek kingdom, which darkened Israel’s eyes with their edicts, as they used to say to them: ‘Write on the horn of a bull that you have no portion in the God of Israel.’ “Upon the face of the depths” – this is the evil kingdom [Edom], which cannot be calculated,13Its great size and power are beyond calculation. like the depths; just as the depths cannot be calculated, so is it with [the wickedness of] the wicked.14The text was altered due to censorship. The original reading was: So, too, the evil kingdom. “And the spirit of God was hovering” – this is the spirit of the messianic king,15Who will follow triumphantly after the four kingdoms of subjugation. as it says: “The spirit of the Lord will rest upon him” (Isaiah 11:2). By what merit will it [the Messianic kingdom] come? “Hovering over the surface of the water” – by the merit of repentance, that is likened to water, as it is stated: “Pour out your heart like water [before the face of the Lord]” (Lamentations 2:19). Rabbi Ḥagai said in the name of Rabbi Pedat: A covenant is made with the water, that even when the weather is hot, the wind blows over it.16To cool it off. This is why the word for “hovered” is written meraḥefet, in the present tense. It happened once that Rabbi Shimon ben Zoma was sitting, entranced in thought. Rabbi Yehoshua passed and greeted him once, twice, but he did not answer him. The third time, he answered him with a start. He said to him: ‘Ben Zoma, where were your thoughts?’ He said to him: ‘I have been contemplating.’ He said to him: ‘As the heavens and the earth are my witnesses, I shall not move from here until you inform me where your thoughts were.’ He said to him: ‘I was looking at the act of Creation, and [I saw that] between the upper waters and the lower waters there were only two or three fingerbreadths. “The spirit of the Lord was blowing” is not written, but rather, “was hovering” – like a bird that flaps its wings,17As it hovers over its nest. they touch [the nest] but do not quite touch.’ Rabbi Yehoshua turned and said to his disciples: Ben Zoma is gone.18Having experienced such supernal revelations, he is no longer of this world.  Not even a few days passed with ben Zoma still in the world.
Rabbi Abahu and Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great, Rabbi Abahu said: Right from the beginning of the creation of the world, the Holy One blessed be He foresaw the actions of the righteous and the actions of the wicked. That is what is written: “For the Lord knows the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked will perish” (Psalms 1:6).19See Bereshit Rabba 8:4. “The earth was emptiness and disorder” – these are the actions of the wicked. “God said: Let there be light” – these are the actions of the righteous. But I do not know which He desires, whether it is the actions of these, or the actions of those. When it is written: “God saw the light, that it was good” (Genesis 1:4) – this shows that He desires the actions of the righteous, and does not desire the actions of the wicked. Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great said: Right from the beginning of the creation of the world, the Holy One blessed be He foresaw the Temple built, destroyed, and rebuilt. “In the beginning God created [the heavens and the earth]” – that indicates [the Temple] being built, as it says: “To plant the heavens and to lay the foundation of the earth and to say to Zion: You are My people” (Isaiah 51:16). “The earth was emptiness and disorder” – that indicates [the Temple] destroyed, just as it says: “I have seen the land, and behold, it is emptiness and disorder” (Jeremiah 4:23). “God said: Let there be light” – that indicates [the Temple] being built and perfected in the future, as it says: “Arise, shine, for your light has come” (Isaiah 60:1), and it is written: “For, behold, the darkness will cover the earth, and nations, a fog; but upon you the Lord will shine and His glory will be seen upon you” (Isaiah 60:2).

=== 3 | 3 ===
“God said: Let there be light, and there was light” (Genesis 1:3). “God said: Let there be light” – Rabbi Yitzḥak began: “Your opening words enlighten; they bring understanding [to the simple]” (Psalms 119:130). Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: The light was created first. This is analogous to a king who sought to build a palace, but that location was dark. What did he do? He kindled lamps and lanterns to ascertain how he would lay the foundation. So, too, the light was created first. Rabbi Neḥemya said: The world was created first. This is analogous to a king who built a palace and adorned it with lamps and lanterns. Up to this point, Rabbi Yudan expounded.1Rabbi Yudan expounded the verse: “Your opening words enlighten” as support for the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda that the light was created first. Rabbi Pinḥas, Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Simon, and Rabbi Ḥanon came and began in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Rav Yitzḥak: “Your opening words enlighten; they bring understanding to the simple” – the opening of Your mouth for us was light: “God said: Let there be light…”
Rabbi Berekhya began in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon: “By the word of the Lord the heavens were made” (Psalms 33:6). Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: It was not with toil and not with exertion that the Holy One blessed be He created His world, but rather, “by the word of God,” and the heavens were already made. Here, too, “and there was [vehaya] light”2Indicating that the light came into existence gradually. is not written here, but rather, “vayhi light” – it immediately came about.
Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai began: “There is joy for a man in the pronouncement of his mouth, and how good is a word at its time” (Proverbs 15:23). “Joy for a man [ish]” – this is the Holy One blessed be He, as it is stated: “The Lord is a warrior [ish milḥama]; the Lord is His name” (Exodus 15:3). “In the pronouncement of his mouth” – “the Lord said: Let there be light.” “And how good is a word at its time” – “God saw the light, that it was good” (Genesis 1:4).
Rabbi Shimon ben Yehotzadak asked Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman, saying to him: ‘Since I have about you that you are a master of aggada, [I ask you:] from what was the light created?’ He said to him: ‘It [the verse] teaches that the Holy One blessed be He wrapped himself in it like a garment, and the aura of its radiance shone from the end of the world to its end.’ He said it to him in a whisper.3This is because one does not expound regarding the mysteries of Creation in public. He said to him: ‘It is an explicit verse: “Wrapped in light as if with a garment” (Psalms 104:2), and you say it to me in a whisper? This is bewildering.’ He said to him: ‘Just as I heard it in a whisper, so I said it to you in a whisper.’ Rabbi Berekhya said: Had Rabbi Yitzḥak not expounded this4The exposition of Rabbi Shimon ben Yehotzadak in the previous paragraph. in public, it would not have been possible to say it. Beforehand, what would they say?5How did they expound the verse before having heard Rabbi Shimon’s exposition? Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: It is from the site of the Temple that the light was created. That is what is written: “And behold, the glory of the God of Israel was coming from the direction of the east…[and the earth shone with His glory]” (Ezekiel 43:2). And his glory is nothing other than the Temple, just as it says: “Throne of glory, exalted from the first, the place of our Temple…” (Jeremiah 17:12).
Rabbi Simon said: Light is mentioned five times here, corresponding to the five books of the Torah. “God said: Let there be light” – corresponding to the book of Genesis, in which the Holy One blessed be He engaged in creating His world. “And there was light” – corresponding to the book of Exodus in which Israel emerged from darkness to light. “God saw the light, that it was good” (Genesis 1:4) – corresponding to the book of Leviticus, which is full of multiple halakhot.6Hence the two positive expressions: “light” and “good.” “God distinguished between the light and the darkness” (Genesis 1:4) – corresponding to the book of Numbers, which distinguishes between those who departed from Egypt and those who entered the land. “God called the light, Day” (Genesis 1:5) – corresponding to the book of Deuteronomy, which is full of multiple halakhot. The students raised an objection to Rabbi Simon: ‘But is the book of Leviticus not full of halakhot [just like Deuteronomy]?’7Regarding Leviticus, the double expression indicated the multiplicity of halakhot. Why does Deuteronomy, which is just like Leviticus, not have a the double expressionof light? He said to them: ‘In its regard, too, it said a second word.’8The verse corresponding to Deuteronomy also contains two positive expressions, “light” and “good.”
“God called the light, Day” – are “light” and “day” not the same thing? This is bewildering. It is taught: The light that was created during the six days of Creation cannot illuminate by day, because it would make the orb of the sun seem dim [by comparison], nor can it [illuminate] at night, as it was created to illuminate only during the day. Where is it, then?9Since it does not illuminate the world at any time. It was stored away, and is designated for the righteous for the future, as it is stated: “The light of the moon will be like the light of the sun and the light of the sun will be sevenfold, like the light of the seven days” (Isaiah 30:26). This is bewildering:10The verse just cited, which refers to the shining of the great light of Creation for seven days.  “Seven [days]”? Are they not three? Is it not so, that the lights were created only on the fourth day? It is, rather, like a person who says: This and that I am preparing for the seven days of the wedding feast.11He says this even if his preparations are for only one or two of the seven days. Rabbi Neḥemya said: These are the seven days of mourning for the righteous Methuselah, during which the Holy One blessed be He conferred extra light upon them. “God saw the light, that it was good, and God distinguished between the light and the darkness” (Genesis 1:4). “God saw the light, that it was good” – Rabbi Ze’eira son of Rabbi Abahu preached in Caesarea: From where is it derived that someone does not recite a blessing on the candle [at havdala on Saturday night] until he avails himself of its light? It is from here: “[God] saw…and [God] distinguished [vayavdel].” Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Simon said: He set it aside12Vayavdel (“He distinguished”) can also mean He set aside. for Himself.13As it is said (Daniel 2:22): “Light dwells with Him.” The Rabbis say: He set it aside for the righteous in the World to Come. This is analogous to a king who had a fine portion of food and set it aside for his son. “God called the light, Day, and to the darkness He called Night. It was evening and it was morning, one day” (Genesis 1:5). Rabbi Berekhya said: This is what two eminent men of the world, Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, expounded: “[God] distinguished” – this refers to distinguishing in the literal sense.14Unlike the previous explanations. This is analogous to a king who had two commanders, one to be in charge by day and one to be in charge by night. They were arguing with one another. This one said: ‘I will be in charge by day,’ and that one said: ‘I will be in charge by day.’ The king summoned the first one and said to him: ‘So-and-so, the day will be your realm.’ Likewise for the second one, he said to him: ‘So-and-so, the night will be your realm.’ So, too, “God called the light, Day”15This can also be translated: “God called out to the light: Day [will be your realm].” – He said to it: ‘The day will be your realm.’ “And to the darkness He called Night” – He said to it: ‘The night will be your realm.’ Rabbi Yoḥanan said: That is what the Holy One blessed be He says to Job: “In all your days, have you commanded the morning and apprised darkness of its place?” (Job 38:12) – have you informed it of its place, where it is? This was a rhetorical question. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: I will say the source for this: “He forms light and creates darkness, He makes peace” (Isaiah 45:7) – after they were created, He made peace [between them]. “God called the light, Day” – Rabbi Elazar said: The Holy One blessed be He never associates His name with the bad, but only with the good. “God called the light, Day and to the darkness God called night” is not written here, but rather, “to the darkness He called night.”16Regarding darkness, the pronoun “He” is used instead of God’s name.
Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: “It will be evening” is not written here, but rather, “it was evening” – from here we learn that there had been an order to time even beforehand.17Even before the creation on the fourth day of the sun and the moon, which are the conventional means of marking time. “It will be evening” would have meant that on the first few days, it was noted that later on there would be evening and morning.  Rabbi Abahu said: This teaches that He continuously created worlds and destroyed them, until He created the current one, and said: ‘This one pleases Me, those did not please Me.’ Rabbi Pinḥas said: The source for Rabbi Abahu is: “God saw everything that He had made, and behold, it was very good” (Genesis 1:31) – this pleases Me, those did not please Me.18“Behold” implies that there was a new, improved situation that had not been there before.
Rabbi Yanai said: Right from the beginning of the creation of the world, the Holy One blessed be He foresaw the actions of the righteous and the actions of the wicked. “The earth was emptiness” (Genesis 1:2) – these are the actions of the wicked. “God said: Let there be light” (Genesis 1:3) – these are the actions of the righteous. “God distinguished between the light and the darkness” (Genesis 1:4) – between the actions of the righteous and the actions of the wicked. “God called the light, Day” (Genesis 1:5) – these are the actions of the righteous. “And to the darkness He called Night” (Genesis 1:5) – these are the actions of the wicked. “It was evening” (Genesis 1:5) – these are the actions of the wicked. “And it was morning” (Genesis 1:5) – these are the actions of the righteous.  “[It was evening and it was morning,] one day”19Why does it state “one day” rather than “the first day,” as it states “the second day” (Genesis 1:8), etc.? – the Holy One blessed be He gave to them [to Israel] one [unique] day. Which is that? It is Yom Kippur. Rabbi Tanḥum bar Yirmeya said: [It was the day] on which four items were created: Mountains, the heavens, the earth, and light.20The creations on the first day were more significant than the others, and in that sense it is unique. Rabbi Yudan said: [It was the day] on which the Holy One blessed be He was alone in His world, as there was no one else in His world other than Him.21It was the only day on which God was truly “one,” as on the second days there were already angels. This is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan, but it is not in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Ḥanina. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The angels [malakhim] were created on the second day. That is what is written: “He covers His upper chambers with water;22This is what God did on the second day (Genesis 1:6–7). He makes clouds His chariot; He proceeds on the wings of wind” (Psalms 104:3), and it is written: “He makes the winds His messengers [malakhav]” (Psalms 104:4). Rabbi Ḥanina said: The angels were created on the fifth day, as it is stated: “Let birds fly [yeofef] over the earth…” (Genesis 1:20) and it is written: “And with two23The seraphim had six wings, using two of them for flight (Isaiah 6:2). it would fly [yeofef]” (Isaiah 6:2). Rabbi Lulyana bar Tavrai said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: Both according to the opinion of Rabbi Ḥanina and according to the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan, everyone agrees that none were created on the first day, so people should not say: Mikhael was pulling at the south side of the heavens and Gabriel at its north side, while the Holy One blessed be straightened it out it in the middle. Rather, “I am the Lord, who made everything; who stretched out the heavens alone, who spread the earth by Myself [me’iti]” (Isaiah 44:24) – it [the last word] is written [as two]:24Although the word is pronounced (keri) me’iti, in the biblical text it is written (ketiv) as two words, mi iti. “who is with Me [mi iti]?” Who was partner with Me in creation of the world?
Rabbi Shmuel bar Ami said: From the beginning of the creation of the world, the Holy One blessed be He desired to enter into a partnership with the creations below.25To have his Divine Presence rest among His creations. Either way, it [the wording of the verse] is difficult. If it [the counting of the days] was for the purpose of a tally, it should have said: ‘One, two, three,’ or else ‘first, second, third’; is it proper to say: ‘One, second, third?’ This is bewildering.26The explanation is that “one day” is an allusion to the one God, who attached His name to the day when the creation of the world began to show His desire to be together with them. When did the Holy One blessed be He repay them?27By altering the proper wording of the numbering of days, it is as if God owed them something. It was later, at the establishment of the Tabernacle, as it is stated: “The one who presented his offering on the first day” (Numbers 7:12) – [alluding to] the first [day] of the creation of the world. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘It is as though I created the world on that day.’28It was on that day, which was the day the Tabernacle was erected, on the first of Nisan (Exodus 40:17), when God’s original desire was realized and His Divine Presence rested among His creations below.. It was taught: That day was conferred with ten crowns. It was the first day of the act of Creation;29It was a Sunday, the first day of the week. the first day for [years of] kings;30The years of Jewish kings are counted from the first of Nisan. the first day for the princes;31The princes’ offerings were presented for the dedication of the altar. the first day for the priesthood;32Aaron and his sons began to serve as priests after the Tabernacle was dedicated. Moses had filled that role during the preceding seven days of Inauguration. the first day for the Divine Presence [on earth], as it is stated: “They shall craft a sanctuary for Me [and I will dwell in their midst]” (Exodus 25:8); the first day for blessing;33The Priestly Benediction. the first day for sacrificial service; the first day for the prohibition of improvised altars; the first day for slaughtering [sacrifices] in the north;34Offerings of the most sacred order were to be slaughtered in the north of the courtyard. and the first day for descent of fire [from heaven], as it is stated: “Fire emerged from before the Lord…” (Leviticus 9:24).

=== 4 | 4 ===
“God said: Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water, and let it divide between water and water” (Genesis 1:6).  “God said: Let there be a firmament” – it is written: “He roofs His upper chambers with water” (Psalms 104:3). The way of the world is that a flesh-and-blood king builds a palace and roofs it with stones, wood, and earth. But the Holy One blessed be He is not so, He roofed His world only with water, as it is stated: “He roofs His upper chambers with water.”
“God said: Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water” – the Rabbis say it in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina, Rabbi Pinḥas, and Rabbi Yaakov bar Avin in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: When the Holy One blessed be He said: “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water,” the middle drop [of water] congealed and thereby the lower heavens and the upper highest heavens came about. Rav said: Their substance on the first day1When God “created the heavens” (Genesis 1:1). was damp, and on the second day they congealed. “Let there be a firmament” – let the firmament harden. Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Simon said: Let there be a lining for the firmament [rakia], as it says: “They flattened [vayraku] the sheets of gold” (Exodus 39:3). Rabbi Ḥanina said: Fire emerged from on High and passed over the surface of the firmament.2Drying it, in accordance with the opinion of Rav. When Rabbi Yoḥanan would reach this verse: “With His wind, the heavens are enhanced” (Job 26:13), he would say: Rabbi Ḥanina taught me well. Rabbi Yudan ben Rabbi Shimon said: The fire emerged from on High and burnished the surface of the firmament. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Abba bar Kahana: The act of Creation came to teach something about the giving of the Torah, but ultimately learned something from it. “Like [the day of] a splitting fire” (Isaiah 64:1)3The verse is speaking of the giving of the Torah, and describes that day as being like another day, one of fire splitting something in two.  – when did fire split between what was above and what was below, was it not at the giving of the Torah?4And the verse compares that day to another day, one of a splitting fire – namely, the day of the creation of the heavens. That is a rhetorical question. So it was at the creation of the world.
Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Hoshaya: Equivalent to the space between the earth and the firmament, so is the distance between the firmament and the upper waters. “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water” – at the midpoint between them. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: I will say the source. Had it been stated: “God made the firmament and he divided between the waters that were on the firmament,” I would have said that the upper waters rest directly upon the firmament. But since it says: “And the waters that were above the firmament” (Genesis 1:7) – [it indicates that] the upper waters are suspended [above the firmament] by the word of God. Rabbi Aḥa said: It is like the flame in a lamp.5The wick does not stand on the bottom of the lamp, but is suspended above it, as it were, by the oil.  And its fruits are rainwater.6The upper waters produce rain, but, as when a tree produces fruit, they are not depleted by the rainfall.
A certain Samaritan asked Rabbi Meir, saying to him: ‘Is it possible that the upper waters are suspended by the word of God?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ He said to him: ‘Bring me a tube with water.’ He brought him a tube with water. He placed a gold plate on top if it, and the water did not stay in place;7It spilled out of the bottom of the tube. [he placed] a silver plate, and the water did not stay in place. When he put his finger on top of it, the water stayed in place. He said to him: ‘You are placing your finger there.’ He said to him: ‘If I am flesh and blood and my finger can suspend the water, the finger of the Holy One blessed be He, all the more so.’ Thus, the upper waters are suspended by the word of God. He [the Samaritan] said to him: ‘Is it possible that the One in whose regard it is written: “Do I not fill the heavens and the earth” (Jeremiah 23:24), would speak to Moses from between the two staves of the Ark [in the Tabernacle]?’ He said to him: ‘Bring me large mirrors.’ He said to him: ‘Look at your reflection in them.’ He saw that it [his reflection] was large. He said to him: ‘Bring me small mirrors.’ He brought him small mirrors. He said to him: ‘Look at your reflection in them.’ He saw that it was small. He said to him: ‘If you, who are flesh and blood, are able to change yourself into anything you wish, the One who spoke and made the world come into being, blessed be He, all the more so.’ Thus, when He wishes, “do I not fill the heavens and the earth,” and when he wishes He speaks to Moses from between the two staves of the Ark. Rabbi Ḥanina bar Isi said: At times, the world and its contents cannot contain the glory of his Godliness; at other times He speaks with a person from between the hairs of his head.8Sometimes God’s presence is concentrated into such a small area that it is comparable to the space between hairs. That is what is written: “The Lord answered Job from the tempest [hase’ara]” (Job 38:1) – from between the hairs [saarot] of his head. He further asked him, saying to him: ‘“The stream of God9The source of rainwater. is full of water” (Psalms 65:10) – [it has rained] since the six days of Creation and yet nothing is missing?10The stream is still called “full.” This is bewildering.’ He said to him: ‘Go take a bath, and weigh yourself before you go in [to the bathhouse] and after you have gone in.’11After you have bathed. He went. When he came out and weighed himself he was missing nothing. He said to him: ‘All the perspiration that you excreted, did it not come out of you?’ He said: ‘Yes.’ He said to him: ‘If you, who are flesh and blood, nothing was missing from your fount, from the fount of the Holy One blessed be He, all the more so.’ Thus, “the stream of God is full of water” – [it has rained] since the six days of Creation and nothing is missing. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The Holy One blessed be He took all of the primordial waters and situated them half in the firmament and half in the ocean. That is, “the stream [peleg] of God is full of water” – half [palga].
The firmament is similar to a pool of water and above the pool is a dome. Because of the pool there is condensation of thick drops, and they descend into the salt water but do not intermingle. Rabbi Yona said: Do not wonder; the Jordan passes through the Sea of Tiberias but does not intermingle [with its water]. There is miraculous process involved in this matter.12The matter of rainfall. When a person sifts wheat or stubble in a sieve, before they fall two or three fingerbreadths they are already intermingled, but these [raindrops] travel a distance of several years and do not intermingle with one another. Rabbi Yudan ben Rabbi Shimon says: He rains them down by measure, as it is stated: “For He deducts [yigara] drops of water” (Job 36:27), just as it says: “It will be deducted [venigra] from your valuation” (Leviticus 27:18).13All deduction is by measure. The thickness of the earth is equivalent to the thickness of the firmament, as it is stated: “It is He who sits over the circuit [ḥug] of the earth…” (Isaiah 40:22), “in the circuit [ḥug] of the heavens He makes His way” (Job 22:14) – the words ḥug ḥug provide a verbal analogy.14Establishing a comparison between the earth and the heavens.  Rav Aḥa said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: It is like a sheet of metal.15The firmament is not as thick as the earth; rather it is extremely thin. Rabbi Yehoshua bar Rabbi Neḥemya said: It is approximately two or three fingerbreadths [thick].  Rabbi Shimon ben Pazi said: The upper waters contain approximately thirty kesustas16A certain measure of volume. more than the lower – “and let it divide between water and water [lamayim]” – lamed equals thirty.17The numerical value of lamayim is thirty more than the numerical value of mayim. The Rabbis say: It is half and half.
“God made the firmament, and divided between the water that was under the firmament and the water that was above the firmament; and it was so” (Genesis 1:7). “God made the firmament” – this is one of the verses due to which ben Zoma stirred up commotion in the world. “[God] made”? This is bewildering; for were they not [brought about] by God’s mere word? That is, “By the word of the Lord were the heavens made; by the breath of His mouth, all their hosts” (Psalms 33:6).18The verb “made” is employed in reference to something formed by the word of God. Why is “that it was good” not written regarding the second day?19As it is regarding all the other days of Creation. Rabbi Yoḥanan taught it in the name of Rabbi Yosei ben Rabbi Ḥalafta: It is because Gehenna was created on it, as it is stated: “For the inferno is arranged from yesterday” (Isaiah 30:33) – a day that has a yesterday, but does not have a day before yesterday.  Rabbi Ḥanina says: It is because division was created, as it is stated: “And let it divide between water and water.” Rabbi Tavyomei said: If on account of division that is for the improvement of the world and its settlement, there is no “that it was good,” division that causes turmoil in the world, all the more so. Rabbi Shmuel [bar Naḥman] said: It is because the work of creating water was not completed.20Only on the third day did the water assume its final form (Genesis 1:9). That is why “that it was good” is written twice on the third day; once for the work of creating the water, and once for the other work done on that day. A certain noblewoman asked Rabbi Yosei, saying to him: ‘Why is “that it was good” not written regarding the second day?’ He said to her: ‘Nevertheless, it ultimately returned and included everything at the end, as it is stated: “God saw everything that He had made, and, behold, it was very good”’ (Genesis 1:31). She said to him: ‘This is analogous to six people who come to you and you give each one of them a maneh, but to one of them you do not give a maneh. You then give one maneh for everyone [to be divided among them] – will the result not be that they all have a maneh and a sixth in their hands, but one of them has only one sixth of a maneh in his hand?’ This was a rhetorical question. He then said to her in accordance with what Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: ‘It is because the work of creating water was not completed.’ That is why “that it was good” is written twice on the third day; once for the work of creating water, and once for the other work done on that day.  Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Tanḥum bar Ḥanilai: It is written: “He tells the outcome from the outset” (Isaiah 46:10) – from the beginning of the creation of the world, the Holy One blessed be He foresaw that Moses would be called “good” (Exodus 2:2) and that he was destined to receive his [punishment] because of it [water].21Because of his wrongful actions at the Waters of Meriva (Numbers 20:12–13). That is why “that it was good” is not written regarding it. Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: This is analogous to a king who had a ruthless legion. The king said: ‘Since this legion is ruthless, let my name not be written in association with it.’ So, too, the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Since the generation of the Flood, the generation of Enosh, and the generation of the Dispersion were all penalized by it [water], therefore, let “that it was good” not be written in association with it.’
“God called the firmament heavens. It was evening and it was morning, a second day” (Genesis 1:8). “God called the firmament heavens [shamayim]” – Rav said: [The word indicates] fire [esh] and water [mayim]. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said in the name of Rav: The Holy One blessed be He took fire and water and integrated them with one another, and from them the heavens were made. Alternatively, shamim is written,22The letters of shamayim can also be read shamim. as they assess [shamim] the actions of the people. If they merit, “the heavens declare his righteousness” (Psalms 97:6); if not, “the heavens reveal his iniquity” (Job 20:27). Another matter, shamayim – because the creations wonder [mishtomem] in their regard, saying: ‘Of what do they consist? Are they of fire, are they of water? It is a wonder.’ Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Levi: He [God] came and settled it: “He roofs His upper chambers with water” (Psalms 104:3); that is, they are of water. [Another interpretation: The word indicates] dyes [samim] – just as with dyes, some are green, some are red, some are black, and some are white, so, too, the heavens, at times they are green, at times they are red, at times they are black, and at times they are white. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: “Shamayim” – sa mayim, bearing water.23The upper waters are on top of the heavens.  It is analogous to milk that was placed in a bowl. Until a drop of rennet falls into it, it is loose. When one drop of rennet falls into it, it congeals and becomes set [omed]. So, too, “The pillars [amudei] of heaven were loose” (Job 26:11) – the heavens became set when He put His rennet in them, “and it was evening and it was morning, a second day.”24This took place on the second day. This is in accordance with what Rav said: They were moist on the first day and congealed on the second day.

=== 5 | 5 ===
“God said: Let the water under the heavens be gathered to one place, and let the dry land appear, and it was so” (Genesis 1:9). “God said: Let the water…be gathered [yikavu]” – it is written: “At Your rebuke they fled; at the sound [of Your thunder they rushed away]” (Psalms 104:7). Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Abba bar Ami: Let a set measure be established for the water, as it says: “A plumb line [kav]1A kav is used for measurement in building. will be extended over Jerusalem” (Zechariah 1:16). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said in the name of Rabbi Levi: The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Let the water eagerly await [yekavu] for Me, for what I am going to do with it in the future.’ This is analogous to a king who built a palace and settled mute people in it. They would rise early and inquire regarding the king’s wellbeing with gestures, with fingers, and with kerchiefs. The king said: ‘If they could speak, would it not be even more so?’ This was a rhetorical question. The king then settled speaking residents in it. They rose and seized the palace and said: ‘This palace is not the king’s; it is ours.’ The king said: ‘Let the palace be restored to its previous state.’ So, from the beginning of the creation of the world the praises of the Holy One blessed be He would arise only from the water, as it is written: “It is from the sound of many waters, the mighty breakers of the sea” (Psalms 93:4). What would they say? “The Lord is mighty on High” (Psalms 93:4). [God said:] ‘If these [waters] that have no ability to talk and speak, and yet they laud Me, when I create Man, all the more so.’ [But] the generation of the Flood arose and rebelled against Him, the generation of Enosh arose and rebelled against Him, the generation of the Dispersion arose and rebelled against Him. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Let these [mankind] be expelled, and let those who had dwelled here before arise and come back.’ That is what is written: “The rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights” (Genesis 7:12).
“To one place” – Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Levi, and Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Yudan ben Rabbi Shimon say: The world in its entirety was all water, and you say “[gathered] to one place”? This is bewildering. It is analogous to ten inflated wineskins that were located in a hall. The king needed their space. What did he do to them? He untied them, let their air out, and removed them into a corner. So, the Holy One blessed be He trod upon the primordial waters2Pushing them down. and diverted them into the ocean. That is what is written: “Behold, He halts [ya’atzor]3Ya’atzor can also mean He presses. the water and it dries…” (Job 12:15); “He treads on the crests of the sea” (Job 9:8).
Rabbi Levi said: The waters said to one another: ‘Let us go and fulfill the command of the Holy One blessed be He.’ That is what is written: “The rivers raise, Lord; the rivers raise their voices. [The rivers boost their towering waves [dokhyam]]” (Psalms 93:3). Rabbi Levi said: [They exclaimed:] ‘Via the sea [derekh yam], via the sea.’ Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: ‘To such-and-such place [dukhta], to such-and-such corner, such-and-such waves.’ Rav Huna said: ‘To this sea [hadakh yama], to this sea.’ Rabbi Yehoshua bar Ḥanina said: ‘To water channels [dukhsa yam], to water channels.’ Rabbi Elazar said: The sea absorbed them, just as you say: “Have you entered into the depths of the sea?” (Job 38:16) – within the boundaries of the sea. The Rabbis say: [The waters exclaimed:] ‘We are pressed down [dokhim], receive us. We are broken [medukhanim], receive us.’ Rabbi Yehoshua ben Rabbi Neḥemya said: The water would ascend mountains and descend depths until it reached the ocean. That is what is written: “They rose to the mountains, descended [in the valleys to the place You established for them]” (Psalms 104:8). What place did You establish for them? This is the ocean.  Rabbi Abahu expounded: The ocean is higher than the entire world, and the whole world in its entirety drinks from its water.
Rabbi Levi said: Some of the expounders, like ben Azai and ben Zoma, expounded: The voice of the Holy One blessed be He became a guide for Moses, when he said to him: “Ascend to Mount Avarim” (Deuteronomy 32:49). The voice of the Holy One blessed be He became a guide for the water. That is what is written: “The voice of the Lord is on the water” (Psalms 29:3). Rabbi Berekhya said: The lower waters separated from the upper only with weeping [bekhiya]. That is what is written: “He dams the depths of [mibekhi] the rivers” (Job 28:11). Rabbi Tanḥum derives it from here: “He makes the earth with His might…. At the sound [kol] of His placement of a multitude of water [in the heavens]” (Jeremiah 10:12–13), and kol is nothing other than weeping, just as it says: “So said the Lord: A voice [kol] is heard in Rama, ]wailing, bitter weeping[” (Jeremiah 31:15).
Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The Holy One blessed be He stipulated a condition with the sea [upon its creation] that it should split before Israel. That is what is written: “The sea returned to its power [le’eitano]” (Exodus 14:27), in accordance with its condition [litna’o] that He stipulated with it. Rabbi Yirmeya ben Elazar said: It is not only with the sea alone that the Holy One blessed be He stipulated, but with everything that was created during the six days of Creation. That is what is written: “My hands stretched the heavens and commanded all their host” (Isaiah 45:12) – right from when “My hands stretched the heavens,” “I commanded all their host.” I commanded the sea that it should split before Israel. I commanded the heavens and the earth that they should be silent before Moses, as it is stated: “Listen, the heavens, and I will speak, and the earth will hear the sayings of my mouth” (Deuteronomy 32:1). I commanded the sun and the moon that they should stand still before Joshua, as it is stated: “Sun, stand still at Givon; [and Moon, in the Valley of Ayalon]” (Joshua 10:12). I commanded the ravens that they should sustain Elijah, as it is stated: “The ravens would bring him bread and meat…” (I Kings 17:6). I commanded the fire that it should not harm Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya. I commanded the lions that they should not harm Daniel. I commanded the heavens that they should open before Ezekiel, as it is stated: “The heavens opened…” (Ezekiel 1:1). I commanded the fish that it should spew out Jonah, as it is stated: “The Lord said to the fish, and it spewed out Jonah” (Jonah 2:11).
Rabbi Elazar said: At the beginning of the creation of the world, the Holy One blessed be He decreed: “Let the water…be gathered.” Why [is it written:] “He calls the water of the sea” (Amos 5:8), “He calls the water of the sea” (Amos 9:6) twice? Once for the generation of the Flood and once for the generation of Enosh.4The implied question is: Since God decreed at creation that the waters should be limited to one place, how is it that they subsequently came back and covered the earth? (see Devarim Rabba 10:2). It is because: “God acted so they would be in fear of Him” (Ecclesiastes 3:14). This is analogous to a province that rebelled against the king. The king sent a powerful legion and surrounded it so that the residents of the province would see it and be in fear of him. So, why is it that: “He heaps together the water of the sea”? (Psalms 33:7). It is so “the entire earth would be in fear of the Lord…” (Psalms 33:8).5The water was gathered together into one place so that men would see it and be in fear that it may come back and cover them.
The way of the world is that a person empties a full vessel into an empty vessel. Can one, perhaps, pour a full vessel into a full vessel? The world in its entirety is all water, and yet you say “to one place”? But from here [we see] that a smaller space was able to contain a greater amount [than its size]. Kohelet and in Vayikra Rabba 19:9>.  Similarly, “Moses and Aaron gathered the assembly [to the front of the rock]” (Numbers 20:10). It [the front of the rock] was the size of a small sieve, and yet all of Israel was standing before it? But from here [we see] that a smaller space was able to contain a greater amount [than its size]. Similarly, “the Lord said to Moses and Aaron: Take for yourselves [cupped handfuls of soot of a furnace]” (Exodus 9:8). Rav Huna said: Did Moses’s cupped hand hold eight clenched handfuls? This is bewildering. A cupped handful and a clenched handful are not the same; a cupped handful holds twice as much as a clenched handful.6God told Moses and Aaron (two people) to take “handfuls”, in the plural, indicating two handfuls each, totaling four handfuls, each handful being equal to two clenched handfuls, for a total of eight. And it is written: “Moses threw it” (Exodus 9:8).7And to throw powerfully one must use one hand. It emerges, then, that the cupped hand of Moses held eight clenched handfuls. But from here [we see] that a smaller space was able to contain a greater amount [than its size]. Similarly, Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta said: “The length of the courtyard shall be one hundred cubits and the width shall be fifty on each side” (Exodus 27:18), and yet all of Israel could stands inside of it?8See Leviticus 8:3. This is bewildering. But from here [we see] that a smaller space was able to contain a greater amount [than its size]. Similarly, “Joshua said to the children of Israel: Come here…” (Joshua 3:9). Rav Huna said: He had them stand up between the two staves of the Ark. Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: He had them all lean on one another between the two staves of the Ark. Rava said: He crowded them between the two staves of the Ark. Joshua said to them: ‘From the fact that the two staves of the Ark was able to contain you all, you may know that the Divine Presence of the Holy One blessed be He is in your midst.’ That is what is written: “Joshua said: With this you will know that the living God is in your midst” (Joshua 3:10).  This was so in Jerusalem, too, as we learned: They stood crowded, but prostrated themselves spaciously.9Yoma 21a. Rabbi Shmuel ben Rabbi Ḥana said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: There were four cubits for each person to occupy, and a [further] cubit on each side so that none of them would hear the prayer of the other. This will be so in the future, too, as it is stated: “At that time, they will call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord, and all the nations will be gathered into it” (Jeremiah 3:17). Rabbi Yoḥanan ascended to inquire after the wellbeing of Rabbi Ḥanina and found him sitting and expounding this verse: “At that time, they will call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord, [and all the nations will be gathered into it].” He said to him: ‘Can Jerusalem contain the Throne of the Lord?’10And all the nations. He said to him: ‘The Holy One blessed is He will say to it: Expand and extend and receive your populations.’ That is what is written: “Expand the place of your tent” (Isaiah 54:3). Why? “For you will spread out right and left…” (Isaiah 54:3).
“God called the dry land Earth, and the gathering of the waters He called Seas, and God saw that it was good” (Genesis 1:10). “God called the dry land Earth [eretz].” Why was it called eretz? It is because it hastened [ratzeta] to perform the will of its Maker.11By beginning to expand. Rabbi Natan in the name of Rabbi Aḥa, and Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak said: “I am God Almighty [shadai]” (Genesis 17:1) – I am the One who [she] said to the heavens and the earth: Enough [dai]. Had it not been so, they would have continually stretched out until now. “And the gathering of the waters He called Seas” – Rabbi Yosei ben Rabbi Ḥalafta said: Is it not only one sea?12“The gathering of waters” is in the singular, indicating that the verse is referring to one body of water. Why does the verse state “Seas”? However, the taste of a fish that comes up in Akko is not similar to one that comes up in Sidon or one that comes up in Spain.13Even in a single body of water (the Mediterranean), there are several distinct sections. 
“God said: Let the earth sprout grass, vegetation yielding seed, and fruit trees bearing fruit in their kind, in which there is its seed, upon the earth, and it was so” (Genesis 1:11). “God said: Let the earth sprout grass” – it is taught in the name of Rabbi Natan: There were three who were brought to judgment, but there were four who emerged liable. They are as follows: Adam, Eve, and the serpent were brought to judgment, and the ground was cursed along with them, as it is stated: “Cursed is the ground on your account” (Genesis 3:17) – it will produce for you cursed items, such as gnats, flies, and fleas. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Even these are beneficial.14Even bugs serve a purpose in the world. Thus, the earth’s curse had a silver lining. See Bereshit Rabba 20:8. Why was it cursed? Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Shalom and Rabbi Pinḥas, Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Shalom said: Because it violated its command, as the Holy One blessed be He said to it: “Let the earth sprout grass, [vegetation yielding seed, and fruit trees bearing fruit in their kind]” – just as the fruit is edible, so should the tree be edible. But, it [the earth] did not do so, but rather, “The earth produced grass…[and trees bearing fruit]” (Genesis 1:12) – the fruit is edible but the tree is not edible. Rabbi Pinḥas said: [On the contrary,] it did even more than it was commanded, taking the initiative in fulfilling the will of its Creator. “Trees bearing fruit” – even the non-fruit trees produced fruit. According to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Shimon, all is well, but according to Rabbi Pinḥas, why was it [the earth] cursed? The explanation is that it is like a person who says [when cursing someone]: Cursed be the breasts from which this person nursed.15The earth was the provider of sustenance for mankind, so it was cursed as part of their curse.
“It was evening and it was morning, a third day” (Genesis 1:13). “It was evening and it was morning, a third [shelishi] day” – it was the day on which warriors were created,16The groundwork was laid for warriors to wage war. The earth was created on this day, and that includes iron. as it says: “Warriors [shalishim] and nobles, all of them riding horses” (Ezekiel 23:23). When iron was created, the trees began trembling. But it said to them: ‘Why are you trembling? If no wood of yours enters me none of you will be harmed.’17Without a wooden handle, the axe is useless against trees.

=== 6 | 6 ===
“God said: Let there be lights in the firmament of the heavens to distinguish between the day and the night; let them be for signs, for appointed times, for days, and years” (Genesis 1:14). “God said: Let there be lights” – Rabbi Yoḥanan began: “He made the moon for appointed times” (Psalms 104:19). Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It was only the sun that was created to illuminate.1“Let there be” (yehi) is in the singular. If so, why was the moon created? For the appointed times, in order to sanctify New Moons and years according to its calculation. Rabbi Shilo of Kefar Tamarta said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Even though “He made the moon for the appointed times,” “the sun knows its setting” (Psalms 104:19) – [the month is counted only] from the time that “the sun knows its setting.” One does not count [the months] by the moon until after the sun has set.2If the astronomical new moon takes place during the day, the calendric New Moon is not fixed on that day, but only upon the next setting of the sun, which is the start of the following day. Yusti Ḥavra said in the name of Rabbi Berekhya: It says: “They traveled from Rameses in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the month” (Numbers 33:3).3The Sages had a tradition that the astronomical new moon of the month of the Exodus was after noon on a Wednesday, and that the Exodus took place two weeks later, on a Thursday. If you count according to the moon,4The visibility of the moon. Since the astronomical new moon was on Wednesday afternoon, the moon would not be visible until Thursday night.  until now, there had been only fourteen sunsets.5If the calendric New Moon had been counted from the first visibility of the moon on Thursday night, the Exodus (on a Thursday) would have taken place after only fourteen sunsets, not fifteen. That is, it would be called the fourteenth of the month, not the fifteenth. And furthermore, if the calendric New Moon would have begun on the day of the astronomical new moon (Wednesday), the Exodus would have been on the sixteenth. [We see] then that one counts for the moon only after the sun sets.6The calendric New Moon is counted from the sunset following the astronomical new moon, that being Wednesday night for the month of the Exodus. Accordingly, the Exodus itself occurred on the fifteenth. Rabbi Azarya said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: It was only the sun that was created to illuminate. If so, why was the moon created? It is that it teaches that the Holy One blessed be He foresaw that the idolaters were destined to make them [the sun and the moon] into gods. The Holy One blessed be He said: If even when they challenge one another,7By both being present together in the sky. the idolaters make them into gods, had there been only one [luminary], all the more so.8The moon was created in order to diminish the inclination to treat the sun as a deity. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Simon: Both of them were created to illuminate, as it is stated: “They shall serve as lights” (Genesis 1:15); “God set them in the firmament of the heavens [to illuminate upon the earth]” (Genesis 1:17). “Let them be for signs” – these are Shabbatot; “and for appointed times” – these are the three pilgrimage festivals; “for days” – these are New Moons; “and years” – this is the sanctification of years.9The determination by a religious court when a new year should begin.
“The day is Yours, night is Yours, as well” (Psalms 74:16) – the day lauds You and the night lauds You. Just as the day is in Your domain, so the night is in Your domain. When You perform miracles for us during the day, “the day is Yours,” and when You perform miracles for us at night, “night is Yours, as well.” When You perform miracles for us during the day, we recite songs to You during the day. When You perform miracles for us at night, we recite songs to You at night. You performed miracles for us during the day and we recited songs to You during the day: “Deborah and Barak son of Avinoam sang on [that] day…” (Judges 5:1). You performed miracles for us at night and we recited song to You at night: “The song will be for you, like the night of the consecration of the festival” (Isaiah 30:29). To You it is appropriate to recite songs during the day; to You it is appropriate to recite songs at night. Why? “You founded light and the sun” (Psalms 74:16). And You made the two lights, as it is stated: “God made the two great lights…” (Genesis 1:16).
Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Tanḥum ben Rabbi Ḥiyya and Rabbi Pinḥas in the name of Rabbi Simon said: After He calls them [both] great, He goes ahead and diminishes them, [saying] “The greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night”? (Genesis 1:16). This is bewildering. But it is because one of them entered into the realm of its counterpart.10The moon encroached upon the realm of the sun, as it is visible at times during the day. For this reason its light was diminished. Rabbi Pinḥas said: Regarding all the [holiday] offerings it says: “One goat as a sin offering” (Numbers 29:5), but regarding the New Moon it is written: “One goat as a sin offering for the Lord” (Numbers 28:15). The Holy One blessed be He said [as it were]: Bring atonement on My behalf for having diminished the moon, as it is I who caused it to enter into the realm of its counterpart. Now, if this one that entered [into its counterpart’s realm] with permission was diminished by Scripture, one who enters [his neighbor’s realm] without permission, all the more so. Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Ilai: It is only proper for the greater [older] one to count by the greater thing, and the smaller [younger] one to count by the lesser thing. Esau counts [its years] by the sun, which is the greater, and Jacob counts [its years] by the moon, which is the lesser. Rav Naḥman said: And this is a good portent. Esau counts by the sun, which is the greater. Just as the sun has dominion during the day and has no dominion at night, so Esau has a share in this world and has no share in the World to Come. Jacob counts by the moon, which is lesser. Just as the moon has dominion during both night and day, so Jacob has a share in both this world and in the World to Come. Rav Naḥman said: As long as the light of the greater one is in existence, the light of the lesser one is not discernible. When the light of the greater one recedes, the light of the lesser one is discernible. So, too, as long as the light of Esau is in existence, the light of Jacob is not discernible. When the light of Esau will recede, the light of Jacob will be discernible. That is what is written: “Arise, shine, for your light has come…. For, behold, the darkness will cover the earth, [and thick darkness the peoples, but upon you the Lord will shine and His glory will be seen upon you]” (Isaiah 60:1–2).
“And the stars” (Genesis 1:16) – Rav Aḥa said: This is analogous to a king who had two stewards, one ruled [only] over the city and one ruled over the [rest of the] province. The king said: ‘Since this one diminished himself [and consented] to be ruler over the city, I decree concerning him that whenever he goes out, a large crowd should go out with him, and when he enters, the city council and the multitudes should enter with him.’ So, the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Since the moon diminished itself to rule at night, I decree concerning it that when it goes out, the stars should go out with it, and when it goes in,11When it sets. the stars should go in with it.’  Similarly, “the name of his brother was Yoktan” (Genesis 10:25) – Rabbi Aḥa said: Why was he named Yoktan? It is because he would minimize [maktin] his affairs.12He was humble. What did he merit? He merited producing thirteen great families.13See Genesis 10:26–29. Now, if Yoktan14Who was the younger brother (Genesis 10:25). received this because he minimized his affairs, if an important man minimizes his affairs, all the more so. Similarly, “Israel extended his right hand, and laid it on the head of Ephraim, who was the younger” (Genesis 48:14) – Rabbi Ḥonya said: Do we not know from the accounts of the births that he was the younger? What, then, is “who was the younger [tza’ir]”? It is because he would minimize [matzir] his affairs. What did he merit? He merited the birthright. Now, if the young one merited the birthright because he minimized his affairs, an older person who minimizes his affairs, all the more so. This is astounding.15It is astounding how great the power of humility is.
“God set them in the firmament of the heavens to illuminate upon the earth” (Genesis 1:17). “God set them in the firmament of the heavens” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Three items were given as a gift [matana] to the world: The Torah, the lights, and the rains. The Torah, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “He gave [vayiten] to Moses [the two tablets of Testimony]” (Exodus 31:18). The lights, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “God set [vayiten] them in the firmament of the heavens.” The rains, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “I will provide [venatati] your rains in their seasons” (Leviticus 26:4). Rabbi Azarya says in the name of Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon: Peace, as well, as it is stated: “I will grant [venatati] peace in the land” (Leviticus 26:6). Rabbi Yehoshua ben Rabbi Neḥemya said: Salvation, as well, as it is stated: “You have given [vatiten] me the shield of Your salvation” (Psalms 18:36). Rabbi Tanḥuma said: The Land of Israel, as well, as it is stated: “He gave [vayiten] them the lands of the nations…” (Psalms 105:44). Some say, vengeance against Edom, as well, as it is stated: “I will set [venatati] My vengeance upon Edom…” (Ezekiel 25:14). The Rabbis say: Mercy, as well, as it is stated: “He situated [vayiten] them for mercy before their captors” (Psalms 106:46).  Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Maryon says: Setting sail in the Great Sea, as well, as it is stated: “So said the Lord, who makes [noten] a way in the sea…” (Isaiah 43:16). The Rabbis say: “Who makes a way in the sea” – from Shavuot until Sukkot;16Summertime, when the seas are generally calm. “and a path in mighty waters” (Isaiah 43:16) – from Sukkot until Hanukkah.17Autumn, when the seas consist of “mighty waters.” Rabbi Natan, son of the brother of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba, was setting out to sea. He said to his brother: ‘Pray for me.’ He said to him: ‘What should I pray for you? From when you bind up your lulav, bind up your feet.18Do not travel after Sukkot. If you enter a synagogue and hear them praying for rain,19A prayer that is recited from Sukkot onwards. do not rely on my prayer.’ Rabbi Yehoshua son of Rabbi Tanḥuma ben Rabbi Ḥiyya of Kefar Ḥanun was in Asia Minor. He wanted to set sail [after Sukkot]. A noblewoman said to him: ‘Are you setting sail on these days?’ She said this in astonishment. His father appeared to him in a dream. He said to him: ‘My son will go without burial, as it is stated: “Moreover, he has no burial”’ (Ecclesiastes 6:3). He heeded neither the words of this one nor the words of that one, and so it befell him.
Where are the orbs of the sun and the moon situated? They are in the second firmament, as it is stated: “God set them in the firmament of the heavens.” Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Abahu: There is an explicit verse, and the members of the Great Assembly elaborated on it: “You, the Lord, alone, You made the heavens, the heaven of heavens, and all their host…” (Nehemiah 9:6). Where is all their host situated? It is in the firmament that is above the heavens. From the earth to the firmament is a distance of five hundred years’ walk, and the thickness of the firmament is a distance of five hundred years’ walk, and from firmament to firmament is a distance of five hundred years’ walk. See how high it is. And we learned, on the first day of the summer solstice, there is no shade for any creature,20The sun is directly overhead. as it is written: “Nothing can shelter from its heat” (Psalms 19:7).  The orb of the sun has a sheath, as it is stated: “In a tent within, He placed the sun” (Psalms 19:5), and there is a pool of water before it. When it emerges [from the sheath], the Holy One blessed be He mitigates its strength through that water so that it should not emerge and incinerate the world. But in the future, the Holy One blessed be He will strip it of its sheath and burn the wicked with it, as it is stated: “The day that is coming will burn them” (Malachi 3:19). Rabbi Yanai and Rabbi Shimon both say: There will be no Gehenna [in the future];21On Judgment Day the wicked will not receive their punishment by fire in Gehenna. rather, there will be a [scorching] day that will burn up the wicked. What is the source? “For, behold, the day is coming, burning like a furnace…” (Malachi 3:19). The Rabbis say: There will be a Gehenna,22An actual fire. as it is stated: “The utterance of the Lord, for whom there is fire in Zion…” (Isaiah 31:9). Rabbi Yehuda bar Ilai says: There will be neither a [scorching] day nor a Gehenna, but rather, a fire that emerges from the body of the wicked themselves and burns them. What is the source? It is as it is written: “Conceive stubble, give birth to straw, your spirit is a fire that will consume you” (Isaiah 33:11). Rabbi Yehoshua bar Avin said: “The heavens will declare His beneficence” (Psalms 50:6) – in the future, the heavens will relate the beneficence that the Holy One blessed be He bestowed upon His world, in that He did not situate them in the first firmament. Had He situated them in the first firmament, no creature could have withstood the fire of the day.
Rabbi Levi said: There are three items whose sound travels from one end of the world to the other, and the creatures are in the middle but do not sense it. They are: The day,23The sun. the rains, and the soul at the moment that it leaves the body. The day, from where is it known? Rabbi Yehuda said: You believe that it [the sun] moves smoothly in the firmament, but actually it is like a saw sawing wood. The rains, from where is it derived? Rabbi Levi said: “Depths call out to depths in the sound [of your waterways]” (Psalms 42:8). The soul at the moment that it leaves the body, from where is it derived? Because Rabbi Shmuel, brother of Rabbi Pinḥas ben Rabbi Ḥama, was dying in Tzippori, and his colleagues were sitting with him.24Rabbi Pinḥas’ colleagues were sitting with Rabbi Pinḥas. A [humorous] matter came up and they began laughing. He said to them: How the soul of the brother of that man [the soul of my brother] is hewing cedars and hewing trees,25His soul is departing. and you are sitting and laughing and are oblivious to it.
“God set them in the firmament of the heavens” (Genesis 1:17) – how do the orbs of the sun and the moon set in the firmament? Rabbi Yehuda bar Ilai and the Rabbis, the Rabbis say: They go behind the Dome and below.26Circling the earth underneath it, reaching the east at sunrise. Rabbi Yehuda bar Ilai said: They go behind the Dome and above.27Circling back to east high above the Dome, which blocks out their light. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The statement of Rabbi Yehuda bar Ilai, who said: Behind the Dome and above, seems more correct during the summer, when the whole world is boiling and yet the springs are cold; and the statement of the Rabbis, who say: Behind the Dome and below, during the rainy season, when the entire world is cold and yet the springs are tepid.28The springs are warmed up by the sun, which circles under the earth at night. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: We do not know if they fly through the air, or if they move smoothly in the firmament, or if they follow their predetermined path. The matter is very difficult and it is impossible for people to ascertain it.
“And to rule during the day and at night, and to divide between the light and the darkness, and God saw that it was good” (Genesis 1:18). “And to rule during the day and at night” – Rabbi Ilfa said: If this is referring to the lights, is it not already stated: “The greater light to rule the day”? Genesis 1:16). Why, then, does the verse state: “And to rule during the day and at night”? Rather, it is referring to the righteous, who exert control over the body that was created to illuminate during the day and the body that was created to illuminate at night. That is what is written: “The sun stood still, and the moon stopped, until the nation took vengeance against their enemies. Is it not written in the book of the upright?” (Joshua 10:13). What is the book of the upright? It is the book of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.29Genesis. Why is it called the book of the upright? It is as it is written: “Let me die the death of the upright” (Numbers 23:10).30Where “upright” alludes to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Rabbi Ḥalafta applied it [this lesson] to here: “And to rule during the day and at night.”31As Rabbi Ilfa just said. Rabbi Ḥanin in the name of Rabbi Shmuel applied it to the end of the book: “However, his younger brother [Ephraim] will be greater than he [Manasseh]” (Genesis 48:19). Is it possible to say this?32Manasseh’s descendants were more numerous than those of Ephraim (Numbers 26:34–37). Rather, this refers Joshua, who would descend from him [Ephraim], who would cause the orbs of the sun and the moon, which rule from one end of the world to the other, to stand still.33And in that sense Ephraim was greater than Manasseh.  Rabbi Ḥanan in the name of Shmuel applied it to the end of the Torah, [where it is said of Joseph]: “A firstborn bull is his majesty…[he will gore the peoples together at the ends of the earth]” (Deuteronomy 33:17). Is it possible?34Is it possible that a king would arise from Joseph that would defeat kings throughout the world? No such king is recorded. Rather, this is Joshua, who would descend from him, and who would cause the orbs of the sun and the moon, which rule from one end of the world to the other, to stand still.35Thereby becoming known to everyone in the world.  This is as Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: The book of Deuteronomy was like a standard for Joshua. When the Holy One blessed be He appeared to him, he found him sitting with the book of Deuteronomy in his hand. He said to him: ‘“Be strong” Joshua, “be courageous” Joshua, “this book of the Torah shall not depart…”’ (Joshua 1:6–8). He took him and showed him to the orb of the sun. He [Joshua] said to it: ‘Just as I have not been still from [reading] this [book], so, you shall stand still before me.’ Thereupon, “The sun stood still, and the moon stopped” (Joshua 10:13). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: He said to it: ‘Wayward slave, are you not the acquired possession of my ancestor [Joseph]? Did my ancestor not see you in a dream: “Behold, the sun and the moon…[were prostrating themselves to me]”?’ (Genesis 37:9). Thereupon, “the sun stood still, and the moon [stopped].”

=== 7 | 7 ===
“God said: Let the water swarm with swarms of living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth on the face of the firmament of the heavens” (Genesis 1:20). “God said: Let the water swarm” – it is written: “There is none like You among the gods, Lord, and nothing akin to Your deeds” (Psalms 86:8). It is the usual way of the world that a mortal human fashions a form on dry land.1Using solids for raw material. But the Holy One blessed be He fashions a form in the water, as it is stated: “God said: Let the water swarm with swarms of living creatures.”
Yaakov of Kefar Nevorai once issued a ruling in Tyre that fish require ritual slaughter. Rabbi Ḥagai heard this and sent a message to him: ‘Come here to be flogged.’ He said to him: ‘Is a man who says a Torah concept to be flogged?’ He said to him: ‘From where in the Torah is this derived?’ He said to him: ‘From what is written: “God said: Let the water swarm with swarms of living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth” – just as a bird requires ritual slaughter, so, too, fish require ritual slaughter.’ He said to him: ‘You did not issue a proper ruling.’ He said to him: ‘From where can you prove it to me?’ He said to him: ‘Bend over,2Assume the position for flogging. and I will prove it to you. It is as it is written: “Will flocks and cattle be slaughtered for them and it suffice for them? If all the fish of the sea will be gathered for them, will it suffice for them?” (Numbers 11:22). “Will be slaughtered” is not written here [regarding fish], but rather, “will be gathered.”’ He said to him: ‘Strike your blows, beat your beating, as it is helpful in learning a lesson.’ Yaakov of Kefar Nevorai once issued a ruling in Tyre that it is permitted to circumcise the son of a non-Jewish woman3The father of the child being a Jew. on Shabbat. Rabbi Ḥagai heard this and sent a message to him: ‘Come here to be flogged.’ He said: ‘Is a man who says a Torah concept to be flogged?’ He said to him: ‘From where in the Torah is this derived?’ He said to him: ‘“They verified their lineages by their families, by their patrilineal houses” (Numbers 1:18) – the family of the father is called family; the family of the mother is not called family.’4And since the child has a Jewish father he is Jewish and requires circumcision, even on Shabbat. He said to him: ‘You did not issue a proper ruling.’ He said to him: ‘From where can you prove it to me?’ He said to him: ‘Bend over and I will prove it to you.’ He said: ‘If the son of a non-Jewish woman were to come to you and say: I want to become a Jew,5To undergo conversion, which includes circumcision. with the stipulation that I be circumcised on Shabbat or on Yom Kippur, would one desecrate it for him?6Circumcision involves a desecration of Shabbat. Is it not so that one desecrates Shabbat and Yom Kippur only for [circumcising] the son of an Israelite woman?’7It is permissible to circumcise a Jewish baby on his eighth day even if it falls on Shabbat. He said to him: ‘From where do you derive this?’ [He said:] ‘It is from what is written: “Now, let us establish a covenant with our God to send away all the [non-Jewish] wives, and those born from them, according to the counsel of the Lord…”’ (Ezra 10:3). He said to him: ‘Rabbi, are you flogging me based on received Scripture?’8“Received Scripture” refers to any part of the Bible besides the Torah. He said to him: ‘But is it not written there: “It shall be done in accordance with the Torah”?’ (Ezra 10:3). He said to him: ‘From which [verse in the] Torah?’ He said to him: ‘From what Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: “You shall not intermarry [with them]” (Deuteronomy 7:3). Why? “Because he9Your non-Jewish son-in-law. will divert your son10Your grandson, borne by your daughter. from following Me” (Deuteronomy 7:4) – your [grand]son who comes from an Israelite woman is called your son, but your [grand]son who comes from a non-Jewish woman is not called your son.’11Therefore the Torah does not voice any concern about your non-Jewish daughter-in-law leading her son astray, as he is not considered Jewish. He said to him: ‘Strike your blows, as it is helpful for absorbing [a lesson]; beat your beating, as it is helpful in learning a lesson.’
“And let birds fly” – it is the usual way of the world that a flesh-and-blood king builds a palace and settles occupants in the upper and lower levels. Does he, perhaps, do so in its air space? The Holy One blessed be He, however, settles occupants even in the air space, as it is written: “And let birds fly above the earth…”
“God created the great serpents and every living creature that crawls, with which the water swarmed by their species, and every winged bird in its kind, and God saw that it was good” (Genesis 1:21). “God created the…serpents [hataninim]” – Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: Taninim is written without a yod12Yod being the sign of the plural. – this is Behemoth and Leviathan, that have no mates. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: Behemoth has a mate, but has no desire [to mate], as it is stated: “The sinews of its testicles are knotted” (Job 40:17). Rav Huna said in the name of Rav Matna: The peacock comes from a single white-colored drop,13Sperm. and yet it has three hundred and sixty-five colors, corresponding to the number of days in the solar year. Rabbi Yirmeya Kahana asked Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish: ‘One who crossbreeds sea animals, what is the halakha?’14It is forbidden to crossbreed animals (Leviticus 19:19). He said to him: ‘Also in their regard it is written: “By their species.”’15Alluding to the concept that different species should not be interbred. With this, ben Lakish spread out his net for Kahana.16He sought to stifle any further questions. Kahana raised an objection: ‘Is “by their species” not written regarding fish as well?’17That certainly does not allude to a halakha that they should not be interbred, as that is an impossible act. With this, Kahana spread out his net to trap Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish. How, indeed can this be done?18The mixing of two species of fish. Rabbi Yona said: ‘I can explain it regarding driving animals:19The Torah also forbids tying two different species together and forcing them to move along together (Deuteronomy 22:10).  One brings two fish, a mairon and an asparon,20Two different species of fish. ties them together with reed-grass, and leads them along in the river or the sea. It is prohibited to do so, due to the prohibition of diverse kinds, as we learned:21Kilayim 8:2. The diverse kinds that were mentioned regarding driving them [together], may not be used to plow, to haul, or to pull together. Thus it is stated: “And every living creature that crawls, with which the water swarmed by their species”’ (Genesis 1:21).22Indicating that the prohibitions involving diverse species apply to sea life as well. “And every winged bird” (Genesis 1:21) – this is the peacock.
“God said: Let the earth produce the spirit of living beings by their species, animals, and crawling creatures, and beasts of the earth by their species, and it was so” (Genesis 1:24). “God said: Let the earth produce…” – Rabbi Elazar said: “The spirit of living beings” – this is the life spirit of Adam the first man.23Adam’s life spirit was created at this point, even before his physical body was formed. “God made the beasts of the earth by their species, and the animals by their species, and every creature that crawls upon the ground by its species, and God saw that it was good” (Genesis 1:25). “God made the beasts of the earth by their species” – Rabbi Hoshaya Rabba said: This is the serpent.  Rabbi Ḥama bar Hoshaya said: Regarding souls, it says four items,24“Let the earth produce the spirit of: (1) living beings by their species, (2) animals, and (3) crawling creatures, and (4) beasts of the earth by their species” – four spirits in all. but when they were actually created it says [only three items]: “The beasts of the earth by its species, and the animals by its species, and every creature that crawls upon the ground.” This is bewildering. Rabbi said: [The extra spirit] refers to the demons, as the Holy One blessed be He created their souls, but when He was about to create their bodies, Shabbat [arrived and] became sanctified and He did not [have time to] create them. This is to teach you proper conduct from the demons: If a person has in his possession a precious object or a gem on the day before Shabbat just before dusk,25It is forbidden to carry anything outdoors on Shabbat. one says to him: ‘Cast it away from you,’26Rather than desecrate Shabbat by carrying it home. as [even] the One who spoke and brought the world into being was engaged in the creation of the world and created their souls [of the demons], but when He was about to create their bodies, Shabbat [arrived and] became sanctified, and He did not create them.

=== 8 | 8 ===
“And God said: Let us make Man in our image, in our likeness, and let them dominate over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the heavens, and over the animals, and over all the earth, and over every crawling creature that crawls upon the earth” (Genesis 1:26). “And God said: Let us make Man in our image, in our likeness.” Rabbi Yoḥanan began: “Back and front [aḥor vakedem], You shaped me…” (Psalms 139:5) – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: If a person merits, he partakes of two worlds, as it is stated: “Back and front, You shaped me.”1Aḥor vakedem can be translated “the end, and that which precedes it,” – an allusion to this world and the World to Come. But if not, he will come to give an accounting, as it is stated: “You placed Your palm on me” (Psalms 139:5).2The following line should be here instead of where it appears, later in the midrash: Just as it says: “Distance Your palm from me” (Job 13:21). This verse shows that God’s “palm” refers to His punishment of man (Matnot Kehuna).  Rabbi Yirmeya ben Elazar said: When the Holy One blessed be He created Adam the first man, He created him androgynous. That is what is written: “He created them male and female” (Genesis 5:2). Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: When the Holy One blessed be He created Adam the first man, He created him with two faces,3That is, two conjoined bodies, male and female. and [subsequently] He sawed him in two4Separating the female part from the male part. and made [for] him two backs,5Where they had previously been joined together. a back here and a back there. They raised an objection to him: But is it not written: “He took one of his ribs [tzalotav] … [and the Lord God built the rib that He took from the man into a woman]”? (Genesis 2:21–22). He said to them: [It means that He took] one of his two sides, as it says: “And for the tzela of the Tabernacle” (Exodus 26:20), which we translate: “And for the side of the Tabernacle...”. Rabbi Tanḥuma in the name of Rabbi Benaya and Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Elazar said: When the Holy One blessed be He created Adam the first man, He created him in an unformed state and he was situated from one end of the world to the other. That is what is written: “Your eyes saw my unformed parts...” (Psalms 139:16). Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya and Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon in the name of Rabbi Elazar said: He created him filling the whole world. From east to west, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “Back [aḥor] and front [kedem],6Aḥor and kedem can also mean “west” and “east.” You shaped me…” (Psalms 139:5). From north to south, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “[From the day God made Adam on the earth,] and from one end of the heavens to the other end of the heavens” (Deuteronomy 4:32). From where is it derived that he even filled the empty space of the world? It is as it is stated: “You placed Your palm on me” (Psalms 139:5) just as it says: “Distance Your palm from me” (Job 13: 21).7This line is misplaced here and belongs in section 1, as indicated there.  Rabbi Elazar said: [Adam was created] last [aḥor] among the acts of creation on the last8The Hebrew text says “first,” but Rashi emends the text. day, and first [kedem] among the acts of creation on the last day.9Adam’s spirit was created as the first act of the last day, and his body was created as its final act. This is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Elazar, as Rabbi Elazar said: “Let the earth produce the spirit of living beings by their species” (Genesis 1:24) – this is the life spirit of Adam the first man. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: [The creation of Adam was] last [aḥor] among the acts of creation on the last day, and first [kedem] among the acts of creation on the first day. This is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, as Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: “And the spirit of God was hovering over the surface of the water” (Genesis 1:2) – this is the spirit of the messianic king, as it says: “The spirit of the Lord will rest upon him” (Isaiah 11:2). If a person is meritorious, it is said to him: ‘You preceded the ministering angels’; if not, it is said to him: ‘A fly preceded you, a gnat preceded you, this earthworm preceded you.’ Rav Naḥman said: [Adam was created] last [aḥor] of all the creations, but was first [kedem] for all punishments.10As it says regarding the Flood: “He obliterated all existence that was on the face of the earth, from man, to animal, to crawling creature, to birds of the heavens” (Genesis 7:23). Rabbi Shmuel said: Regarding praising [God] as well, he comes last. That is what is written: “Praise the Lord from the heavens…” (Psalms 148:1), and it says the rest of that passage. Then “praise the Lord from the earth, [sea creatures and all depths]” (Psalms 148:7), and it says the rest of that passage. Only after that it says: “Kings of the earth and all nations…” (Psalms 148:11), “young men and maidens” (Psalms 148:12). Rabbi Samlai said: Just as his praising [of God] is only after the animals, the beasts, and the birds, so his creation was only after the animals, the beasts, and the birds. What is the source? It is as it is stated: “Let the water swarm” (Genesis 1:20), and then: “Let the earth produce…” (Genesis 1:24), and then: “And God said: Let us make Man in our image.”
Rav Ḥama bar Ḥanina began: “Have you known this from [oldest times?]” (Job 20:4). Rav Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: This is analogous to a city that received its supplies by donkey drivers. They would ask one another:11The drivers entering the city would ask those departing from the city. ‘What is the price of grain in the province today?’ The Friday ones would inquire of the Thursday ones;12And they would adapt their sales in accordance with this information. the Thursday ones of the Wednesday ones; the Wednesday ones of the Tuesday ones; the Tuesday ones of the Monday ones; the Monday ones of the Sunday ones. The Sunday one, whom would he ask? Would he not ask the businessmen of the city? Here, too, everything that was made on each day would ask one another: ‘What creations did the Holy One blessed be He create on your day?’ The sixth day would ask the fifth day, and so on until the first day. Whom would it [the first day] ask? Is it not the Torah, that preceded the creation of the world? As Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: The Torah preceded the creation of the world by two thousand years. That is what is written: “I was with Him, as a protégé; [I was a delight day after day]”13The speaker is wisdom personified, that is, the Torah. (Proverbs 8:30), and the day of the Holy One blessed be He is one thousand years, as it is written: “As one thousand years in Your eyes are like yesterday” (Psalms 90:4). 14So “day after day” is two thousand years. That is, “have you known this [from oldest times?]” (Job 20:4). The Torah knows what preceded the creation of the world. But you have license to expound only “from when man was placed upon the earth” (Job 20:4). Rabbi Elazar said, citing ben Sira:15Ben Sira 3:19–20. “Do not seek what is too great for you, do not interrogate what is stronger than you, do not seek knowledge of what is hidden from you, and do not ask regarding what is concealed from you. Observe what is permitted for you, and you have no business with the esoteric.”
“And God said: Let us make Man” – with whom did He consult? Rabbi Yehoshua said in the name of Rabbi Levi: He consulted with the works of the heavens and the earth. This is analogous to a king who had two members of his council and he would not do anything without their knowledge. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: He consulted with what was made on each and every day. This is analogous to a king who had an adviser and he would not do anything without his knowledge. Rabbi Ami said: He consulted with His heart. This is analogous to a king who built a palace through the services of an architect, but it was not pleasing for him. At whom should he be angry? Is it not the architect? This is a rhetorical question. That is, “He was saddened in His heart” (Genesis 6:6).16This could also be translated, “He became upset at His heart.” Rav Asi said: This is analogous to a king who conducted a business transaction through an intermediary, and he suffered a loss. At whom should he be angry? Is it not the intermediary? This is a rhetorical question. That is, “He was saddened in His heart.”
Rabbi Berekhya said: When the Holy One blessed be He came to create Adam the first man, He foresaw righteous and wicked people descending from him. He said: If I create him, wicked people will descend from him. But if I do not create him, how will righteous people ever descend from him? What did the Holy One blessed be He do? He distanced the way of the wicked from His attention, appended the attribute of mercy to Himself,17In most of the story of creation, only the name Elohim (God) is used, but at the point man is created He is described as Hashem Elohim (the Lord, God). The title “Hashem” indicates God’s attribute of mercy. and created him: That is what is written: “For the Lord knows the way of the righteous, and the way of the wicked will be eradicated” (Psalms 1:6). He eradicated it [the way of the wicked] from before his attention, appended the attribute of mercy to Himself, and created him. Rabbi Ḥanina did not interpret it in that manner. Rather, when He came to create Adam the first man, He consulted the ministering angels and said to them: “Let us make Man in our image, in our likeness” (Genesis 1:26). They said to him: ‘What is his nature?’ He said to them: ‘Righteous people will arise out of him.’ That is what is written: “For the Lord knows [yode’a] the way of the righteous” (Psalms 1:6) – for the Holy One blessed be He informed [hodi’a] the ministering angels about the way of the righteous. “But the way of the wicked will be eradicated” (Psalms 1:6) – He eradicated18Concealed. it from them. He revealed to them that the righteous would arise out of him, but He did not reveal to them that the wicked would [also] arise out of him, as had He revealed to them that the wicked would arise out of him, the attribute of justice would not have allowed him to be created.19That is, they would have protested against his creation.
Rabbi Simon said: When the Holy One blessed be He came to create Adam the first man, the ministering angels divided into various factions and various groups. Some of them were saying: ‘Let him not be created,’ and some of them were saying: ‘Let him be created.’ That is what is written: “Kindness and truth met; righteousness and peace touched” (Psalms 85:11). Kindness said: ‘Let him be created, as he performs acts of kindness.’ Truth said: ‘Let him not be created, as he is all full of lies.’ Righteousness said: ‘Let him be created, as he performs acts of righteousness.’ Peace said: ‘Let him not be created, as he is all full of discord.’ What did the Holy One blessed be He do? He took Truth and cast it down to earth.20Rejecting its counsel. That is what is written: “You cast truth earthward” (Daniel 8:12). The ministering angels said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘Master of the universe, why are You demeaning Your very seal?21“Truth” is the seal of the Holy One blessed be He. Let Truth ascend from the earth.’ That is what is written: “Truth will spring from the earth” (Psalms 85:12). The Rabbis say in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina bar Idi, and Rabbi Pinḥas and Rabbi Ḥilkiya said in the name of Rabbi Simon: Meod, this refers to Man [adam].22Adam and meod are written with the same letters. That is what is written: “God saw everything that He had made, and, behold, it was very [meod] good” (Genesis 1:31) – Man [adam] was good. Rav Huna, the rabbi of Tzippori, said: While the ministering angels were busy deliberating with one another and engaging with one another, the Holy One blessed be He created him. He said to them: ‘Why are you deliberating? Man has already been created.’
Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Aivu: He created him wisely, as He created the needs of his sustenance and only then created him. The ministering angels said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘Master of the universe, “what is a mortal that You remember him, a man that You take him into account”? (Psalms 8:5). This trouble, why should it come about?’ He said to them: ‘If so, “all sheep and cattle, all the animals of the field” (Psalms 8:8) – why were they created? “The birds of the heavens and the fish of the sea” (Psalms 8:9) – why were they created?’ This is analogous to a king who had a tower filled with all manner of fine things, but he had no guests. What pleasure does the king derive from having filled it? They said before Him: ‘“Lord, our Master, how mighty is Your name throughout the world” (Psalms 8:10) – do what pleases You.’
Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel: He consulted with the souls of the righteous. That is what is written: “They are the potters and the inhabitants of Neta’im and Gedera; they dwelled there with the king for his works” (I Chronicles 4:23). “They are the potters [hayotzerim]” – alluding to: “the Lord God formed [vayitzer] man of dust from the ground” (Genesis 2:7). “Inhabitants of Neta’im” – alluding to: “the Lord God planted [vayita] a garden eastward in Eden” (Genesis 2:8). “And Gedera” – after “for I set the sand as a barrier [gader] for the sea” (Jeremiah 5:22).23“They are the potters and the inhabitants of Neta’im and Gedera” are all seen as allusions to the righteous, as God created man, planted the Garden, and placed boundaries for the sea only after having consulted with the souls of the righteous. “They dwelled there with the king for his works” (I Chronicles 4:23) – “with the king,” the King of kings, the Holy One blessed be He, “they dwelled,” [referring to] the souls of the righteous, [“for his works”], as the Holy One blessed be He consulted them when creating the world.
Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said in the name of Rabbi Yonatan: When Moses was writing the Torah, and was writing what was made on each day, when he reached this verse: “And God said: Let us make Man in our image, in our likeness” – he said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, why do you provide the heretics with basis for a claim?24By making it appear as if God had partners whom He needed to consult. This is bewildering.’ He said to him: ‘Just write, and if someone wants to err, let him err.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: ‘Is it not so regarding this man whom I created, that I will bring forth descendants of greater and lesser status? If someone of greater status is about to seek approval from one of lesser stature than he, but he says: Why do I need to seek approval from one who is of lesser stature than I? One may say to him: Learn from your Creator, as He created the heavenly realms and the earthly realms, but when He came to create man, he consulted with the ministering angels.’  Rabbi Levi said: There is no consultation here; rather, this is analogous to a king who was strolling at the entrance to his palace, and saw a large hewn rock set off to the side. He said: ‘What should we use this for?’ Some of them [of his advisers] said: ‘[Use it for] the public baths,’ and others said: ‘For private bathhouses.’ The king said: ‘I am going to craft it into a statue.’25A statue in my image. Who will prevent it?26God told the angels that He was about to make man in His image, not to consult with them, but to inform them that He was doing so with or without their consent.
The heretics once asked Rabbi Samlai: ‘How many deities created the world?’ He said to them: ‘Let you and I inquire into the early days.’ That is what is written: “For inquire now into the early days that were before you, from the day that God created [bara] man” (Deuteronomy 4:32) – “that [God] baru” is not written here,27Plural. but rather, “that [God] bara.”28Singular. They said to him: ‘What is this that is written: “In the beginning God [Elohim]29Elohim appears to be a plural term. created”?’ He said to them: “Baru Elohim” is not written here, but rather, “bara Elohim.”  Rabbi Samlai said [moreover]: Everywhere you find a basis for a claim of the heretics, you find a refutation alongside it. They asked him further, saying to him: ‘What is this that is written: “Let us make Man in our image, in our likeness”?’30“Our” implying that there is more than one deity. He said to them: ‘Read what is written thereafter: God created [vayivre’u] man in their image31With plural verb and pronoun. is not stated, but rather, “God created [vayivra] man in His image,”’32With singular verb and pronoun. (Genesis 1:27). After they left, his students said to him: ‘Rabbi, those men you pushed off with a reed.33You gave them a facile response. What would you respond to us?’ He said to them: ‘In the past, Adam was created from earth and Eve was created from Adam. From now on, “In our image, in our likeness” – a man will not [produce offspring] without a woman, nor will a woman without a man, nor both of them without the Divine Presence.’34“Our” in the phrase “Let us make man in our image, in our likeness” refers to a child’s father and mother and God, who all create new life together. They then asked him, they said to him: ‘What is this that is written: “God [El], God [Elohim], the Lord [Hashem], [He knows]…”’ (Joshua 22:22).35It would appear as if three different deities are being referred to. He said to them: ‘“They know” is not written here, but rather, “He knows.”’36So all these names refer to a single Deity. His students said to him: ‘Those men you pushed off with a reed. What do you respond to us?’ He said to them: ‘All three of them are names of God, as when a person says: Basilias Augustus Caesar.’37These are all titles that are used in reference to a single king. They [the heretics] asked him: ‘What is this that is written: “For He is a holy [kedoshim] God”?’ (Joshua 24:19).38Kedoshim is a plural adjective, implying more than one deity. He said to them: ‘“They are holy” is not written, but rather, “he is holy.”’
Rabbi Hoshaya said: When the Holy One blessed be He created Adam the first man, the ministering angels erred concerning him and sought to proclaim “holy” before him. This is analogous to a king and a governor who were in a chariot, and the residents of the province wanted to salute the king by proclaiming: Domine.39O Lord. But they did not know which one he was. What did the king do? He pushed him [the governor] out of the chariot, and then they all knew that he was the governor. So, when the Holy One blessed be He created Adam the first man, the ministering angels erred concerning him and sought to proclaim “holy” before him. What did the Holy One blessed be He do? He cast a deep slumber upon him, and everyone then knew that he was [merely] a man. That is what is written: “Desist from man, who has breath in his nostrils, for in what way is he worthy?” (Isaiah 2:22).
“So God created man in His own image, in the image of God created He him; male and female He created them” (Genesis 1:27). “Male and female [unkeva] He created them” – this is one of the words that they changed for King Ptolemy:40When Ptolemy gathered seventy Sages to translate the Torah into Greek – the Septuagint (see Megilla 9a). There were several places where the Sages veered from translating literally in order to evade various problems. “A male and his orifices [unkuvav] he created them.”41They made this change to avoid a seeming contradiction between this verse and another verse (Genesis 2:18), in which it appears that Adam was created alone, without a female.  Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina bar Yitzḥak, and the Rabbis in the name of Rabbi Elazar say: He endowed him [Adam] with four features from the supernal realm and four features from the lower realm. [From the lower realm:] He eats and drinks as does an animal, procreates as does an animal, defecates as does an animal, and dies as does an animal. From the supernal realm: He stands as do the ministering angels, speaks as do the ministering angels, has intelligence as do the ministering angels, and sees as do the ministering angels. But do animals not [also] see? This is bewildering. The difference is that this one [a human] has peripheral vision. Rabbi Tifdai in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: The supernal beings were created in the [divine] image and likeness, but do not procreate, while the earthly beings [created before man] procreate but were not created in the [divine] image and likeness. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘I will create him [Adam] in the [divine] image and likeness, [a trait] from the supernal realm, but he will procreate, [a trait] from the earthly realm.’ Rabbi Tifdai in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘If I create him from the supernal realm, he will live and never die; if from the earthly realm, he will die and will not live. Rather, I will create him from [both] the supernal and from the earthly. If he sins he will die; if he does not sin he will live.’
“God blessed them and God said to them: Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth and subdue it, and dominate over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the heavens, and over every living creature that crawls upon the earth” (Genesis 1:28). “And dominate over the fish of the sea” – Rabbi Ḥanina said: If they merit it, [they will] dominate [redu], but if not, they will fall [yeredu].42They will become victims to the predations of animals. Rabbi Yaakov of Kefar Ḥanin said: One who fulfills “in our image, in our likeness – “And dominate”; those who do not fulfill “in our image, in our likeness” – they will fall [yeredu]. Rabbi Yaakov of Kefar Ḥanan said: Let the one who is “in our image, in our likeness”43Man. come “and dominate” the one who does not resemble being “in our image, in our likeness.”44The animals. “God blessed them” – there we learned: A virgin should marry on a Wednesday and a widow on a Thursday.”45Ketubot 2a. Why? It is because a blessing [for fertility] is written in connection with these days. But, is it not so, that a blessing [for fertility] is written only in connection with Thursday and Friday?46Genesis 1:22 and 1:28. Bar Kapara said: Wednesday means on the eve of Thursday, and Thursday means on the eve of Friday.47The marriage that takes place during the day is consummated at night. Rabbi Elazar in the name of Rabbi Yosei Ben Zimra: “[Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth] and subdue it” [vekhivshuha]48Plural. – it is written [as if it should be read] vekhovshah49Singular. – the man alone is commanded regarding procreation, but not the woman. Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka says: Both the man and the woman [are commanded]. Regarding both of them it says: “God blessed them […and said: Be fruitful, and multiply…].” Vekhivshuha – it is written [as if it should be read] vekhovshah50Meaning: And subdue her. – the man restrains his wife so she should not go out in public,51In an inappropriate manner. as any woman who goes out in public will ultimately falter. From where do we derive it? It is from Dina, as it is stated: “Dina went out” (Genesis 34:1) – and she ultimately faltered. That is what is written: “Shekhem saw her…” (Genesis 34:2). Rabbi Yirmeya, Rabbi Abahu, and Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Maryon in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: The halakha is in accordance with Rabbi Yoḥanan.52Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka.
Rabbi Abahu said: The Holy One blessed be He [Himself] took the cup of blessing,53The cup of wine over which the wedding benedictions are recited. [as it were,] and gave a blessing to them. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: Mikhael and Gavriel were the groomsmen of Adam the first man. Rabbi Samlai said: We have found that the Holy One blessed be He blesses grooms, adorns brides, visits the ill, and buries the dead. He blesses grooms – from where is it derived? “God blessed them.” He adorns brides – from where is it derived? “The Lord God built the side” (Genesis 2:22).54See Bereshit Rabba 18:1. He visits the ill – from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “The Lord appeared to him in the plains of Mamre” (Genesis 18:1).55God appeared to Abraham shortly after his circumcision. He buries the dead – from where is it derived? “He buried him56Moses. in the valley” (Deuteronomy 34:6). Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said in the name of Rabbi Yonatan: He also consoles the mourner. That is what is written: “God appeared to Jacob again…[and He blessed him]” (Genesis 35:9). What blessing did He bless him? It was the blessing of mourners.57This took place immediately after Jacob’s mother died (see Rashi on that verse).

=== 9 | 9 ===
“God saw everything that He had made, and, behold, it was very good. It was evening and it was morning, the sixth day” (Genesis 1:31). “God saw everything that He had made…” – Rabbi Levi began: “The glory of God is concealing a matter, but the glory of kings is investigating a matter” (Proverbs 25:2) – Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina: From the beginning of the book until here, it is “the glory of God,” [calling for] “concealing a matter.” From here on, “the glory of kings is investigating a matter” – the glory of the words of the Torah that are likened to kings, as it is stated: “Through me kings reign” (Proverbs 8:15),1The speaker is Wisdom personified, that is, the Torah. [calling for] investigating a matter.
Another matter, “God saw everything that He had made, and, behold, it was very good” –Rabbi Tanḥuma began: “He made everything beautiful in its time” (Ecclesiastes 3:11) – Rabbi Tanḥuma said: The world was created at its proper time; the world was not fit to be created before then. Rabbi Abbahu said: From here we learn that the Holy One blessed be He continuously created worlds and destroyed them, until He created the current ones, and said: This one pleases me, those did not please Me. Rabbi Pinḥas said: Rabbi Abbahu’s source: “God saw everything that He had made, and, behold, it was very good” – this pleases me, those did not please Me.2“Behold” implies that there was a new, improved situation that had not been there before.
“God saw everything that He had made, and, behold, it was very good” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: When a flesh-and-blood king builds a palace, he looks at the upper levels in one glance and at the lower levels in another glance. But the Holy One blessed be He looks at the supernal and the earthly all in one glance. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: “Behold, it was very good” – this is this world. “And, behold, it was very good”3The addition of the word “and” is to introduce a second object. – this is the World to Come. The Holy One blessed be He looked at this world and the World to Come in one glance. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said in the name of Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya: “Alas! My Lord God, behold, You made the heavens and the earth with Your great power and with Your outstretched arm; there is nothing that is obscured from You” (Jeremiah 32:17). From that moment on, there is nothing that is obscured from You.4Every act in history, since the creation of heaven and earth, is known by God. Rabbi Ḥagai said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: “And you, Solomon my son, know the God of your father and serve Him wholeheartedly and with a willing mind, for the Lord seeks all hearts, and understands all inclinations of thoughts. If you seek Him, He will be accessible to you, but if you forsake Him, He will abandon you forever” (I Chronicles 28:9). Even before a thought is formed in a person’s heart, it is already revealed before Him.5Most Hebrew texts have “before You”; see Rashash. Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: Before a creature is created, his thought is already revealed before Him. Rabbi Yudan himself said: “Even when there is no speech on my tongue, behold, Lord, You know it all” (Psalms 139:4) – even before one’s tongue utters a word, already, “behold, Lord, You know it all.”
Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina and Rabbi Yonatan, Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: This is analogous to a king who built a palace. He saw it and it pleased him. He said: ‘Palace, palace, if only you could always find favor before me just as you have found favor before me at this moment.’ So, the Holy One blessed be He said to His world: ‘My world, My world, if only you could always find favor before Me just as you have found favor before Me at this moment.’ Rabbi Yonatan said: This is analogous to a king who was marrying off his daughter, and he made her a bridal canopy and chamber, whitewashed it, embossed it, and painted it. He saw it and it pleased him. He said: ‘My daughter, if only this bridal chamber could always find favor before me just as it has found favor before me at this moment.’ So, the Holy One blessed be He said to His world: ‘My world, My world, if only you could always find favor before Me just as you have found favor before Me at this moment.’
In Rabbi Meir’s Torah they found written: “And, behold, it was very [me’od] good” – and, behold, death [mot] is good.6In a gloss next to the word me’od Rabbi Meir had written mot. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: I was once riding on the shoulders of my grandfather, going up from his city to Kefar Ḥanan via Beit She’an, and I heard Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar sitting and expounding in the name of Rabbi Meir: “And, behold, it was very good” – and, behold, death is good. Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina and Rabbi Yonatan, Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: Adam the first man was worthy not to have tasted the taste of death. Why, then, was he penalized with mortality? It is because the Holy One blessed be He foresaw that [his descendants] Nebuchadnezzar and Ḥiram king of Tyre were destined to render themselves deities. That is why he was penalized with mortality. That is what is written [concerning Ḥiram]: “You were in Eden, the Garden of God” (Ezekiel 28:13). Now, was Ḥiram actually in the Garden of Eden? This is a rhetorical question. Rather, He was saying to him: ‘It is you who caused the one in the Garden of Eden to die.’ Rabbi Ḥiyya, son of Rabbi Berekhya’s daughter, said in the name of Rabbi Berekhya: “You were a great cherub” (Ezekiel 28:14) – it is you [Ḥiram] who caused that cherub [Adam]7Adam is referred to as a cherub due to his lofty spiritual status. to die. Rabbi Yonatan said to him:8To Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina. If so,9If the reason for Adam’s mortality is as you say. let Him decree death for the wicked and not decree death for the righteous. The reason [He didn’t do this] is that it was so that the wicked should not feign repentance, so that the wicked should not say: ‘Do the righteous not live because they accumulate mitzvot and good deeds? We, too, will accumulate mitzvot and good deeds.’ The result would be acting [virtuously] for insincere motives. Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, Rabbi Yoḥanan said:10In explanation of Rabbi Meir’s statement that death is a good thing. Why was death decreed for the wicked? The answer is that as long as the wicked are alive, they anger the Holy One blessed be He. That is what is written: “You wearied the Lord with your words” (Malachi 2:17). But once they die, they stop angering the Holy One blessed be He, as it is stated: “There anger has ceased for the wicked” (Job 3:17) – there they stop angering the Lord. And why was death decreed for the righteous? The answer is that as long as the righteous are alive, they engage in battle against their evil inclination, and when they die, they rest.11In Paradise. That is what is written: “There rest those whose strength is sapped” (Job 3:17) – [those who say:] ‘We have toiled enough.’  Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: It12The benefit of dying and going on to the Next World. is to give these [the righteous] a double reward and to exact double retribution against those [the wicked]. It is to give reward to the righteous who were worthy of never tasting the taste of death. That is why, “therefore, they will inherit a double portion in their land” (Isaiah 61:7). And to exact retribution against the wicked, as the righteous were worthy of never tasting the taste of death, and it was only due to them [the wicked] that they accepted death upon themselves. They will therefore inherit double of what they have earned.13Double punishment. There are other versions that cite the verse: “Shatter them with double destruction” (Jeremiah 17:18).
Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar said: “And behold it was very good” – and behold sleep is good. Is sleep, then, very good? This is a rhetorical question. Did we not learn: Wine and sleep are beneficial for them [the wicked] and beneficial for the whole world?14Mishna Sanhedrin 5:5. However, as a result of a person sleeping a bit, he can get up and toil extensively in the Torah.
Rabbi Naḥman bar Shmuel bar Naḥman said in the name of Rav Shmuel bar Naḥman: “Behold it was very good” – this is the good inclination; “and behold it was very good” – this is the evil inclination.15The addition of the word “and” is to introduce a second object. Is the evil inclination, then, very good? This is a rhetorical question. Rather, were it not for the evil inclination, a man would never build a house, would never marry a wife, would never beget children, and would never engage in commerce. Likewise, Solomon says: “[And I have considered all toil and all excelling in work,] that it is each man’s envy of his counterpart” (Ecclesiastes 4:4).
Rav Huna said: “Behold it was very good” – this refers to experiencing good fortune; “and behold it was very good” – this refers to experiencing suffering. Is the experiencing of suffering, then, “very good”? This is a rhetorical question. It is, rather, that through it, people come to attain life in the World to Come. Likewise, Solomon says: “Rebukes of admonition is the way toward life” (Proverbs 6:23). You must say: Go out and see, which path is it that leads a person towards life in the World to Come? This is the experiencing of suffering.
Rabbi Ze’eira said: “Behold it was very good” – this is the Garden of Eden; “and behold it was very good” – this is Gehenna. Is Gehenna, then, very good? This is a rhetorical question. This is analogous to a king who had an orchard. He stationed laborers there and he built a storage house at its entrance. He said: ‘Anyone who performs successfully in the labor of the orchard, he may enter its treasury; anyone who does not perform successfully in the labor of the orchard, he may not enter its treasury.’ So, too, anyone who amasses mitzvot and good deeds, here is the Garden of Eden. Anyone who does not amass mitzvot and good deeds, here is Gehenna.16Gehenna is a good thing in that it spurs man to act virtuously.
Rabbi Shmuel bar Yitzḥak said: “Behold it was very good” – this is the angel of life; “and behold it was very good” – this is the angel of death. Is the angel of death, then, “very good”? This is a rhetorical question. Rather, it is analogous to a king who prepared a feast, invited the guests and brought before them a serving dish filled with all kinds of delicacies. He said: ‘Anyone who eats and blesses the king, let him eat and enjoy himself, but anyone who eats and does not bless the king, his head shall be severed with a sword.’ So, too, anyone who amasses mitzvot and good deeds, here is the angel of life, and anyone who does not amass mitzvot and good deeds, here is the angel of death.
Rabbi Shimon bar Abba said: “Behold it was very good [tov me’od]” – this is the [divine] attribute of benevolence [midat tov], “and behold it was very good” – this is the [divine] attribute of strict punishment. Is the attribute of strict punishment, then, “very good”? Rather, He works conscientiously on the punishment, in which manner to bring it.17God makes sure to produce a punishment that corresponds to the person’s misdeed, so that he and others can understand what brought it about and improve their behavior accordingly. Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Shimon bar Abba: All the [original divine] measures are now void,18All the processes that God used in creating the world. but the [principle of] measure for measure19The principle that God grants reward and punishment in a manner that corresponds to a person’s acts. has not been voided. Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Yosei: From the beginning of the creation of the world, the Holy One blessed be He foresaw [the principle] that in accordance with the measure that a person metes out for others, so is it meted out for him. That is why the Sages said: “And behold it was very good” – this is the attribute of beneficence.
The Rabbis said it in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina bar Idi, Rabbi Pinḥas, and Rabbi Ḥilkiya: “Very [me’od]” and “man [adam]” are identical; the letters of this word are the same as letters of that one. That is what is written: “God saw everything that He had made, and, behold, it was very good” – this refers to man.
Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: “Behold it was very good” – this is the kingdom of Heaven; “and behold it was very good” – this is the kingdom on earth.20In some editions, due to censorship: The kingdom of the Romans. Is the kingdom on earth, then, “very good”? This is a rhetorical question. Rather, [it is good] because it addresses people’s grievances,21The government does this through the enforcement of law and order. as it is stated: “I made the earth and created man upon it” (Isaiah 45:12).22God placed human rulers on the earth to govern it.
“It was evening and it was morning, the sixth day, [and heaven and earth were finished…]” (Genesis 1:31–2:1) – Rabbi Yudan said: This is the additional hour [late Friday afternoon] that one takes away from the profane and adds to the sacred [Shabbat], during which the labor of the world was completed.23God finished the process of creation before the very end of the sixth day, so the end of Friday is itself appended to Shabbat. That is why “the sixth [day, and heaven and earth were finished]” is written. Rabbi Simon ben Marta said: Until this point, one reckons [the days] according to the count of the world,24The first day of creation, the second day of creation, etc. from here on, one reckons according to a different count.25After this point, one does not count the number of days since creation, but the number of days after Shabbat: The first day after Shabbat (Sunday), the second day after Shabbat (Monday), etc.

=== 10 | 10 ===
“The heavens and the earth and their entire host were completed” (Genesis 2:1). “The heavens and the earth and their entire host were completed.” It is written: “I see an end to all great things, but Your commandments are exceedingly broad” (Psalms 119:96). Everything has boundaries, the heavens and earth have boundaries, with the exception of one matter that does not have boundaries. Which is that? That is the Torah, as it is stated: “Its measure is longer than the earth and broader than the sea” (Job 11:9). Another interpretation: “I see an end to all great things” – this is the work of the creation of the heavens and the earth, as it is stated: “The heavens and the earth…were completed.”
Rabbi Ḥama began: “Remove the dross from silver [and a vessel will emerge for the smith] (Proverbs 25:4) – Rabbi Eliezer said in the name of Rabbi Yaakov: This is analogous to a bathtub that was filled with water, and there were two ornamental bowls in it. As long as it was full of water, the handiwork of the bowls was not visible. Once someone opened the drain and emptied the water from it, the handiwork of the bowls became visible. So, too, as long as the world was emptiness and disorder, the labor of the heavens and the earth was not visible. Once the emptiness and disorder was uprooted from the world,1Upon the completion of the process of creation. the handiwork of the heavens and the earth became visible. “A vessel [keli] will emerge for the smith” (Proverbs 25:4) – they [the heavens and earth] became [finished] vessels. That is what is written: “The heavens and the earth and their entire host were completed [vaykhulu].”
How did the Holy One blessed be He create His world? Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The Holy One blessed be He took two skeins, one of fire and one of snow, mixed them with one another, and from them the world was created. Rabbi Ḥanina said: Four, for the four directions of the world. Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: Six, four for the four directions and one for above and one for below. Hadrian, may his bones be crushed, once asked Rabbi Yehoshua bar Ḥananya, saying to him: ‘How did the Holy One blessed be He create His world?’ He said to him in accordance with what Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said. He said to him: ‘Is it possible that it was so?’ This was a rhetorical question. He took him into a small house and said to him: ‘Extend your hand to east, west, north, and south.’ He said to him: ‘Such was the action done by the Holy One blessed be He.’
Rabbi Hoshaya said: Rabbi Afes expounded in Antioch: “Vaykhulu” is nothing other than an expression of a delivering a blow and an expression of destruction [kelaya]. This is analogous to a king who entered a province and the residents of the province lauded him. Their lauding pleased him, and he provided them with encouragement and incentives. Sometime later, they angered him, so he minimized encouragement and incentives for them. So, too, until Adam the first man sinned, the celestial bodies would move in a short path, and quickly. After he sinned, He diverted them into a roundabout path, and they went at a slow pace. There are celestial bodies that complete their circuits in twelve months, such as Mercury. And there are celestial objects that complete their circuit in thirty days, namely, the moon. And there are celestial objects that complete their circuits in twelve years, namely, Jupiter. And there are celestial objects that complete their circuits in thirty years, namely, Saturn. This is all besides Venus and Mars, which complete their circuit only in four hundred and eighty years. 2This is a gloss from an unknown student, which was mistakenly inserted into the Midrash text since the first printed edition. Rabbi Pinḥas taught in the name of Rabbi Ḥanan of Tzippori: Regarding white fig trees, their Sabbatical Year sanctity takes effect in the second year of the Sabbatical cycle, because they produce fruit after three years,3Mishna Sheviit 5:1. Fruit that is picked two years after the Sabbatical Year began forming during the Sabbatical Year. whereas on that day,4The third day of Creation, when trees were created. they produced fruit in one day. But in the future, the Holy One blessed be He will heal that impairment, as it is stated: “He will heal the wound of his injury” (Isaiah 30:26) – He will heal the wounds of injuries of all the world.
Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: The heavens were perfected [nishtakhlelu] through [the addition of] the sun, moon, and constellations, and the earth was perfected through [the addition of] trees, vegetation, and the Garden of Eden. Rabbi Simon in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: The creations were all made in generic form [mekhulalim],5When they were first created they were without their full shape and detail, and during the six days of creation they expanded and developed into their full form. and they gradually expanded. “And their entire host [tzevaam]” – Rabbi Elazar said: There are three kinds of tzava:6The word is used in three different senses. The common denominator of them all is that they refer to things that come in abundance. The tzava of the heavens and the earth, the tzava of the students, and the tzava of suffering. The tzava of the heavens and the earth, as it is stated: “The heavens and the earth and their entire host [tzevaam] were completed.” The tzava of the students, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “All the days of my teaching students [tzeva’i], I wait until my replacement comes” (Job 14:14) – until my replacement arises. The tzava of suffering, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “Behold, there is suffering [tzava] for man upon earth” (Job 7:1). [Another interpretation of this last verse:] All a person’s aspirations [tzivion] are only on the earth.7For earthly matters, such as achieving wealth and comfort. But of what benefit is it for him, since “his days are like the days of a hired laborer” (Job 7:1). Naḥman son of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: If one merits, tzava8A great deal of success. will be his, but if not, the tzava9Great tragedy. will be upon him.10The word “upon” in Job 7:1 is written (ketiv) על, but pronounced (keri) עלי, allowing for two interpretations: Either the tzava is for the benefit of the man, or it overcomes him. When one builds a building, if he is fortunate, the tzava is his. If he falls from it and dies, the tzava overcomes him. If one eats his bread and enjoys it, tzava is his. If it gets stuck in his throat and chokes him, the tzava overcomes him. And the Holy One blessed be He has appointed many kinds of tzava for man in order to collect His due – many bears, many lions, many snakes, many fiery serpents, many scorpions.11The lesson is that the pursuit of material gain may ultimately be detrimental to a person. Moreover, “his days are like the days of a hired laborer.”
Bar Sira said: God produced drugs from the earth with which the physician heals the wound, and with which the pharmacist mixes his compounds.12The Wisdom of Ben Sira 38:4. Rabbi Simon said: There is not a single blade of grass that does not have a constellation in the firmament13A heavenly force or an angel that is in charge of it. that strikes it and says to it: ‘Grow.’ That is what is written: “Do you know the rules of the heavens? Will you establish its dominion [mishtaro] on earth?” (Job 38:33). It is an expression of being in charge [shoter]. “Will you tie the chains of the Pleiades, or untie the reins of Orion?” (Job 38:31) – Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa and Rabbi Simon said: Pleiades renders fruits delicate and Orion draws it out from knot to knot.14It causes the fruits to grow to full size. That is what is written: “Will you bring out the Mazarot in its season and guide Ursa with its sons?” (Job 38:32). Rabbi Tanḥuma said: It [Mazarot] is a constellation that softens [memazer] the produce.
The Rabbis say: Even matters that you consider superfluous in the world, like flies, fleas, and gnats, they, too, are included in the creation of the world, and through all of them the Holy One blessed be He executes His missions – even by means of a serpent, even by means of a gnat, even by means of a frog. Rabbi Tanḥuma said it in the name of Rabbi Menaḥma, Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Ḥelbo: Rabbi Aḥa would relate this incident: A certain man was standing on the river bank. He saw a frog carrying a scorpion and transporting it across the river.15The scorpion was sent to kill someone, and crossed the river in an unnatural manner to do so.  After it [the scorpion] performed its mission, it [the frog] took it back to its place. Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanan of Tzippori: There was an incident involving a certain man who was standing to reap his crop in the Bei Tarfa valley. He saw a stalk of a certain herb, picked it, and crafted it into a wreath for his head. A serpent came and he struck it, killing it. Another man came and stood there to look at the snake. He said: ‘I wonder, who was it who killed this serpent?’ That man said: ‘I killed it.’ He lifted his eyes and saw the stalk of herb that had been crafted into a wreath on his head. He said: ‘Did you really kill it?’ He said: ‘Yes.’ He said: ‘Can you remove that herb from your head?’ He said: ‘Yes.’ Once he removed it he said to him: ‘Can you come over here and lift this serpent with this staff?’ He said: ‘Yes.’ When he approached that serpent, immediately his limbs fell.16The snake had been sent to kill the man. The herb, which apparently contained an antidote to snake venom, saved him from his fate, but eventually the mission was accomplished.  Rabbi Yanai was sitting and expounding at the entrance to his city. He saw a serpent slithering and approaching. When he chased it away from one side, it returned at the other side, and when he chased it away from that side, it returned from the other side. He said: This one is on his way to perform a mission. Thereafter, a sound was heard in the city: So-and-so son of so-and-so was bitten by a serpent and died. Rabbi Elazar was sitting, paying a visit to the latrine. A Roman came and expelled him, entered in his place and sat himself down. He [Rabbi Elazar] said: This did not occur for naught. Immediately, a serpent emerged and struck him [the Roman], killing him. He applied to him the verse: “I placed a man [adam] in your stead” (Isaiah 43:4) – I placed Edom in your stead.17The Romans were identified with the people of Edom. Rabbi Yitzḥak ben Elazar was standing and strolling along the shore of the Sea of Caesarea and saw a certain thighbone that was rolling along. He kept pushing it away out of sight, but it kept rolling back. He said: This one is prepared to perform a mission. Several days later, a certain courier passed by, and he stumbled on it and died. They went and examined him and found that he was carrying evil missives regarding the Jews of Caesarea. The wicked Titus entered the Holy of Holies with a sword drawn in his hand and he cut the two curtains. Then he took two harlots and cohabited with them atop the altar. He emerged with his sword full of blood. Some say that it was blood of sacrifices, and some say it was the blood of the goat offered on Yom Kippur. He spoke out with blasphemy and sacrilege.18Saying that he had defeated God and this was His blood. He took all the Temple vessels and wrapped them up in a big bundle.19Using the Temple curtain. He again began to speak out with blasphemy and sacrilege against the most High, saying: ‘There is no comparison between one who wages war with the king in the wilderness and defeats him, and one who wages war with the king in his own palace and defeats him there.’ He went down to his ship. When he set sail, a large wave struck him in the sea. He said: ‘It appears that the God of this nation has power only in the water. He exacted retribution against the generation of Enosh only with water, He exacted retribution against the generation of the Flood only with water, He exacted retribution against Pharaoh and his army only with water. I, too, when I was in His House and His domain He was unable to stand up against me, and now He has confronted me here. He believes that He will kill me in the water.’ The Holy One blessed be He said [an oath] to him: ‘Wicked one, by your life, I will exact retribution from this wicked one [Titus] with a creature that is the smallest of all the creatures I created during the six days of Creation.’ Thereupon, the Holy One blessed be He signaled to the angel of the sea and it calmed from its raging.  When he reached Rome, all the residents of Rome emerged and lauded him. When he ascended to Rome [the city], he entered the bathhouse. When he emerged, they poured him a vial of a post-bath elixir with wine to drink. A gnat entered into his nose and began to continuously gnaw at his brain, until it was as large as a two-pound fowl. He [Titus] issued a command, saying: ‘Open up the brain of this man20Titus referred to himself in third person. to ascertain through what instrument the God of the Jews has exacted retribution from this man.’ Thereupon, they called the surgeons, they opened up his brain and removed what was like a two-pound fowl. Rabbi Elazar bar Rabbi Yosei said: ‘I saw in Rome that [they placed] a weight of two pounds on one side [of a balance] and the bird-like growth [of Titus] on the other side, and they were equal in weight. They took it and placed it in a bowl. As it [the growth] withered, he [Titus] withered along with it. [When it returned to its natural size,] the gnat flew away and the soul of the evil Titus flew away [as well].’
“God completed on the seventh day His labor that He had made; He rested on the seventh day from all His labor that He had made” (Genesis 2:2). “God completed on the seventh day” – Rabbi Ḥanina said: Rabbi Yishmael ben Rabbi Yosei took me to a certain inn and said to me: ‘Here my father prayed the Shabbat [evening] prayer before Shabbat.’21On Friday afternoon. Rabbi Yirmeya and Rabbi Aḥa say: Rabbi Yoḥanan raised it as a difficulty: ‘Did my father pray the Shabbat [evening] prayer here before Shabbat?’ he asked in bewilderment. But there was no need to raise a difficulty, as the donkey drivers had come up from Arav to Tzippori, and said: ‘Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa has already begun to observe Shabbat in his city.’ If you wish to raise a difficulty, raise it concerning this [version of the incident]: Rabbi Ḥanina said: Rabbi Yishmael ben Rabbi Yosei took me to a certain inn and said to me: ‘Did my father pray the post-Shabbat [evening] prayer here on Shabbat?’22The difficulty is: How could he say the post-Shabbat prayer while it was still daytime? Rabbi Abba said: ‘Concerning this as well there is no need to raise a difficulty, as Rabbi once was sitting and giving a lecture, and [afterwards] he said to Abba Yudan, his spokesman: Announce to the congregation that they should pray the weekday [evening] prayer now, though it is still daytime.’
Rabbi asked Rabbi Yishmael ben Rabbi Yosei, saying to him: ‘Did you hear from your father what is meant by: “God completed [vayechal] on the seventh day”? This is bewildering.’23God finished the Creation before the seventh day, not on the seventh day. The explanation is that it is like someone who was banging with a hammer onto an anvil. He raised it while it was still day and lowered it after nightfall.24The act was begun before nightfall, so it is counted as being done during the day. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: A mortal human being who does not know [with certainty] his times, his minutes, and his hours, he must add from the profane to the sacred.25A mortal man cannot determine the exact moment when Shabbat begins, so he must take away some of the weekday hours of Friday and add it on to Shabbat. But the Holy One blessed be He, who knows [with certainty] his minutes, his times, and his hours, entered into it [Shabbat] like a hairbreadth.26God performed labor at a time that appeared to mortal man as though it was already the seventh day, although it was, in fact, not yet Shabbat. Geniva and the Rabbis, Geniva said: This is analogous to a king who made himself a wedding canopy, painted it and embossed it. What was it lacking? A bride [kalla] to enter it. So, too, what was the world lacking? Shabbat.27God did create something on the seventh day – namely, Shabbat itself. The Rabbis say: This is analogous to a king for whom they crafted a signet ring. What was lacking? The seal. So, too, what was the world lacking? Shabbat.28And Shabbat is a sign, like a signet, between God and Israel (Exodus 31:17). This is one of the matters that they changed for King Ptolemy29This was when he gathered seventy Sages to translate the Torah into Greek – the Septuagint (see Megilla 9a). There were several places where the Sages veered from translating literally to evade various problems. – [they wrote] “God completed on the sixth day…and He rested on the seventh day.” King Ptolemy once asked the rabbis in Rome: ‘In how many days did the Holy One blessed be He create His world?’ They said to him: ‘In six days.’ He said to them: ‘And ever since that time, Gehenna has been burning for the wicked? Woe to the world from its judgments.’ “His labor” – did Rabbi Berekhya not say this in the name of Rabbi Simon: It was not with toil and not with exertion that the Holy One blessed be He created His world.30But, “by the word of the Lord the heavens were made” (Psalms 33:6). And you say “from all His labor”? This is bewildering. The explanation is that it is to exact retribution against the wicked, who demolish the world [as if it were] all created with toil and with exertion, and to grant a reward to the righteous, who sustain the world [as if it were] all created with toil and with exertion.  What was created on it [Shabbat] after He rested [from creating the world]? Tranquility, satisfaction, calm, and quiet. Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Yosei ben Rabbi Nehorai: As long as the hands of their Maker were touching them, they [the creations] would continuously expand. When the hands of their Maker let go of them, they were granted rest. “He rested [Vayanaḥ]31This word can also mean, “He let go.” [on the seventh day]” (Exodus 20:11) – He let go of His world on the seventh day. Rabbi Abba said: A mortal [king], when he grants furlough [to his soldiers], he does not give them gratuities, and when he gives them gratuities, he does not grant them furlough. But the Holy One blessed be He both granted a furlough and gave gratuities: “He rested [on the seventh day from all His labor that He had made]…and God blessed [the seventh day]” (Genesis 2:2–3).

=== 11 | 11 ===
“God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, because on it He rested from all His labor that God created to make” (Genesis 2:3). “God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it” – it is written: “The blessing of the Lord, it will enrich, without adding toil with it” (Proverbs 10:22). “The blessing of the Lord, it will enrich” – this is Shabbat, as it is stated: “God blessed the seventh day.” “Without adding toil [etzev] with it” – this is mourning, just as it says: “The king is in grief [ne’etzav] over his son” (II Samuel 19:3).1Mourning the dead is not observed on Shabbat.
“God blessed the seventh day [and sanctified it]” – Rabbi Yishmael said: He blessed it with manna and He sanctified it with manna. He blessed it with manna in that all the days of the week one omer [of manna] would fall, while on the day before Shabbat two omers would fall.2An extra omer for Shabbat. He sanctified it with manna, as it did not fall on it [on Shabbat] at all. Rabbi Natan says: He blessed it with manna and sanctified it with a blessing.3The Shabbat blessing recited over a cup of wine. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: He blessed it with manna and sanctified it through the gatherer.4Someone who gathered wood in the wilderness on Shabbat and was put to death (Numbers 15:32–36). The harsh penalty demonstrates the awesome, inviolable sanctity of Shabbat. He blessed it with apparel.5One should wear fine clothing on Shabbat. Rav Huna said: He should change his clothing.6He must change from everyday clothing into special Shabbat garb. Rabbi Ḥiyya said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: He should mix [garments].7If one does not have a complete set of Shabbat clothing, he should at least mix one fine item into the everyday clothing he will wear on Shabbat. Avin bar Ḥisdai said: He should lower [his garments].8If someone does not have any special garments for Shabbat, he should at least wear his ordinary garment in a distinctive manner, e.g., by lengthening it. Rabbi Yirmeya and Rabbi Ze’eira were walking together [on Shabbat], and the outer garment of Rabbi Yirmeya was raised up,9That type of garment was ordinarily worn folded in order that it be elevated off the ground. but Rabbi Ze’eira lowered his.10By releasing the fold. This shows that one should lower [one’s garments for Shabbat]. Rabbi Elazar says: He blessed it with [the Shabbat] candle,11By enabling it to last longer than usual. and there was an incident involving me [that illustrates this]. One time I kindled a candle on Shabbat eve, and I came and found it burning at the conclusion of Shabbat, and nothing [of the oil] was diminished. He blessed it with the radiance of a person’s face, He sanctified it with the radiance of a person’s face. The radiance of a person’s face all the days of the week is not comparable to the way it is on Shabbat. He blessed it with the lights.12The primordial light of creation, which was hidden away because of Adam’s sin. Rabbi Shimon bar Yehuda of Kefar Akko says in the name of Rabbi Shimon: Even though the lights were cursed on the day before Shabbat,13When Adam sinned. they were not stricken until the conclusion of Shabbat. This is in accordance with the opinion of the Rabbis, and not in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Ami, as Rabbi Ami said: Adam the first man, his glory14The primordial light. did not spend the night with him.15It was abolished on the day of his creation, before Shabbat. What is the source? “Man [adam] will not go to rest in his splendor; he is like the beasts that perish” (Psalms 49:13). The Rabbis say: His glory did spend the night with him, and only at the conclusion of Shabbat was his radiance taken from him, as He expelled him from the Garden of Eden. That is what is written: “You alter his countenance and send him away” (Job 14:20). When the sun set on Shabbat eve, the Holy One blessed be He sought to put away the [primordial] light, but He accorded honor to Shabbat. That is what is written: “God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it” – He blessed it with light. When the sun set on Shabbat eve the [primordial] light continued to function.16Even at night. Everyone began praising [God]; that is what is written: “Under all the heavens they sing His praises,17The Midrash interprets yishrehu as being related to shira, song. and His light is to the ends of the earth” (Job 37:3). Why was this?18Why is it that “under all the heavens they sing His praises”? Because “His light is to the ends of the earth.”  Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Simon said: By the light that the Holy One blessed be He created on the first day, a person could look out and see from one end of the world to the other end. When the Holy One blessed be He looked at the people of the generation of the Flood and the people of the generation of the Dispersion, whose actions were to be corrupt, He arose and hid it away and designated it for the righteous in the future. From where is it derived that He hid it away? It is as it is stated: “Their light will be withheld from the wicked, and the upraised arm will be broken” (Job 38:15). And from where is it derived that He designated it for the righteous in the future? It is as it is stated: “But the path of the righteous is like a dawning light, growing brighter until the day is established” (Proverbs 4:18). Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Ze’eira: That [primordial] light functioned for thirty-six hours – twelve on the day before Shabbat, twelve on the night of Shabbat, and twelve on Shabbat. As the sun set at the conclusion of Shabbat, darkness began approaching, and Adam the first man became afraid, as it is stated: “And I said that darkness will envelop me [yeshufeni]; night for me is light,” (Psalms 139:11) – that one [the serpent] in whose regard it is written: “He will strike you [yeshufekha] with his head, and you will strike him [teshufenu] with your heel” (Genesis 3:15), is now coming to confront me.19The serpent represents death, as it was through its evil machinations that Adam sinned and was condemned to death. What did the Holy One blessed be He do? He prepared for him two flint stones and he struck them one against the other. Light emerged from them and he recited a blessing over it. That is what is written: “Night for me is light.” What blessing did he recite over it? [Blessed be God] Who creates the lights of fire. This is in accordance with the opinion of Shmuel, as Shmuel said: Why does one recite a blessing over light at the conclusion of Shabbat? It is because that time was the beginning of its creation. Rav Huna in the name of Rav and Rabbi Abahu in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan said: One recites a blessing over it [light] at the conclusion of Yom Kippur, as well, because fire rested all that day.20It is forbidden to make a fire all day on Yom Kippur.
He blessed it due to the expenditure.21He gave Shabbat a blessing that people should not suffer a long-term financial loss when spending money to honor it. Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Yosei ben Rabbi Ḥanina: Every day on which there is reduction [among the creations of that day], blessing is written in its regard, and in fact it lacks nothing. On the fifth day, birds and fish were created, and people slaughter and eat birds and trap and eat fish, [reducing their number], but since blessing is written in its regard22Genesis 1:22. it lacks nothing.23The birds and fish replenish themselves through reproduction. On the sixth day, man and animal were created, and people slaughter and eat animals, and people die, but since blessing is written in its regard24Genesis 1:28. it lacks nothing. But regarding the seventh day what can you say?25Why was it necessary for God to give a blessing for Shabbat? Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Yosei ben Rabbi Ḥanina: It is for the expenditure.
Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Yosei: For the sake of fastidious people, He blessed it with delicacies.26Though such people are very fussy eaters, God blessed Shabbat that all its food should be delicious. Our master [Rabbi] once prepared a feast for Antoninus27A Roman governor who was friendly with him. on Shabbat. He brought before him some cold cooked dishes. He ate them and enjoyed them. He [Rabbi] prepared another feast for him on a weekday. He brought before him some hot cooked dishes. He said to him: ‘Those [from Shabbat] pleased me more than these.’28Even though the Shabbat dishes were served cold. He said to him: ‘They [the weekday foods] are missing a certain spice.’ He said to him: ‘Is it possible that the pantry of the king is lacking anything?’29Tell me which spice you lack, and I can bring you some from the royal pantry. He said: ‘They are lacking Shabbat. Do you have Shabbat?’ Rabbi Yishmael ben Rabbi Yosei asked Rabbi, he said to him: ‘The [Jewish] residents of Babylon, by what merit do they live?’ He said to him: ‘It is by the merit of the Torah [which they study diligently].’ ‘And the residents of the Land of Israel, by what merit [do they live]?’ He said to him: ‘It is by the merit of tithes [which they separate from their produce].’ ‘And the residents outside of the Land of Israel, by what merit [do they live]?’ ‘It is by the merit of the fact that they honor Shabbatot and the festivals.’ Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: One time a certain person in Laodicea invited me and brought before us a round tabletop borne on sixteen poles, and on it was every type of food that was created during the six days of Creation. There was a certain child sitting in the middle of the tabletop and proclaiming and saying: “The earth and all that it holds are the Lord’s, the world and all its inhabitants” (Psalms 24:1). And why did he go to such lengths?30Why was the child placed there in order to proclaim this? It was so the host should not become haughty [from all his wealth]. I said to him [the host]: ‘Son, from where did you merit all this honor?’ He said to me: ‘I used to be a butcher, and every time I saw a fine animal over the week days, I would set it aside for Shabbat.’ I said to him: ‘It is not for naught that you merited [all this].’ Rabbi Tanḥuma said: There was an incident in Rome on the day before the great fast [Yom Kippur]. There was a certain tailor there and he went [to the market] to purchase a fish. It happened that he and the child [servant] of the governor were vying for it. This one would offer a higher price and the other one would offer a still higher price, until it reached twelve dinars, and the tailor purchased it. At dinnertime, the governor said to the child: ‘Why did you not bring me a fish?’ He said to him: ‘My master, I will not conceal it from you, I went [to the market] and there was only one fish there and it happened that I and a certain Jew were vying for it. He offered a higher price and I offered a higher price until it reached twelve dinars. Would you have wanted me to bring you a fish for twelve dinars?’ he asked rhetorically. He said to him: ‘Who is it [who bought the fish]?’ He said to him: ‘A man named such-and-such.’ He sent for him and he came before him. He said to him: ‘What did you see, Jewish tailor, that led you to eat a fish that cost twelve dinars?’ He said to him: ‘My master, we have one day [each year] that atones for us for all the sins we have performed all the days of the year. When it arrives, should we not accord it honor?’ He said to him: ‘Because you adduced a justification for your position, you are exempt [from punishment].’ How did the Holy One blessed be He reward him? He went and cut it open and He brought it about for him that there was a fine gem inside it, and he supported himself from it all his days.
The wicked [governor] Tinneus Rufus asked Rabbi Akiva: ‘How is this day [Shabbat] different from the other days of the week?’31Why should it be treated differently from the other days? He said to him: ‘How is this man [Tinneus Rufus] different from other men?’32Why is it that you are treated differently from other men? He said: ‘What did I say to you and what did you say to me?’ He said to him: ‘You said to me: How is this day different from the other days of the week, meaning, in what way is Shabbat different from every day? And I said to you: How is this man different other men, meaning, in what way is Tinneus Rufus different from other men?’ He said to him: ‘It is because the king wished to honor me.’ He said to him: ‘This [Shabbat], too, the Holy One blessed be He wished to honor it.’ He said to him: ‘From where can you prove it to me?’33That Shabbat is actually different from other days. He said to him: ‘The Sambatyon River proves it, as it flows with stones all the days of the week, but on Shabbat it rests.’ He said to him in astonishment: ‘Are you dragging me to a river?’34We are not going to travel to the Sambatyon to witness it, so you have still not proven anything. He said to him: ‘Necromancers, who raise the dead via the male organ, will prove it, as a dead man can be brought up all the days of the week, but on Shabbat he cannot be brought up. Let this man [Tinneus Rufus] test this out with his father.’  One time, he [Tinneus Rufus] needed to do so, and he tested it with his father. He was brought up all the days of the week, but on Shabbat he could not be brought up. On Sunday he brought him up again. He said to him in bewilderment: ‘Since you died, have you become a Jew? Why were you brought up all the days of the week, but on Shabbat you could not be brought up?’ He said to him: ‘Anyone who does not observe Shabbat willingly in your place, will observe it here perforce.’ He said to him: ‘Do you have labor there for which you exert yourselves all the days of the week, that you can experience rest on Shabbat?’ He said to him: ‘All the days of the week we are punished, but on Shabbat we rest.’ He [Tinneus Rufus] returned to Rabbi Akiva and said to him: ‘If it is as you say, that the Holy One blessed be He honors the Shabbat, let him not make the wind blow [on Shabbat], let him not make rain fall, let him not allow grass to grow.’ He said to him: ‘May the spirit of that man35Tinneus Rufus. depart from him. I will tell you a parable: [It is analogous to] two people who resided in the same courtyard. If one does not contribute to the eruv and the other one contributes to the eruv, is it, perhaps, permitted to transport items in the courtyard? However, if one person resides in a courtyard alone, it is permitted for him [to transport items] in the entire courtyard. Here, too, the Holy One blessed be He, because there is no other power that co-exists with Him, and the entire world is His, it is permitted for Him [to transport items] throughout the entire world. Additionally, those who partook of the manna can attest to it,36That Shabbat is indeed different from the other days of the week. as all the days of the week it would fall, but on Shabbat it did not fall.’
A certain philosopher once asked Rabbi Hoshaya, saying to him: ‘If circumcision is so dear to Him [God], why was it not given to Adam the first man?’37The insinuation of his question was that circumcision is not a divine command, but rather a form of purposeless mutilation. He said to him: ‘Why does this man [the philosopher] shave the corner of [the hair on] his head but leave the corner of his beard?’ He replied: ‘It is because this [the head hair] grew with him in his period of foolishness.’38In his childhood. He said to him: ‘If so, he should put out his eye, sever his hands, and break his legs, because they too grew with him in his period of foolishness.’ He said to him: ‘Have we come to such [frivolous] arguments?’ This was a rhetorical question. He said to him: ‘It is not possible for me to dismiss you with no response at all. The explanation is that everything that was created during the six days of Creation requires some action [to bring it to its perfected state], e.g., mustard requires sweetening, lupines require sweetening, wheat requires grinding. And even man needs to be perfected.’
Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta: Abraham, in whose regard observance of Shabbat is not mentioned, inherited the world with a limited measure, as it is stated: “Arise, walk about in the land to its length and to its breadth, [as to you I will give it]” (Genesis 13:17). But Jacob, in whose regard observance of Shabbat is mentioned, as it is stated: “He encamped before the city” (Genesis 33:18) – he entered with the dimming of the sun and established Shabbat boundaries [for his camp] while it was still day – [he] inherited the world with no limited measure, as it is stated: “Your descendants will be as the dust of the earth, [and you shall spread out to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south]” (Genesis 28:14).
Another interpretation: Why did He bless it [Shabbat]? Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Dostai and Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman, Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Dostai say: It is because it does not have a partner. Sunday has Monday [as its partner], Tuesday has Wednesday, Thursday has Shabbat eve. But Shabbat has no partner.39Therefore it required God’s blessing. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: It [the blessing of Shabbat] is in that it cannot be postponed.40It always occurs every seventh day. Festivals may be postponed,41The holy days are observed on particular dates in particular months, so their time is determined when the New Year and New Months are declared by the religious court. These courts are authorized to postpone these declarations in various circumstances. Yom Kippur may be postponed, but Shabbat cannot be postponed. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: Shabbat said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘Master of the universe, all of them [the other days] have partners, but I do not have a partner.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to it: ‘The congregation of Israel is your partner.’ When Israel stood before Mount Sinai, the Holy One blessed be He said to them: ‘Remember the matter that I said to Shabbat: The congregation of Israel is your partner.’ That is the meaning of the statement in the Ten Commandments: “Remember the Shabbat day to keep it holy” (Exodus 20:8).
Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina: The Holy One blessed be He created three creations on each day. On the first day He created the heavens, the earth, and light; on the second day, the firmament, Gehenna, and angels; on the third day, trees, grasses, and the Garden of Eden; on the fourth day, the sun, the moon, and the constellations; on the fifth day, birds, fish, and Leviathan; on the sixth day, Adam, Eve, and crawling creatures. Rabbi Pinḥas said: On the sixth day, He created six things: Adam, Eve, crawling creatures, animals, beasts, and demons. Rabbi Benaya said: “That God created and made” is not written here, but rather, “that God created to make” – everything that the Holy One blessed be He was going to create on the seventh day, He created them early, on the sixth day.
Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Hoshaya: Although it says: “Because on it He rested from all His labor,” from the labor of creating His world He rested,42“Because on it He rested from all His labor that God created” implies that it was only from His own labor that He rested, but there were other types of labor that continued. but he did not rest from the labor of the wicked nor from the labor of the righteous. Rather, he performs actions with these and with those. He shows to these the essence of what is their fate and to those the essence of their fate.43He punishes the wicked and rewards the righteous, all in accordance with what has been determined by their deeds. This kind of “labor” never ceased. From where is it derived that the punishment of the wicked is called labor? It is as it is stated: “The Lord opened His armory and took out the weapons of His fury, for it is labor [for the Lord]” (Jeremiah 50:25). And from where is it derived that the reward of the righteous is called labor? It is as it is stated: “How great is the goodness You have in store for those who fear You, which You have fashioned44The expression ”fashioning”  is associated with labor. for those taking refuge in You, in the presence of people” (Psalms 31:20).

=== 12 | 12 ===
“These are the outgrowths of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, on the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens” (Genesis 2:4). “These are the outgrowths [toledot] of the heavens and of the earth when they were created” – it is written: “Behold, these are but the edges of His ways…” (Job 26:14). Rav Huna said: All the things that you see are just the edges of the ways of the Holy One blessed be He. “Behold, these are but the edges of His ways, and how a trace is heard about Him; who can investigate the thunder of His might?” (Job 26:14). Rav Huna said: Thunder, when it emerges in its full force, no creature can understand it. “Who has investigated?” is not written, but rather, “who can investigate?” Clever people may have vague knowledge or ideas about it, [but even they cannot understand it fully]. Rav Huna said: If you are unable to understand [even] the workings of thunder, is it not all the more so for the workings of the [whole] world? That is a rhetorical question.  If1This paragraph is an exposition on the verse “What is man, that he should come along after the King, after they have already done something?” (Ecclesiastes 2:12). The Midrash will soon explain why the verse says ‘they.’ a person says to you: I can understand the workings of the world, say to him: ‘If you are unable to understand even a flesh-and-blood king, are you able to understand the King of kings, the Holy One blessed be He? That is a rhetorical question.’ Rav Naḥman said: This2This paragraph is an exposition on the first half of the aforementioned verse: “I devoted myself to acquire wisdom” (Ecclesiastes 2:12). After Solomon acquired his wisdom, others were able to take advantage of it as well. is analogous to a thicket of reeds into which no person could enter, as anyone who entered into it would lose his way. What did one clever person do? He continuously cut down [reeds] and entered further and further into the thicket. He entered via the clearing and exited via the clearing. Everyone then began entering and exiting via the clearing. Rav Naḥman said differently: This is analogous to a great palace that had many entrances. Everyone who entered it would lose his way. What did one clever person do? He took a spool of string and tied it [on one end] opposite the entrance and he entered by means of the spool3Unwinding the string as he went along. and exited by means of the spool. Everyone then began entering and exiting by means of the spool.  Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: This is analogous to a flesh-and-blood king who built a palace. People entered into it and said: If the pillars were taller it would be nicer, if the walls were higher it would be nicer, if the ceiling were higher it would be nicer. But did a person ever come and say: If I had three eyes, if I had three legs, it would be better for me? That is a rhetorical question. “After He has already done” is not written, but rather, “after they have already done” (Ecclesiastes 2:12). The King of kings, the Holy One blessed be He, and His court conferred, as it were, over each and every limb of yours, and established it at its proper configuration, as it is stated: “Will you repay the Lord this, crude and unwise people? Is He not your father, your redeemer? He made you, and He established you” (Deuteronomy 32:6). Rabbi Levi bar Ḥaita said: When a flesh-and-blood king builds a palace, if he would place its drain pipe at its entrance it would not be becoming. But the King of kings, the Holy One blessed be He, created man and placed his drain pipe at his entrance,4This refers to the nose, which is right at the front of one’s face. and it is becoming, and it is [in fact] a person’s glory. Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Maryon said: It is written: “The Lord God formed the man” (Genesis 2:7). Why, then, does the verse state [again]: “Whom He had formed” (Genesis 2:8)? The Holy One blessed be He was taking pride in His world, as it were, saying: ‘See the creation that I created and the form that I formed.’ Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Maryon said: It is written: “These are the outgrowths of the heavens and of the earth when they were created” – their Creator praises them, who can disparage them? Their Creator lauds them, who will find fault with them? Rather, they are beautiful and praiseworthy, as it is stated: “These are the outgrowths of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, on the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens.”
Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Levi: “When they were created [behibare’am]” – with heh [beheh]5Effortlessly, with the ease it takes to pronounce the letter heh (see section 10). He created them [bera’am]. “My hand made all these [eleh], and all these came into being, the utterance of the Lord, but to this I will look; to the poor and the depressed and those fervent for My word” (Isaiah 66:2) – Rabbi Yehuda said in the name of Rabbi Simon: It was not with exertion and not with toil that the Holy One blessed be He created the world, as it is stated: “My hand made all these, [and all these came into being, the utterance of the Lord].”6The implication of this verse is that the world was created through the mere utterance of the Lord. Rabbi Yudan said: By the merit of the Torah, as it is stated: “These [eleh] are the statutes and ordinances and laws which the Lord gave between Him and the children of Israel at Mount Sinai by the hand of Moses” (Leviticus 26:46). Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya says: By the merit of the tribes, as it is stated: “These [eleh] are the names” (Exodus 1:1). And it is stated: “And all these [eleh] came into being.”
“These are [eleh] the outgrowths of the heavens [when they were created, on the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens]…” – Rabbi Abahu said: Everywhere eleh is stated, it rejects what preceded it; ve’eleh adds to what preceded it. Here, where it says eleh, it excludes what preceded it. What, then, does it exclude? Emptiness, disorder, and darkness.7The state that preceded the creation of the earth and the heavens (Genesis 1:2).
Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: “The heavens and the earth…were completed” (Genesis 2:1) – at their designated time. “And their entire host” (Genesis 2:1) – at their designated time.8The heavens and the earth on the one hand, and their hosts on the other hand, were created on separate days. Rabbi Neḥemya said to him: But is it not written: “These are the outgrowths of the heavens and of the earth when they were created [on the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens]” – which teaches that on the same day they were created they produced their outgrowths? He said to him: But is it not written: “It was evening, it was morning, one day…a second day…a third day…a fourth day…a fifth day…a sixth day”?9With different items created on each day. Rabbi Neḥemya said: They are like people picking figs; each one of them appears at its time.10All the buds of the figs are present at the beginning of the season, but they ripen gradually, each one in its time. So, too, the outgrowths of the heavens and the earth were present in an incipient form from the beginning, and grew into their final form during the subsequent days. Rabbi Berekhya said in support of Rabbi Neḥemya’s teaching: “The earth brought forth [vegetation]” (Genesis 1:12) – [“bringing forth” indicating] something that was already stored inside it.
Rabbi Neḥemya of Kefar Siḥon said: “For in six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth, [the sea]…” (Exodus 20:11). The three items are the essential basis of the creation of the world, and each one waited three days and then produced three products: The earth [was created] on the first day, in accordance with the opinion of Beit Hillel,11Bereshit Rabba 1:15. and it waited three days, the first and second and third, and then [on day three] produced three products – trees, vegetation, and the Garden of Eden. The firmament [was created] on the second day, waited three days, the second and third and fourth, and then [on day four] produced three products – the sun, the moon, and the constellations. Water [was created] on the third day, waited three days, the third and fourth and fifth, and then [on day five] produced three products – birds, fish, and Leviathan. Rabbi Azarya did not say thus, but rather, “on the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens” – there were [only these] two items that were the essential basis of the creation of the world, and each waited three days and their labor was completed on the fourth. The heavens [were created] on the first day, in accordance with the opinion of Beit Shammai,12Bereshit Rabba 1:15. they waited three days, the first and second and third, and then their labor was completed on the fourth day. What was the completion of their labor? The celestial lights. The earth [was created] on the third day: “The earth brought forth [vegetation, etc.]” (Genesis 1:12), [the vegetation] being the essential element of its creation. It waited three days, the third and fourth and fifth, and its labor was completed on the sixth. What was the completion of its labor? It is man, as it is stated: “I made the earth and created man upon it” (Isaiah 45:12).
The outgrowths [toledot]” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: All toledot that are stated in the Torah are written defectively388Toledot may be written in full form, with two vavs, but usually it is written missing one or both of the vavs. except for two: “These are the offspring [toledot] of Peretz…” (Ruth 4:18), and this one. Why are those [others] defective?13Specifically, “This is the book of the offspring [toledot] of Adam” (Genesis 5:1), where toledot is missing one vav. Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Rabbi Avin: They are corresponding to the six things that were taken away from Adam the first man [after he sinned].14The numerical value of vav is six. They are: His radiance, his [eternal] life, his stature, the [extraordinary] produce of the earth, the [extraordinary] fruit of the tree, and the lights. His radiance, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “You alter his countenance and send him away” (Job 14:20). His life, from where is it derived? “For you are dust, [and to dust shall you return]” (Genesis 3:19). His stature, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “The man and his wife hid” (Genesis 3:8). Rabbi Abahu said: At that moment, the stature of Adam the first man was reduced and [he] became a [mere] hundred cubits. The produce of the earth and the fruit of the tree, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “Cursed is the ground on your account” (Genesis 3:17).  As for the lights, Rabbi Shimon ben Rabbi Yehuda of Kefar Akko said in the name of Rabbi Meir: Although the lights were cursed on the day before Shabbat,15When Adam sinned. they were stricken only at the conclusion of Shabbat. This is in accordance with the opinion of the Rabbis and not in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yosei, as Rabbi Yosei said: Adam the first man, his glory did not spend the night with him.16It was removed from him on the day of his creation, before Shabbat. What is his source? “Man [adam] will not go to rest in his splendor…” (Psalms 49:13). The Rabbis say: [His glory did spend the night with him; ] only at the conclusion of Shabbat was his radiance taken from him as He expelled him from the Garden of Eden. That is what is written: “He banished the man” (Genesis 3:24), and it is written: “You alter his countenance and send him away” (Job 14:20).  Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Simon said: By the light with which the world was created, Adam the first man could look out and see from one end of the world to the other. When the Holy One blessed be He looked ahead at the actions of the generation of Enosh, the actions of the generation of the Flood, and the actions of the generation of the Dispersion, [and saw] that they were corrupt, He arose and hid it away from them, as it is stated: “Their light will be withheld from the wicked” (Job 38:15). Why did He hide it away? The explanation is that he hid it away for the righteous in the future, as it is stated: “God saw that it [light] was good [tov]” (Genesis 1:4). Tov is nothing other than the righteous, as it is stated: “Say of the righteous one that he is good [tov]” (Isaiah 3:10). From where is it derived that He hid it away for the righteous? It is as it is stated: “But the path of the righteous is like a dawning light” (Proverbs 4:18). When he saw that the light was hidden away for the righteous, He rejoiced, as it is stated: “At the light of the righteous He will rejoice” (Proverbs 13:9). Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Gezeira: That [primordial] light functioned for thirty-six hours – twelve on the day before Shabbat, twelve on the night of Shabbat, and twelve on Shabbat [day]. When Adam the first man sinned, He sought to hide it away [immediately], but He accorded deference to Shabbat, as it is stated: “God blessed the seventh day” (Genesis 2:3). With what did He bless it? It was with light. When the sun set on Shabbat eve the light continued to function. Everyone began praising the Holy One blessed be He. That is what is written: “Under all the heavens they sing His praises” (Job 37:3).17The Midrash interprets yishrehu as being related to shira, song. Why? It is because “His light is to the ends of the earth” (Job 37:3). That light illuminated all day and all night.  As the sun set at the conclusion of Shabbat, darkness began approaching, and at that time Adam the first man became afraid. He said: ‘Is it possible that the one [the serpent] in whose regard it is written: “He will strike you [yeshufekha] with his head, and you will strike him [teshufenu] with your heel” (Genesis 3:15), is now coming to confront me,18The serpent represents death, as it was through its evil machinations that Adam sinned and was condemned to death. as it is stated: “And I said that darkness will envelop me [yeshufeni]”?’ (Psalms 139:11). He said this with bewilderment. What did the Holy One blessed be He do? He prepared for him two flint stones, and he struck them one against the other. Light emerged from them and he recited a blessing over it. That is what is written: “Night, for me, is light” (Psalms 139:11). This is in accordance with the opinion of what was taught in the school of Rabbi Yishmael: Why does one recite at the conclusion of Shabbat the blessing over light: ‘[Blessed be God] Who creates the lights of fire?’ It is because that time was the beginning of its creation. Rav Huna in the name of Rabbi Aivu in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan said: One recites a blessing over it [light] at the conclusion of Yom Kippur, as well, because fire rested on that day.19It is forbidden to make a fire all day on Yom Kippur. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel: Although the [six] items were created in their complete form,20This is derived from the fact that toledot here (Genesis 2:4) is written complete, with both vavs. when Adam the first man sinned they were ruined, and they will not be restored to their completeness until the descendant of Peretz [the Messiah] comes, as it is stated: “These are the offspring [toledot] of Peretz” (Ruth 4:18) – in its complete form,21With both vavs. for the six things [taken away from Adam] that will be restored: His radiance, his [eternal] life, his stature, the produce of the earth, the fruit of the tree, and the lights. His radiance, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “May all those who love Him be like the sun coming out in its might” (Judges 5:31). His [eternal] life, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “For like the days of a tree will be the days of My people…” (Isaiah 65:22), and it is taught: Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says: “Tree” is nothing other than Torah, as it says: “It is a tree of life for those who grasp it” (Proverbs 3:18).22“Like the days of a tree” means like the days of the Torah, meaning forever. His stature, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “I caused you to walk upright [komemiyut]” (Leviticus 26:13).  Rabbi Ḥiyya taught: With upright stature and not in fear of any creature. Rabbi Yudan said: [Their stature will be] one hundred cubits23Komemiyut is interpreted as koma meyot – stature of hundreds. like Adam the first man. Rabbi Shimon said: Two hundred cubits.24Because meyot (hundreds) is in plural. Rabbi Elazar bar Rabbi Shimon said: Three hundred: Koma refers to one hundred,25As that was the stature (koma) of Adam. and meyot – refers to [another] two hundred. Rabbi Abahu said: Nine hundred cubits. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Dosa: Rabbi Abahu’s source is from here: “For like the days of a tree will be the days of My people” – like a sycamore that grows in the ground for six hundred years. An offspring emerges from its mother’s womb a bit more than a cubit long.26And by the end of the first year after conception (when the baby is three months old), it reaches a length of one-and-a-half cubits.  Go out and calculate one-and-a-half cubits per year,27Since man’s growth is compared to the growth of a sycamore, that means he will grow at a constant rate for six hundred years. that is nine hundred cubits.  The produce of the earth, the fruit of the tree, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “For the seed is of peace: The vine will yield its fruit, [and the land will yield its produce]” (Zechariah 8:12). The lights, from where is it derived? It is as it is written: “The light of the moon will be like the light of the sun [and the light of the sun will be sevenfold, like the light of the seven days]” (Isaiah 30:26).
Everything is associated with offspring [toladot].28They are involved in the process of producing offspring, or they themselves are considered offspring. The heavens and the earth have toladot, as it is stated: “These are the outgrowths [toledot] of the heavens and of the earth when they were created.” Mountains are called toladot, as it is stated: “Before the mountains were born…” (Psalms 90:2). Rain is called toladot, as it is stated: “Does rain have a father?” (Job 38:28). Dew is called toladot, as it is stated: “And who begot the drops [eglei] of dew?” (Job 38:28). Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: These [eglai] are gem-like drops of dew.  It was taught: Anything that is associated with offspring dies and decomposes, is created but does not create. Anything that is not associated with offspring does not die, does not decompose, and creates but is not created. Rabbi Azarya stated: This [latter category] was stated [only] regarding the One above.
Everything that you see is an outgrowth of either the heavens or the earth, as it is stated: “In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth” (Genesis 1:1). On the second day, He created things out of the heavenly realm: “God said: Let there be a firmament” (Genesis 1:6). On the third day, He created things out of the earthly realm: “God said: Let the earth sprout grass” (Genesis 1:11). On the fourth day, He created things out of the heavenly realm: “God said: Let there be lights” (Genesis 1:14). On the fifth day, He created things out of the earthly realm: “God said: Let the water swarm” (Genesis 1:20). On the sixth day, He came to create man. He said: ‘If I create him from the heavenly realm, the heavenly will outnumber the earthly by one creation and there will not be peace [equilibrium] in the world. If I create him from the earthly realm, the earthly will outnumber the heavenly by one creation and there will not be peace in the world. Rather, I will create him from both the heavenly and the earthly realms for the sake of peace.’ That is what is written: “And the Lord God created man…” (Genesis 2:7) – “Out of dust from the ground” (Genesis 2:7), from the earthly, “and He blew into his nostrils a living spirit” (Genesis 2:7), from the heavenly. This is as Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: “Dominion and fear are with Him; He makes peace in His heights” (Job 25:2). “Dominion” – this is Gabriel; “and fear” – this is Mikhael.29The angels Mikhael and Gabriel represent opposite spiritual forces, and God creates a balance (“peace”) between them, as he did with all of creation.
Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa said: “When they were created [behibare’am]” – be’Avraham30Behibare’am  and  be’Avraham are spelled with the same letters. – due to the merit of Abraham. Rabbi Azarya said regarding this statement of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa: “You alone are the Lord; You made [the heavens, the heaven of heavens, and all their host, the earth and everything that is on it, the seas] and everything that is in them” (Nehemiah 9:6). And for what purpose was all this effort undertaken? It is for: “You are the Lord, the God who chose Abram, and took him out of Ur of the Chaldeans, and set his name as Abraham” (Nehemiah 9:7).  Rabbi Yudan said: “The ibex are in the high mountains” is not written here, but rather, “the high mountains are for the ibex” (Psalms 104:18). Why were the high mountains created? For the ibex. The ibex is weak and fears wild beasts, but when it seeks to drink, the Holy One blessed be He introduces a manic spirit into it and it shakes its horns back and forth, producing noise, and it [the wild beast] flees. “The crag is a shelter for the hyrax” (Psalms 104:18) – the hyrax takes shelter under the crag from the bird of prey when it flies over so that it will not prey on it. If the Holy One blessed be He took into account this impure being when creating His world, would he not do all the more so for the merit of Abraham? That is a rhetorical question.
“Behibare’am” – Rabbi Abahu said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Behibare’am – with a heh [beheh] He created them [bera’am]. Just as with heh, though all the other letters employ the tongue this one does not employ the tongue,31In order to pronounce the heh one need not use the tongue or any of the other parts of the mouth, e.g., the lips, the throat, the roof of the mouth, etc. so, too, with no exertion or toil, the Holy One blessed be He created His world. It was, rather, “By the word of the Lord” (Psalms 33:6), and immediately “the heavens were made” (Psalms 33:6).  Rabbi Yuda Nesia asked Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: Because I have heard about you that you are a master of aggada, [I ask you]: What is it that is written: “Praise Him who rides in the highest heavens, by His name the Lord [beyah shemo]…”? (Psalms 68:5). He said to him: There is no place that does not have a person appointed to address its grievances (biya).32Later editions have בית instead of בֶּיָּה. A commissioner in the province is appointed to address grievances brought to him, a governor of the province is appointed to address grievances brought to him. So, who is appointed to address the grievances of the world? It is the Holy One blessed be He beyah shemo – over the grievances [biya] of His world. He said to him: Woe to us for those [scholars] who have perished and are no longer to be found. I once asked Rabbi Elazar [to interpret this verse], and he did not say as you said. Rather, [he said:] “For beyah Hashem is the Rock [tzur] of the world [olamim]” (Isaiah 26:4) – with [these] two letters,33Beyah is interpreted to mean “by yod and heh.” the Holy One blessed be He created34Tzur (“Rock”) is interpreted as if pronounced tzar, “He fashioned.” His world.35He created two worlds, as the word olamim is plural. We do not know whether this world was created with heh  and the World to Come with yod, or whether this world was created with yod and the World to Come was created with heh. But from what Rabbi Abahu said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Behibare’am – with a heh [beheh] He created them [bera’am], we see that it is this world that was created with heh. Just as heh is closed on all its sides, but open at the bottom, that is an allusion to the fact that all the dead descend to the netherworld. Its protrusion at the top is an allusion that they are destined to ascend from there. The window on its side is an allusion to the penitents.36Penitence provides an escape from man’s sentence to the netherworld. The World to Come was created with a yod. Just as the yod has a bent stature, so, too, the wicked have bent statures and their faces are blackened in the future.37Like a yod, which looks like a plain blotch of ink. That is what is written: “The loftiness of humanity will be bowed and the haughtiness of men will be brought down and the Lord alone will be exalted on that day” (Isaiah 2:17). And it says: “And the false gods will entirely vanish” (Isaiah 2:18). “When they were created” – Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon: With no exertion or toil the Holy One blessed be He created His world.38“When they were created,” in the passive voice, suggests that the world came about without toil, spontaneously. It was, rather, “By the word of the Lord,” and immediately “the heavens were made” (Psalm 33:6). This is analogous to a king who rebuked his slave, and he stood there astounded.39Unable to move. So, “The pillars of heaven sag, astounded at His rebuke” (Job 26:11).40The final form of the heavens was achieved through God’s mere rebuke, without toil.
Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua, Rabbi Eliezer says: Everything that is in the heavens is created out of the heavens; everything that is on earth is created out of the earth. He derives it from here: “Praise the Lord from the heavens [Praise Him all His angels…Praise Him sun and moon]…” (Psalms 148:1–3); “praise the Lord from the earth [all great sea creatures…mountains and all hills]…” (Psalms 148:7–9).41All the objects in the heavens are listed as products of heaven, and all the objects on earth are listed as products of the earth.  Rabbi Yehoshua says: Everything that is in the heavens and on the earth were created only out of the heavens. He cites it from here: “For He says to the snow: Be on the earth” (Job 37:6) – just as the snow, though its [ultimate] place of existence is on the earth, is created only in the heavens, so, too, everything that is in the heavens and on the earth, its creation is only out of the heavens. Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Yosef: Everything that is in the heavens and on the earth, its creation is only out of the earth. That is what is written: “For, just as the rain and the snow descend from the heavens…” (Isaiah 55:10) – just as the rain, even though its descent is from the heavens, its creation is only out of the earth,42Rain comes from water evaporated from the oceans. so, too, everything that is in the heavens and on the earth, its creation is only from the earth. Rabbi Yudan cites it from here: “Everything was from the dust, and everything returns to the dust” (Ecclesiastes 3:20). Rav Naḥman said: Even the orb of the sun, as it is stated: “He says to the sun [ḥeres]43The verse calls the sun ḥeres, which usually means earthenware. and it does not shine” (Job 9:7).
Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: When a flesh-and-blood king builds a palace, after he builds the lower levels he builds the upper levels. But the Holy One blessed be He created the heavenly realm and the earthly realm with one creation. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says: When a flesh-and-blood king crafts a ship, first he brings the boards, then he brings cedars,44For the masts. then he brings the anchors, and then he brings the navigators. But the Holy One blessed be He created them [the creations of the world] and those that steer it [at once]. That is what is written: “So said God, the Lord, Creator of the heavens and who unfurled them [venoteihem]” (Isaiah 42:5) – “and their navigators [venavateihem] is written.
Rabbi Yitzḥak and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, Rabbi Yitzḥak said: When a flesh-and-blood king builds a tent and stretches the tent tautly, with the passage of time it sags a bit. However, here [concerning God’s “tent”], “can you stretch out the heavens with Him?” (Job 37:18). And lest you say that they sag, the verse states: “Strong as a cast mirror” (Job 37:18). Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: When a mortal man powerfully casts a vessel, with the passage of time it rusts. However, here, “strong as a cast mirror” – they appear like a mirror. Rabbi Azarya said regarding this statement of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish: “Because on it He rested from all His labor [that God created to make]. These are the outgrowths of the heavens and the earth when they were created” (Genesis 2:3–4) – [Why are these two verses juxtaposed?] It means that a day ends and another day begins, a week ends and another week begins, a month ends and another month begins, a year ends and another year begins.45The two verses are juxtaposed because after He completed Creation, the world continued to function with regularity, retaining the state of creation as it was when it was completed.
“On the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens” – Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel, Beit Shammai say: [During creation, God’s] thought took place at night and [His] action during the day.46As it is written “on the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens” – the making took place during the day. Beit Hillel say: [Both His] thought and His action took place during the day. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: I am astonished. How is it that the fathers of the world, Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel, disputed regarding the creation of the heavens and the earth? Rather, [His] thought took place both during the day and at night, and [His] action took place with the dimming of the sun.47Just before sunset.
“The Lord God” – this is analogous to a king who had empty cups [of very thin glass]. The king said: If I pour hot water into them, they will shatter; [if I pour very] cold water, they will crack. What did the king do? He mixed hot and cold water and placed it in them, and they endured. So, the Holy One blessed be He said: If I create the world with [just] the attribute of mercy, there will be many sinners; if [just] with the attribute of strict justice, how will the world endure? Rather, I will create it with [both] the attribute of justice and the attribute of mercy, would that it will endure.48Thus it is written, “on the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens,” “the Lord” signifying His attribute of mercy, and “God” signifying His attribute of strict justice.
“The earth and the heavens” – this is analogous to a legion that was the first to crown the king. The king said: Since this legion crowned me first, I am granting it a commendation that it should never depart away from me. So, the Holy One blessed be He said: Since it was the earth that first fulfilled My desire,49By immediately bringing forth vegetation upon His command (Genesis 1:12). I am granting it a commendation that it will never depart away from Me. That is what is written: “He established the earth on its foundations, never to falter” (Psalms 104:5).

=== 13 | 13 ===
“All the shrubs of the field had yet to be in the earth, and no vegetation of the field had yet to sprout, because the Lord God did not cause it to rain upon the earth, and there was no man to till the ground” (Genesis 2:5). “All the shrubs of the field had yet to be in the earth” – here it says: “All the shrubs of the field […and no vegetation],”1Implying that nothing grew from the ground before Adam was created. but later it says: “The Lord God grew from the ground [every tree]” (Genesis 2:9).2Referring to what happened before Adam’s creation. Rabbi Ḥanina said: There it is referring to the Garden of Eden, and here it is referring to the development of [the rest of] the world. Rabbi Ḥiyya taught: Both these and those did not grow until rain fell on them.3And therefore verse 2:9 in fact does not mean that the trees grew before Adam’s creation.
“All the shrubs [siaḥ] of the field” – all the trees converse [mesiḥin] with one another, as it were.4The rustling of their leaves gives the appearance of conversation with one another. All the trees converse with people, as it were.5By bearing fruit, it is as if they “call out” to man to plant them and profit. All the trees were created for the benefit of people. There was an incident involving an individual who harvested his vineyard, spent the night in it, and the wind came and harmed him.6Grapes help to shield man from malevolent winds; once they have been cut off their protection ceases. All of people’s conversation [siaḥ] is about the land. [They say:] ‘Did the land produce? Did it not produce?’7Crops are of the utmost importance to man, and the subject dominates their conversation. All of people’s prayers8Prayer is also called siaḥ (Bereshit Rabbah 60:14). are about the land: ‘Lord, may the land produce; Lord, may the land flourish.’ All of Israel’s prayers are only regarding the Temple: ‘Lord, may the Temple be built; Lord, when will the Temple be built?’9Siaḥ alludes to prayer, as above, and “field” alludes to the Temple (Bereshit Rabbah 22:7).
“Because the Lord God did not cause it to rain upon the earth” – it mentions a complete name10Lord God. in association with a completed world.11In the verse “These are the outgrowths…on the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens” (Genesis 2:4). That is the first time this full name of God is used. Rabbi Ḥilfai said: Just as it mentions a complete name for a complete world [in that verse],so it mentions a complete name [here,] regarding rainfall. Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai said: Three matters are of equal importance to one another, and they are: Earth [eretz], man [adam], and rain [matar]. Rabbi Levi bar Ḥiyya said: The three of them are each of three letters, to teach you that if there is no earth there is no rain, and if there is no rain there is no earth, and without the two of them, there is no man.
Rabbi Hoshaya said: Remarkable is the might of rain,12God’s might as exhibited through rainfall. as it is the equivalent of the entire act of Creation.13In that it is a metaphysical event, beyond the predictable rules of nature. What is the source? “Who performs great things, and there is no fathoming” (Job 5:9). Through what? “He gives rain over the face of the earth, and sends water over the surface of fields” (Job 5:10). Rabbi Aḥa cites it from here: “He makes the earth with His might, founds the world with His wisdom” (Jeremiah 10:12). What is written thereafter? “To the sound of His placement of the multitude of water in the heavens” (Jeremiah 10:13), and “sound” refers to none other than rain, as it is stated: “Depths call to depths in the sound of your waterways” (Psalms 42:8).
Rabbi Yitzḥak said: It [rain] indicates [divine] favor [meratze] comparable to [that which is facilitated by] offerings, as it is stated [regarding rain]: “Lord, You showed favor to [ratzita] Your land” (Psalms 85:2), and elsewhere it is written: “They will be offered up with acceptance [ratzon] upon My altar” (Isaiah 56:7, 60:7). Rabbi Simon said: It is even [compared to] ingathering of the exiles,14In terms of the salvation that it brings to the world. as it is stated [there]: “You returned Jacob from captivity” (Psalms 85:2). Rabbi Yoḥanan bar Marya says: It is a [sign of] quelling fury, as it is stated [there]: “You quelled all Your fury” (Psalms 85:4). Rabbi Tanḥum bar Ḥanilai said: It is even [a sign of] atonement for sins, as it is stated [there]: “You bore the iniquity of Your people” (Psalms 85:3).
Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: It is of equal importance to the revival of the dead. Rabbi Abba and Rabbi Ḥiyya in the name of Rabbi Abba said: Indeed, the Sages placed it in [the prayers in the blessing of] the revival of the dead.15The second blessing of the Amida prayer. In regard to this one [rain] a hand is mentioned, and in regard to that one [the revival of the dead] a hand is mentioned; in regard to this one [rain], opening up is mentioned, and in regard to that one [the revival of the dead], opening up is mentioned. In this one, a hand is mentioned, as it is stated [regarding Ezekiel’s resurrection of the dry bones]: “The hand of the Lord was upon me…” (Ezekiel 37:1). In that one, a hand is mentioned: “You open Your hand [and amply feed all living beings]” (Psalms 145:16). In this one, opening up is mentioned: “The Lord will open up for you [His good storehouse, the heavens, to provide the rain of your land]” (Deuteronomy 28:12). In that one, opening up is mentioned: “Behold, I am opening up your graves…” (Ezekiel 37:12). Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Rabbi Elazar bar Avina: This one has song associated with it and that one has song associated with it. This one has song associated with it: “Those who dwell in the rocks16The dead. will sing” (Isaiah 42:11). And that one has song associated with it [as it is stated regarding rainfall]: “They shout for joy and they sing [yashiru]” (Psalms 65:14). Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: It [rainfall] is in fact greater than the revival of the dead, as the revival of the dead benefits only people, whereas this [rainfall] benefits people and animals; the revival of the dead benefits only Israel, whereas this [rainfall] benefits Israel and idolaters. A certain idolater once asked Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa, saying to him: ‘You have holidays and we have holidays; when you are rejoicing we are not rejoicing, and when we are rejoicing you are not rejoicing. When do you and we both rejoice? When rain falls. What is the source for this? “The meadows are covered with flocks of sheep; the valleys are wrapped in grain. They shout for joy, and they sing” (Psalms 65:14). What is written thereafter? “Shout to God, priests, Levites, and Israelites” is not written, but rather, “shout to God, all the earth”’ (Psalms 66:1). Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: When the rain falls, the animals seek to mate. What is the source? “The meadows are covered with flocks of sheep [laveshu karim hatzon]” (Psalms 65:14) – a euphemism for the rams mounting the sheep.17The Hebrew could be translated “the rams [karim] cover over [laveshu] the ewes [hatzon].”
“And there was no man to till [laavod] the ground” – there was no man to induce people to worship [lehaavid] the Holy One blessed be He, like Elijah the prophet and Ḥoni HaMe’agel.18Both of them brought about rainfall with their prayers. “And there was no man to till the ground” – man was created only for toil. If he merits, his toil is with Torah. If he does not merit, his toil is with the earth. Fortunate is the person whose toil is with Torah.
“Because the Lord God did not cause it to rain upon the earth, and there was no man…” – were it not for man, there would be no covenant made with the earth to cause rain to fall on it, as it is stated: “Who would…bring rain on land with no man, or on a wilderness with no person in it?” (Job 38:26).
“All the streams go to the sea, [yet the sea is not full; to the place that the streams go, there they go again]” (Ecclesiastes 1:7) – there was an incident involving Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua, who set sail in the Great Sea, and their ship entered a place in the sea where the water was not moving. Rabbi Eliezer said to Rabbi Yehoshua: ‘We came here only for some test.’19To learn something from our experience. They filled a barrel of water from that place. When they arrived in Rome, Hadrian, may his bones be crushed, said to them: ‘What is the nature of seawater?’20How is it that the sea does not flood the land with all the streams that flow into it? They said to him: ‘It contains water that absorbs water.’21Certain seawater has the ability to absorb other water into itself without swelling over. He said to them: ‘Give me some of it [to test].’ They gave him a bowlful. He put water into it, and it swallowed it up.  According to the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer,22The midrash is addressing the verse cited earlier, “All the streams go to the sea, yet the sea is not full; to the place that the streams go, there they return [shavim] again” (Ecclesiastes 1:7). it is from there [the sea] that they [the streams] draw [sho’avim] water.23The clouds draw water from the sea and then fill the streams. See section 10. According to the opinion of Rabbi Yehoshua, “there they return [shavim] again.”24The streams do not get their water from the sea; what the verse means is that the water of the streams constantly flows into the sea. “A mist would rise from the earth, and water all of the surface of the ground” (Genesis 2:6). How was the earth watered? Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Neḥemya, and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yehuda says: Like the Nile, which [floods over and] waters, and then waters again. Rabbi Neḥemya said: Like the inside of the [bed of the] Kavriya Stream, which wells up [and waters it] and is absorbed back into the ground. The rabbis say: It is like the Tavai. There is a river in Babylon named Tavai. Why do they call it Tavai? It is because it irrigates [its surroundings] once in forty years.25The word tavai is related to tohu (emptiness), as, in between its rare inundations, the surrounding area is desolate. That is the way that the earth was irrigated at the beginning, as it is written: “A mist would rise from the earth,” but the Holy One blessed be He reconsidered, [ordaining] that the earth should [thenceforth] be watered only from above. Rabbi Ḥanan of Tzippori said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Rabbi Naḥman: The Holy One blessed be He reconsidered, [ordaining] that the earth should be watered only from above, for four reasons: Because of powerful people;26That they should not use their might to take all the water for themselves. in order to wash away harmful dew;27That had accumulated on the crops. so that the highlands could be watered just like the lowlands; and so that everyone would direct their eyes heavenward.28To pray to God for rain. That is what is written: “To raise the lowly on High” (Job 5:11).
From where does the earth receive its [rain] water? Rabbi Eliezer says: From the water of the ocean,29The ocean water evaporates to form clouds, and that water falls as rain. as it is written: “A mist would rise from the earth.” Rabbi Yehoshua said to him: But is the ocean water not salty?30So how can you say that rain originates there? He said to him: It becomes sweetened in the clouds, as it is written: “Which the skies distill” (Job 36:28). Where is it distilled? In the skies. Rabbi Yehoshua says: [Rain comes] from the upper waters, as it is stated: “By the rains of the heavens it drinks water” (Deuteronomy 11:11). The clouds rise up from the earth to the firmament and there [from above] they receive it [rain] as from the mouth of a jug, as it is written: “Which cluster into rain from His mist” (Job 36:27). And they [the clouds] separate it [the water] like a type of sieve, so that no drop touches its counterpart, as it is written: “Dripping water, thick clouds of the skies [sheḥakim]” (II Samuel 22:12).  Why does he call it [the sky] sheḥakim? Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: It is because it crushes [shoḥakim] the water [into little pieces]. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Like an omasum.31A digestive organ in ruminants that crushes their food. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Like an animal’s intestines.
Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Clouds come only from above, as it is stated: “And behold, among the clouds of the heavens” (Daniel 7:13). Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: Clouds come only from below, as it is stated: “He makes clouds ascend from the ends of the earth” (Psalms 135:7). According to the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan, it is analogous to one who gifts someone a cask of wine along with its pitcher. Rabbi Shimon says: It is analogous to one who said to another: ‘Lend me a se’a of wheat.’ He says to him: ‘Bring your basket and come measure [the wheat] into it.’ So, the Holy One blessed be He says to the earth: ‘Bring your clouds and receive rain.’
It [a cloud] is called by five names: Av (Judges 5:4), ed (Genesis 2:6), anan (Genesis 9:13), nesiim (Jeremiah 10:13), ḥaziz (Zechariah 10:1). Av – because it darkens [me’abev] the face of the firmament. Ed – because it ruins the celebration [eid] of the price gougers.32Who profiteer during droughts. Anan – because it makes people tolerant [anavim] of one another. Nesiim – because it makes people regard each other as aristocrats [nesiim].33People earn money from their crops. Ḥaziz – because it creates [colorful] spectacles [ḥezyonot] in the heavens, and because it causes the divine spirit to rest upon the people,34Rain indicates divine favor (see section 5). as it says: “The vision [ḥazon] of Isaiah son of Amotz” (Isaiah 1:1). Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: Earth is called by four names, corresponding to its four seasons: Eretz (Genesis 1:1), tevel (I Samuel 2:8), adama (Genesis 1:25), arka (Jeremiah 10:11). Eretz – corresponding to the season of Nisan [spring], because it accelerates [meritza] production of its produce. Tevel – corresponding to the season of Tamuz [summer], because it brings flavor [metabelet] to its produce. Adama – corresponding to the season of Tishrei [autumn], as the ground becomes disparate clods of earth [adama]. Arka – corresponding to the season of Tevet [winter], because it causes its produce to wither [moreket].
How much rain needs to fall to constitute “permeation”?35There are certain halakhic ramifications that occur when there is enough rain to constitute “permeation,” so a definition of the term is required. When [the rain reaches] the depth of a plow blade, which is three handbreadths, this is the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says: In hard earth, one handbreadth; in moderate earth, two handbreadths; in moist earth, three handbreadths. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar said: There is no handbreadth of rain falling from above that does not have [the water inside] the earth rise a corresponding two handbreadths. What is the source? “Depths call to depths in the sound of your waterways…” (Psalms 42:8).36The two “depths” in the verse represent the two handbreadths of rising underground water, and “your waterways” refers to the handbreadth of rain. Rabbi Levi said: The upper waters [rain] are like males and the lower [underground] waters are like females, and one [the upper] says to the other [the lower]: ‘Accept us; you are the creation of the Holy One blessed be He and we are His emissaries.’ They thereupon accept them. That is what is written: “Let the earth open” (Isaiah 45:8) – like the female that opens herself up for the male. “Salvation will flourish [veyifru]” (Isaiah 45:8) – because they [the two kinds of waters] are fruitful and multiply.37They are plentiful. “And righteousness will sprout together” (Isaiah 45:8) – this refers to the falling of rain. “I, the Lord, created it” (Isaiah 45:8) – this is why I created it, for the improvement of the world and its settlement.
Rabbi Berekhya said: A calamity38Eid can also mean calamity, as in Deuteronomy 32:35. ascended from the earth, and thereupon “and watered all of the surface of the ground” (Genesis 2:6).39When a calamity occurs, people are chastened by it, and the resultant repentance brings about the end of a drought. This is like the opinion of Rabbi Berekhya, as Rabbi Berekhya said: “My lesson will fall [yaarof] as rain…” (Deuteronomy 32:2) – when the necks [oref] of the people are broken [through tragedy],40When they repent. at that point rain falls.
How much rain must fall for one to be obligated to recite the blessing [over rainfall]? Rabbi Yosei in the name of Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Yona in the name of Rabbi Shmuel said: For the first rain of the season, enough to permeate [the earth], and at the end of the season,41When small amounts of rain had fallen previously. any amount. Rabbi Ḥiyya said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: For the first rain of the season, enough to permeate [the earth], and at the end of the season, not until the surface of the roof tiles are rinsed off. Rabbi Yanai ben Rabbi Yishmael said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish: For the first rain of the season, enough to permeate [the earth], and at the end of the season, enough that the sealant on top of the wine jug becomes soaked. But surely even a great deal of rain could fall and the sealant would not become soaked?42Because it is waterproof. It is, rather, until it appears that it is soaked.43Enough water collects on it to give it the appearance of being soaked. What blessing should one recite [over the rain]? It is as we learned: For rain and other good tidings, one recites: ‘Blessed [is God]…Who is good and beneficent.’ Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Levi derives this from here: “Cold water on a weary soul, so is good news from a distant land” (Proverbs 25:25) – just as for good news one recites: ‘[Blessed is God…] Who is good and beneficent,’44Brachot 54a. for cold water [i.e., rain], too, one recites: ‘[Blessed is God…] Who is good and beneficent.’ Rabbi Yehuda said: This is the blessing that my father Yeḥezkel would recite [over rain]: May Your name be blessed, exalted, and magnified for each and every drop that you cause to fall for us, which you keep separate from one another.45Translation follows the unanimously recommended textual emendation שאתה ממניען אלו מאלו. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Shimon said: He rains them [the raindrops] down by measure, as it is stated: “For He deducts [yegara] drops of water” (Job 36:27), just as it says: “It shall be deducted [venigra] from the valuation” (Leviticus 27:18).46All deduction is by measure. Rabbi Yosei bar Yaakov once went up to visit Rabbi Yehuda of Migdal. He heard his voice reciting this blessing: ‘Thousands upon thousands and myriads upon myriads of blessings and thanks we would require to thank Your name for each and every drop that You cause to rain down for us, for You bestow good rewards [even] to sinners.’ He said to him: ‘That is the blessing that Rabbi Simon would recite.’ Rabbi Zeira said: ‘There [in Babylonia] they say: When low prices prevail in the world, when bounty comes to the world, and when a river inundates the countryside, one recites: Blessed [is God]…Who is good and beneficent.’
“And water all” – Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Zimra: Everything is blessed [when it rains]; commerce is blessed, and the merchants profit. Rabbi Yoḥanan bar Levi said: Even those afflicted with boils benefit [from the rain]. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: The ill also benefit, and their limbs become light for them. Avimai, one of the scholars, used to visit the ill when the “permeation” rain fell. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said to him: ‘How are they doing?’ He said to him: ‘They feel relief.’ Rabbi Abba says: Even a gemstone senses it [the rain].47The rain causes their quality to increase. The Rabbis say: Even the fish sense it.48Though they live underwater. Rabbi Pinḥas said: There was an incident near Akko in which they caught a fish and, [based on its size], they estimated that it would weigh three hundred pounds, but they weighed it at two hundred pounds. There was an elderly fisherman there, who said to them: ‘It is because the “permeation” rain has not yet fallen.’ After it fell, they caught a fish and estimated that it would weigh two hundred pounds, but they weighed it at three hundred pounds.
Rabbi Elazar bar Rabbi Shimon said: The land is watered only at its upper layer. If so, what should the roots of the carob tree and the roots of the sycamore do, as their roots reach into the depths [of the earth]? Rather, each and every [tree] is watered according to its needs. Rabbi Ḥanina ben Rabbi Izka and Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda: The roots of a wheat stalk breach the ground up to fifty cubits. The roots of the fig tree breach rocks. Rabbi Levi said: It is as you49Rabbi Elazar bar Rabbi Shimon. said: [The land is watered] only up to its upper layer; and as for the carob tree and the sycamore, once in thirty days the waters of the depths rise and water them. What is the source? “I, the Lord, guard it; at set times I water it” (Isaiah 27:3). Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: When the rain falls, it gives the ground a new face [panim].50It causes greenery to grow. This is expounded from the phrase “the surface [penei] of the ground.”

=== 14 | 14 ===
“The Lord God formed the man of dirt from the ground and He breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul” (Genesis 2:7). “The Lord God formed” – it is written: “A king will uphold the land with justice [but a man of terumot destroys it]” (Proverbs 29:4). “A king” – this is the King of kings, the Holy One blessed be He. “Will uphold the land with justice” – as He created the world with [the attribute of] justice, as it is stated: “In the beginning, God [Elohim] created” (Genesis 1:1).1Throughout the creation narrative, God is referred to as Elohim, indicating his attribute of strict justice. “But a man of terumot destroys it” – this is Adam the first man, who was the ḥalla of the completion of the world.2Ḥalla is separated after the completion of the dough, and is endowed with sanctity, given to a priest to eat. Adam was intended to be the sacred finale to the creation of the world. Ḥalla is called teruma,3Teruma refers to a portion of something set aside as sacred.  as it is stated: “The first of your kneading basket [you shall separate as a loaf, as teruma]” (Numbers 15:20). Rabbi Yosei ben Ketzarta said: It is like a woman who mixes her dough with water and [then] separates its ḥalla from its midst; so, too, first “a mist would rise from the earth”4Forming a dough-like mixture with the earth. (Genesis 2:6), and then, “The Lord God formed [man]…”
“Formed" [Vayitzer]5Vayitzer is written with the letter yod appearing twice, although in verse 19, regarding the creation of the animals, the same word is spelled with just one yod. – there were two acts of formation [involved in the creation of humanity], the formation of man and the formation of woman, a formation of seven [months] and a formation of nine [months].6According to the Midrash, some babies are born after a gestation of seven months, others after nine months. A fetus that developed in the womb for eight months was considered unviable. Rav Huna said: If it was formed according to the seven [month process], and then born during the eighth or ninth [month], it can live. But if it was formed according to the nine [month process] and born during the eighth, it will not live, all the more so [if it is born] during the seventh.  They asked before Rabbi Abahu: From where is it derived that a fetus born during the seventh month can survive, [but one born during the eighth cannot]? He said to them: From your own [language] I will prove it to you: Zeta7This is the name of the seventh letter of the ancient Greek alphabet, and also means ‘live.’  – epta8It means seven. Seven thus indicates life.; eta9The name of the eighth Greek letter, also meaning “dying.”  – okto.10It means eight. Eight thus indicates death.
“Formed” [Vayitzer] – there were two acts of formation [involved in the creation of man], a formation from the lower realms and a formation from the upper realms. Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina bar Yitzḥak and the Rabbis in the name of Rabbi Eliezer: He created in him four creations from the upper realms and four from the lower realms. He [man] eats and drinks like an animal, procreates like an animal, defecates like an animal, and dies like an animal.11These are all characteristics associated with creatures of the lower realm (earth). From the upper realms: He stands upright, speaks, understands, and sees like ministering angels. But does an animal not [also] see? This is bewildering. The difference is that this one [a human] has peripheral vision. Rabbi Tafduyei said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: The supernal beings were created in the [divine] image and likeness, but do not procreate, while the earthly beings [that have been created up to now] procreate, but were not created in the [divine] image and likeness. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘I will create him [Adam] in the [divine] image and likeness, [a trait] from the supernal realm, but he will procreate, [a trait] from the earthly realm.’ Rabbi Tafduyei said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘If I create him from the supernal realm, he will live and never die; if from the earthly realm, he will die and will not live. Rather, I will create him from [both] these [the supernal] and those [the earthly]. If he sins, he will die; if he does not, he will live.’
“Formed" [Vayitzer] – [alluding to man’s] two inclinations [yetzarim], the good inclination and the evil inclination. Were an animal to have two inclinations, when it would see a person with a knife in his hand ready to slaughter it, it would die of fright. But does man not have two inclinations [and nevertheless does not die of fright]? Rabbi Ḥanina bar Ida said: “He forms [yotzer] the spirit of man within him” (Zechariah 12:1) – this teaches that a person’s soul is bound up [tzerura] within him.12And that is why man, despite possessing two inclinations, does not easily die. Were it not so, whenever he would experience anguish, he would shed it [his soul] and cast it off from himself.
“Formed” [Vayitzer] – there were two acts of formation [involved in the creation of man], a formation for [his life in] this world and a formation for [his life in] the World to Come.13When the dead bodies of the righteous will again take form at the resurrection. Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel, Beit Shammai say: The formation that takes place in this world and the formation that takes place in the World to Come are not the same. In this world, it [man’s formation in the womb] begins with skin and flesh and finishes with sinews and bones, but in the future, it will begin with sinews and bones and finish with skin and flesh, as that is what it says regarding the corpses of Ezekiel: “I saw, and behold, there were sinews upon them,14Upon the bones. and flesh grew, [and skin covered them]” (Ezekiel 37:8). Rabbi Yonatan said: We cannot learn anything from Ezekiel’s corpses.15Because they already had bones. In the future resurrection, there will be no bones. To what were Ezekiel’s corpses comparable? To one who enters a bathhouse; what he takes off first [when undressing] he puts on last [when dressing]. Beit Hillel say: Just as his formation takes place in this world so will his formation take place in the World to Come. In this world, it [man’s formation in the womb] begins with skin and flesh and finishes with sinews and bones, so, too, in the future, it will begins with skin and flesh and finish with sinews and bones, as Job says: “Do You not pour me [tatikheni] like milk [and curdle me like cheese, clothe me with skin and flesh and cover me with bones and sinews]?” (Job 10:10–11) – hitakhtani [in past tense]16Which would have referred to his formation in the womb. is not written here, but rather tatikheni [in future tense].17Referring to the resurrection in the future.  “And curdle me [takpieni] like cheese” (Job 10:10) – hikpetani [in past tense] is not written here, but rather, takpieni, [in future tense]. “You clothe me [talbisheni] with skin and flesh” – hilbashtani [in past tense] is not written here, but rather, talbisheni, [in future tense]. “And cover me [tesokhekheni] with bones and sinews” (Job 10:11) – sokhakhtani [in past tense] is not written here, but rather, tesokhekheni [in future tense]. This is analogous to a bowl filled with milk. Before putting the rennet in it the milk is loose; after putting in the rennet, the milk congeals and sets. That is what Job said: “Do You not pour me like milk [and curdle me like cheese]…skin and flesh…You granted me life and kindness, and Your command preserved my spirit” (Job 10:12).
“[The Lord God formed] the man [ha’adam]” – due to the merit of Abraham.18“The man,” with the definite article, seems to be alluding to a particular man. The Midrash expounds that it is an allusion to Abraham, as it goes on to show. Rabbi Levi said: “The greatest man [ha’adam] among the giants” (Joshua 14:15) – this is Abraham.19Who was a giant in the spiritual sense. Why does it call him great? It is because he was worthy of being created before Adam. However, the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Perhaps he will bring ruin [to the world] and there will be no one to come along to remedy [the damage] that he had wrought. Rather, I will create Adam first, as if he brings ruin [to the world], Abraham will come along and remedy what he had wrought.’ Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: The way of the world is that if a person has a sturdy beam, where does he place it? Is it not in the middle of the Great Hall, so that it can support the [weaker] beams that are in front of it and the beams that are behind it? So, too, why did the Holy One blessed be He create Abraham in the middle of the generations? So that he would support the [unworthy] generations that are before him and the generations that are after him. Rabbi Levi said: One might introduce a virtuous woman into a house with a corrupted woman,20If one has a corrupted wife, he might take a second wife who is more virtuous, hoping that the new wife will influence the first one for the better. but one would not introduce a corrupt woman into a house with a virtuous woman.21In this case the second wife would be a negative influence on the first one. This explains why Abraham came into the world after Adam.
“[The Lord God formed the man] of dirt [afar]” – [read the word] ofer,22Literally, a young gazelle. meaning a young man, as he was created in his full form.23Adam was not created as a baby, but as a full-grown young man. Rabbi Elazar bar Rabbi Shimon said: Eve, too, was created in her full form. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Adam and Eve were created [with the bodies of people who were] approximately twenty years old. Rabbi Huna said: [“Dirt [afar] from the ground [adama]”].24Both afar and adama refer to earth, so what is the significance of using both terms? Afar is a masculine word, adama is a feminine word. A potter brings masculine dirt and feminine ground25He mixes coarse clay with fine clay in order to construct the best pottery. so that the vessels he makes will be strong.26Adam was created from two different kinds of earth to make him more robust. There was an incident involving an individual from Tzippori whose son died. [Some say the mourner himself was a heretic, and] others say that a heretic was sitting before him [to console him]. Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta went up to visit him. He [the heretic] saw that he [Rabbi Yosei] was sitting there and smiling. He said to him: ‘Why are you smiling?’ He said to him: ‘We have faith in the Lord of heaven that you will behold his face [once again] in the World to Come.’ He said to him: ‘Is this man’s grief not enough for him, that you come and aggrieve him further?27With such nonsense. Are there earthenware vessels that can be repaired? Is it not written: “Shatter them like a potter’s vessel”?’ (Psalms 2:9) he asked in bewilderment.28So, too, a dead body cannot be restored to life, as the verse compares man to earthenware. He said to him: ‘An earthenware vessel is formed with water, and is firmed by fire. A glass vessel, [in contrast,] is formed with fire and is firmed with fire. Yet this one [glassware], when broken, can be repaired, while that one [earthenware], when broken, cannot be repaired? This is astonishing.’ He [the heretic] said to him: ‘It is because it [glass ware] is made by blowing.’ He said to him: ‘Let your ears hear what your own mouth is saying. If this one [glassware], that is made with the breath of mortal man, can be repaired, [that which is made] with the breath of the Holy One blessed be He, all the more so.’ Rabbi Yitzḥak said:29Regarding the aforementioned verse, which compares man to earthenware. “Shatter them like an earthenware vessel” is not written here, but rather, “Shatter them like a potter’s vessel” (Psalm 2:9) – a potter’s vessel [refers to one] that has not yet been fired, and can be repaired.30So, too, man will be resurrected after death.
“From the ground [adama]” – Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Ḥelbo said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: From the place of his atonement he was created, just as it says: “You shall make for Me an altar of earth [adama]” (Exodus 20:21). The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘I will create him from the place of his atonement; then there is hope that perhaps he will endure.’ “And breathed into his nostrils” – this teaches that He stood up his [Adam’s] lifeless mass from the earth to the heavens and [there] injected a soul into it. In this world, it [the spirit] is [injected into man] by blowing, and that is why he dies; but in the future, it [the spirit] will be [injected] by [direct] placement,31And will therefore be immortal. as it is stated: “I will place My spirit in you and you will live” (Ezekiel 37:14).
It [man’s soul] is called by five names: nefesh (Genesis 2:7), ruaḥ (Ezekiel 37:14), neshama (Genesis 2:7), yeḥida (Psalms 22:21), ḥaya (Psalms 143:3). Nefesh – this refers to blood, as it is stated: “For blood is the soul [nefesh]” (Deuteronomy 12:23). Ruaḥ – because it ascends and descends, as it is stated: “Who knows the spirit of the sons of man? Does it ascend upward?” (Ecclesiastes 3:21).32Ruaḥ also means wind, which ascends and descends. Neshama – this refers to man’s intellect, as people say: Intellect is good. Ḥaya – because all of one’s limbs may die, but it [the soul] remains alive [ḥaya] in the body.33A person can lose the use of his limbs, but he cannot live without a soul. Yeḥida – because all of one’s limbs are in pairs, but it [the soul] is solitary [yeḥida] in the body.  This is what is written: “If He directs His attention to him, his spirit [ruḥo] and his soul [nishmato] He will gather to him” (Job 34:14). Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya said: If God would direct his attention to this person, his spirit would already be in His hand.34If God would so desire, a person would die in his sleep. “And his soul He will gather to him” – [if He would gather the soul into one single place] in his body, the entire man would die. Rather, when a person sleeps, the soul warms the [entire] body so that it does not get too cold and die. The Rabbis say: If God would direct his attention to this person, and his spirit [ruaḥ] would already be in His hand, “and his soul He will gather to Him” on High,35According to this interpretation, unlike the previous one, “to Him” refers to God. the entire man would die.36If God would take both man’s spirit [ruaḥ] and his soul [neshama] away during sleep, he would die. When a person is sleeping, however, the soul [neshama] [is left within him, and it] warms the body so it will not get too cold and die. That is what is written: “The spirit [neshama] of man is the lamp of the Lord” (Proverbs 20:27). Rabbi Bisni, Rabbi Aḥa, and Rabbi Yoḥanan say in the name of Rabbi Meir: The neshama fills the entire body, and when a person sleeps, it ascends upward and draws life for him from above. Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: For each and every breath that a person takes, he must laud the Creator. What is the source? “Let every soul [neshama] praise God” (Psalms 150:6) – [read instead:] Let every breath [neshima] praise God.
“Man became a living [ḥaya] soul” – Rabbi Yehuda said: This teaches that He made him a tail like a beast [ḥaya], but then removed it from him for the sake of his dignity. Rav Huna said: He made him like an indentured servant to himself, so that if he does not toil he does not eat.37In that sense he is like a domesticated animal [ḥaya]. This is the like opinion of Rabbi Ḥanina, who said: “The Lord delivered me into the hands [biydei] of one against whom I cannot stand (Lamentations 1:14) – one toils at night and during the day,38For his livelihood. but never attains [enough].39The word biydei is read beyadi, into my own hands. I am a slave to my own needs. Rabbi Shmuel, son in law of Rabbi Ḥanina, colleague of the Rabbis, said: Here it calls neshama nefesh,40“He breathed into his nostrils the breath [nishmat] of life, and man became a living soul [nefesh]” (Genesis 2:7). and elsewhere it calls neshama ruaḥ.41“Everyone in whose nostrils was the breath [nishmat] of the spirit [ruaḥ] of life (Genesis 7:22). From where is it derived that we should apply what is stated here there, and what is stated there here?42That is, all of these terms are referring to a single soul, and man does not have multiple souls. The verse states: Ḥayim ḥayim43The word ḥayim appears in both verses. as a verbal analogy.

=== 15 | 15 ===
“The Lord God planted a garden in Eden, to the east; He placed there the man whom He had formed” (Genesis 2:8). “The Lord God planted a garden in Eden, to the east” – the school of Rabbi Yanai says: Why does it mention a full name1The Lord God, as opposed to within the creation narrative, which mentions only the name Elohim (God). regarding the planting of the garden? It is because from the beginning of its planting it requires forethought.2The full name of God indicates that He put in a great deal of planning, as it were, when planting the garden. From the start, [even] before it emerges from its mother’s womb,3This is a metaphor, referring to the emergence of a stalk from its seed.  a person must plan out which direction is appropriate for it.4Some trees fare better in a northern location, others in a southern; some require one type of soil, others a different type. Planning the location where a sapling will be placed is necessary even before the sapling is uprooted from its original place, as soon as the stalk begins to sprout. That is what is written: “The trees of the Lord are sated, the cedars of Lebanon that He planted” (Psalms 104:16).5This verse is seen as a reference to the Garden of Eden. Rabbi Ḥanina said: They [the initial saplings] were as [tiny as] the antennae of grasshoppers when the Holy One blessed be He uprooted them and planted them in the Garden of Eden. “The trees of the Lord are sated…” – Rabbi Ḥanina said: They are sated with the lives that they live,6They live a long time. they are sated with the water that they need, they are sated in their planting.7Even cuttings that are taken from them and replanted elsewhere thrive and prosper. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The world was not worthy of using cedars [for secular buildings], as they were created solely for the purpose of the Temple. That is what is written: “The trees of the Lord are sated, the cedars of Lebanon that He planted.” And “Lebanon” is nothing other than the Temple, as it says: “That goodly mountain and the Lebanon” (Deuteronomy 3:25).  Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said in the name of Rabbi Yonatan: There are twenty-four species of cedar, but only seven are the highest quality of them all. That is what is written: “I will put cedar [erez], shita,8The seven tree names in this verse cannot be identified with certainty, but the Midrash considers them all to be of the cedar family. [hadas and etz shemen in the wilderness; I will place in the desert berosh, tidhar and te’ashur together]” (Isaiah 41:19). Berosh – berata, tidhar – adera, te’ashur – paksinon.9These are their Aramaic translations. Why is it called te’ashur? It is because it is the most praiseworthy [me’ushar] of them all. They [subsequently] added three more to the list: Alonim, armonim, and almugim, Alonim – balutin, armonim – dalbon, almugim – alvam.10These, too, are Aramaic translations of the Hebrew tree names.
“A garden in Eden” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Yosei, Rabbi Yehuda says: The garden is larger than Eden, as it is stated: “All the trees of Eden that were in God’s garden envied it” (Ezekiel 31:9), [and it is stated: “You were in Eden, of God’s garden” (Ezekiel 28:13)].11The implication in both verses is that the place called Eden is located within the Garden. Rabbi Yosei says: Eden is larger than the garden, as it is stated: “The Lord God planted a garden in Eden.”12Indicating that the garden is located within Eden. It is written: “A river emerges from Eden to water the garden” (Genesis 2:10). According to the opinion of Rabbi Yosei, [this means that] from the runoff of a beit kor, a tarkav could be watered.13Tarkav and beit kor are units of area, tarkav being one-sixtieth of a beit kor. The verse is saying that the smaller garden was watered by the runoff from the much larger Eden. According to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda, it is like a spring that is situated in [the middle of] the garden and waters the entire garden. But Rabbi Yehuda adduces two verses, whereas Rabbi Yosei adduces only one verse. Rabbi Ḥanin of Tzippori said: The Holy One blessed be He illuminated the eyes of Rabbi Yosei and he found another verse that was decisive in addition to the first. Which is that? “He will render its wilderness like Eden and its desert like the garden of the Lord” (Isaiah 51:3).14It likens Eden to the wilderness of the Land of Israel, which is larger than its desert to which Eden is likened.
“To the east [mikedem]” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: You may think that it means before the creation of the world, but in fact it means only before the creation of man.15The midrash here interprets mikedem to mean “beforehand” rather than “east.” Man was created on the sixth day, the Garden of Eden on the third day. That is what is written: “For God is my King from times of old [mikedem], working salvation in the midst of the land” (Psalms 74:12) – look at His benevolent works, as the Holy One blessed be He prepared my reward even before I [mankind] began to do anything.
“He placed there [vayasem sham] [the man]” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: He elevated him, just as it says: “You shall set [som tasim] a king over you” (Deuteronomy 17:15). Rabbi Neḥemya said: He enticed him.16With all the comforts available in the Garden. This is analogous to a king who prepared a feast and invited a guest. So, too, the Holy One blessed be He invited Adam,17To the “feast” that had been prepared for him in the Garden. due to the merit of Abraham.18See Bereshit Rabba 14:6 That is what is written: “You know my sitting and my rising; You understand my thoughts from afar” (Psalms 139:2)19The midrash applies the verse to Adam. – “my sitting” in the Garden of Eden,” “my rising” – my expulsion from it. “You understand my thoughts from afar” – by what merit did You come to the decision to create me? It is by the merit of the one who came from afar, as it is written: “I summon a bird of prey from the east, the man of My counsel from a distant land” (Isaiah 46:11).20This is a reference to Abraham, whom God summoned from the east.
“He placed there [the man whom He had formed]” – just as it says: “And it is there to this day” (II Chronicles 5:9).21Referring to the Ark in the Temple. The word “there,” appearing in both verses, is used as a verbal analogy to teach that Adam’s placement in the Garden of Eden was intended to be permanent. Rabbi Levi said: Provided that he remain in his present form.22Provided that he remains “the man whom He had formed,” i.e. without sin. Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Maryon said: It is written: “These are the outgrowths of the heavens [when they were created]” (Genesis 2:4) – their Creator praises them, who can disparage them? Their Creator lauds them, who can find fault with them? Rather, they are beautiful and praiseworthy,23As long as they are as they were created, they will remain that way. [as it is written:] “These are the outgrowths of the heavens.”24This is another interpretation of “the man whom He had formed” – God was speaking the praises of His creation.
“The Lord God grew from the ground every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food, and the tree of life in the midst of the garden, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil” (Genesis 2:9). “The Lord God grew from the ground […and the tree of life]” – it is taught: [The tree of life is] a tree that spreads out over all the living.25The life force of all people emanates from it.  Rabbi Yehuda bar Ilai said: [The extent of] the tree of life is a walking distance of five hundred years26That is, its influence extends over the entire world. and all the waters of creation branch out from beneath it. Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Ilai: It is not merely that [the extent of] its branches are a walking distance of five hundred years, but even [the extent of] its trunk is a walking distance of five hundred years.
What was that tree [of knowledge] from which Adam and Eve ate? Rabbi Meir said: It was wheat. When a person does not have knowledge, people say: That person has never eaten wheat bread in all his days.27This shows that wheat is a food that stimulates knowledge and intelligence. Rabbi Shmuel bar Yitzḥak asked before Rabbi Ze’eira, saying to him: ‘Is it possible that it was wheat?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ He said to him: ‘But is it not written that it was a “tree”?’ He said to him: ‘It [the wheat in Eden] rose to a great height, like the cedars of Lebanon.’28And therefore could rightly be described as a “tree.” Rabbi Yaakov bar Aḥa said: There is a dispute between Rabbi Neḥemya and the Rabbis.29They were discussing the blessing over bread, which praises God for “bringing forth bread” from the earth. The difficulty is that bread does not, of course, grow from the ground. Rabbi Neḥemya said: [“Blessed be God…] who brings forth [hamotzi] bread from the earth, [meaning] that He brought forth bread from the earth in the past.30Hamotzi (“who brings forth”) can also connote an event in the past (see Numbers 23:22). When Adam was created and placed in the Garden, finished bread grew from the ground. This was discontinued when he sinned. The Rabbis say: [Blessed be God …] who brings forth [motzi] bread from the earth, [meaning] that He will bring forth bread from the earth in the future,31Motzi (“who brings forth”) can also connote an event in the future (see Exodus 6:7). In the Messianic future finished bread will grow from the ground. as it is stated: “There will be bread [pisat] from grain upon the earth” (Psalms 72:16). Lefet32Lefet means turnip. In some dialects, the word pisat (translated in the Psalms verse under discussion as bread) also means turnip. The midrash explains the connection. – there is a dispute between two Amora’im, Rabbi Ḥanina bar Yitzḥak and Rabbi Shmuel bar Ami. One said: Lefet – was it not [once] bread [lo pat]?33In Adam’s day one did not need to eat turnips, because there was bread growing from the ground. And the other said: Lefet – is it going to be bread [lo pat] in the future?34In the Messianic future, instead of turnips there will be bread growing from the ground. Rabbi Yirmeya recited the blessing before Rabbi Zeira: Who brings forth [hamotzi] bread from the earth, and he praised him. [Did he act] in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Neḥemya? This is bewildering.35In a dispute between an individual rabbi and the Rabbis as a group, it is the view of the majority that should be followed. In this case, Rabbi Neḥemya was arguing with the Rabbis. [No,] it was, rather, so as not to slur the [adjacent identical] letters.36The word before “hamotzi” is haolam, which ends with a mem. Were one to recite the word as motzi, the first letter of motzi would be slurred with the final letter of haolam. Using the word hamotzi solves that problem. Rabbi Yehuda bar Ilai said: They [the forbidden fruits that Adam ate] were grapes, as it is stated: “Their grapes are grapes of poison, clusters of bitterness for them” (Deuteronomy 32:32) – those clusters brought bitterness to the world. Rabbi Abba of Akko said it was a citron. That is what is written: “The woman saw that the tree was good for eating…” (Genesis 3:6).37Implying that the tree itself had a good taste. Go out and see which is the tree whose wood has a taste like its fruit, and you will find only the citron. Rabbi Yosei says: They were figs. It is a matter that is derived from its context.38After the sin, Adam and Eve used fig leaves to hide their nakedness (Genesis 3:7). This is analogous to the a prince’s son who sinned with one of the maidservants. When the prince heard, he expelled him and had him removed outside the palace. He circulated among the houses of all the maidservants, but none would receive him. But the one with whom he sinned opened her door and received him. So, too, when Adam the first man ate from that tree, the Holy One blessed be He expelled him and had him removed outside the Garden of Eden. He circulated among all the trees but none would receive him.39They would not allow him to use their leaves to clothe himself. What did they say to him? Rabbi Berekhya said: ‘Here is the thief who deceived his Creator.’ That is what is written: “Let no arrogant foot come to me” (Psalms 36:12) – the foot of one who was arrogant towards his Creator. “Let the hand of the wicked not move me” (Psalms 36:12) – you may not take a leaf from me. But the fig tree, whose fruit he had eaten, opened its door and received him. That is what is written: “They sewed fig leaves” (Genesis 3:7). What [type of] fig was it ? Rabbi Avin said: It was the berat sheva species, as it brought seven [sheva] days of mourning to the world.40As a result of the sin, death, and the ensuing seven-day period of mourning, was introduced into the world. Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Elazar: It was the berat elita species, as it brought weeping [elita] to the world. Rabbi Azarya and Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: Far be it that God should have revealed [the identity of] that tree to any man, nor will He reveal it in the future. See what is written: “A woman who will approach any animal [to copulate with her, you shall kill the woman and the animal]” (Leviticus 20:16) – though the person sinned, what sin did the animal commit? [The animal did not sin,] but it is [killed] so that the animal should not pass through the marketplace, where people would say: This is the animal on whose account so-and-so was stoned.41And the memory of that woman would be sullied. If He is concerned about the dignity of his [Adam’s] descendants [even though they had committed a grievous sin], is it not all the more so regarding his [Adam’s] own dignity [after his sin]? That is a rhetorical question.

=== 16 | 16 ===
“A river emerged from Eden to water the garden; and from there it parted and became four headwaters” (Genesis 2:10). “A river emerged from Eden to water the garden” – Rabbi Simon began: “You grant him power [titkefehu] forever, and he went; You alter his countenance and send him away” (Job 14:20) – the power [tokef] that the Holy One blessed be He gave to Adam the first man “forever” should have been for all time. “And he went” – because he forsook the directive of the Holy One blessed be He and went after the directive of the serpent, “You alter his countenance and send him away.” Rabbi Simon said: “Wisdom and might with Him” (Job 12:13)1Two verses later: “Behold, He halts the water and it dries; He releases it, and they overturn the earth” (Job 12:15). – when he [Adam] was still innocent vis-a-vis his Creator,2Before having sinned, when he was “with Him.” he could unleash the water of four riverheads with a single spade.3So great was his “wisdom and might.” These are the four riverheads: “A river emerged from Eden to water the garden [and from there it parted and became four headwaters, etc.].”
“The name of the one is Pishon; it is that which encircles the entire land of Ḥavila, where the gold is” (Genesis 2:11). “The name of the one is Pishon” – because it causes flax [pishtan] to grow4Pishon is interpreted to be the Nile, along which flax grows. and its water flows smoothly [shofi].5Shofi contains the first three letters of Pishon, transposed.  “It is that which encircles the entire land of Ḥavila” – Ḥavila did not yet exist,6Ḥavila was a great-grandson of Noah (Genesis 10:7). and yet you say: “It is that which encircles [the entire land of Ḥavila]”? This is bewildering. The explanation is that “He tells the outcome from the outset” (Isaiah 46:10).7God knows the future, so He is able to call a land by its future name. “Where the gold is” – pure gold.8This is expounded from the fact that it says “the gold,” rather than “gold.” “And the gold of that land is good; there is bdellium there, and onyx stone” (Genesis 2:12). “And the gold of that land is good” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: It is good when it is in his house;9Gold is the best way to store one’s savings, since a large value is concentrated in each coin.  it is good when it accompanies him on the road.10It is convenient for the road as well, for the same reason. The Midrash is expounding the repeated use of the word “gold” in consecutive verses [hazahav, vezahav]. Rabbi Abahu said: The Holy One blessed be He afforded a great favor to His world, as a person makes change from a single gold piece and he can spend it on several expenditures. Reish Lakish said: The world should not have been worthy of using gold [for secular purposes]. Why was it created? For the Temple, as it is stated: “And the gold of that land is good” – just as it says: “This good mountain and Lebanon” (Deuteronomy 3:25).11This phrase refers to the Temple (see Bereshit Rabba 15:1).  “There is bdellium [bedolaḥ] there, and onyx stone” – Rabbi Aivu said: Do you think that this bedolaḥ is the one that spice-mixers use?12Bedolaḥ is both the name of a spice and the name of a gem. Let its counterpart tell about it: “And its appearance was like the appearance of bdellium [bedolaḥ]” (Numbers 11:7). Just as that is a gem, so, too, this is a gem.
“And the name of the second river is Giḥon; it is that which encircles the entire land of Kush” (Genesis 2:13). “And the name of the second river is Giḥon…[the land of Kush]” – Kush did not yet exist,13Kush was a grandson of Noah (Genesis 10:6). and it says: “The entire land of Kush”? This is bewildering. It is because, “He tells the outcome from the outset.” “And the name of the third river is Tigris; it is that which goes east of Ashur. And the fourth river, it is Euphrates” (Genesis 2:14).  “And the name of the third river is Tigris [Ḥidekel]” – because it is harsh [ḥad]14The passage subsequent to these words is mistakenly omitted in most editions: בְּקוֹלוֹ, הוּא הַהֹלֵךְ קִדְמַת אַשּׁוּר, וַעֲדַיִין לֹא עָמַד אַשּׁוּר, אֶלָּא מַגִּיד מֵרֵאשִׁית אַחֲרִית. וְהַנָּהָר הָרְבִיעִי הוּא פְרָת, רַב אָמַר. We have presented the translation of these missing words. in its sound [kolo]. “It is that which goes east of Ashur – but Ashur did not yet exist.15Ashur was a grandson of Noah (Genesis 10:22). It is because “He tells the outcome from the outset.” “And the fourth river, it is Euphrates” – Rav said: Euphrates is the foremost of the rivers.16This is derived from the phrase “it is Euphrates,” and from the fact that it is referred to as “the great river” (Genesis 15:18, Deuteronomy 1:7). Rabbi Ḥanina bar Ami in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin in the name of Rabbi Levi said: “Uval” (Daniel 8:3) is the foremost of the rivers. But is it not written: “I was alongside the great river, that being Tigris”? (Daniel 10:4). The explanation is that Daniel saw two prophetic dreams, one on the Tigris and one on the Uval, and the [vision on the] Tigris was greater than [the vision on] the Uval, and that is why he calls it [Tigris] great. But is it not so, that at the creation of the world, it [Euphrates] is not called great? [Why is that?] The reason is because it went up and encircled the Land of Israel,17At creation it was not yet “great.” Its greatness came later, when it became the border of the Land of Israel. in whose regard it is written: “For who is a great nation that has God [close to it]” (Deuteronomy 4:7).18Euphrates is called “the great river” because of its association with the land of the “great nation.” The folk saying says: A king’s slave is [himself] a king; attach yourself to an officer and people will bow to you. Rav said to his son Ḥiyya: ‘Build me a house in the Land of Israel.’ He said to him: ‘Where?’ He said to him: ‘Build it as soon as you cross the River [Euphrates].’ Shmuel said: ‘Up to the place where the River flows, that is the Land of Israel.’ Where is that? It is Tarbakna.  Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Huna, Rabbi Yudan said: The Euphrates and the Kevar River (Ezekiel 1:1) are one and the same. “Euphrates [Perat]” – because it broadens [para verava] to the point that it can be crossed [only] by boat. “Euphrates [Perat]” – because its water brings fertility [parin] and abundance [to the surrounding soil]. “Euphrates [Perat]” – because it gradually branches out [mefaresh] [into smaller and smaller streams] until it is possible to stop it with a spade. Kevar – because its produce [its grains] are large and do not fall through a sieve [kevara]. Rabbi Huna said: Kevar is a river unto itself, and Perat is a river unto itself.19They are not identical, as Rabbi Yehuda said.  Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: They said to the Euphrates: ‘Why do you not emit a loud sound?’ It responded to them: ‘I do not need [to show off], as my actions make me known: A person plants a sapling near me, and it produces [fruit] in just thirty days; he sows a vegetable near me, and it grows in just three days.’ They said to the Tigris: ‘Why do you emit a loud sound?’ It responded to them: ‘Would that my sound might be heard and I be noticed.’ They said to the fruit trees: ‘Why do you not emit a loud sound?’20Your leaves do not rustle loudly. They responded to them: ‘We do not need [to show off], as our fruits attest to our [importance].’ They said to the non-fruit bearing trees: ‘Why do you emit a loud sound?’ They responded to them: ‘Would that our sound might be heard and we be noticed.’ Rav Huna said: It is not for that reason. Rather, fruit trees, because they are weighed down with their fruit, that is why they do not emit a loud sound. But non-fruit bearing trees, because they are not weighed down with their fruit, do emit a loud sound. That is what is written: “His heart and the heart of his people trembled, like the trembling of the trees of the forest from [the wind]” (Isaiah 7:2).
Rabbi Tanḥum said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: In the future, the Holy One blessed be He will give the nations to drink from the cup of terror,21Drinking from the cup of terror is a metaphor for divine punishment (Isaiah 51:17, 51:22). from the place from which justice [hadin] emerges. What is the source? “A river emerged from Eden [eden] to water the garden; and from there it parted” – “and became four rivers” is not written here, but rather, “and became four headwaters [rashim]”22Rashim can also mean rulers. – these are the four kingdoms,23That would ultimately subjugate Israel (see Daniel chapters 2 and 7). They are: Babylon, Persia-Media, Greece, and Rome-Edom. which correspond to the four headwaters. “The name of the one is Pishon” – this refers to Babylon, after: “Its horsemen come from afar [pashu]” (Habakkuk 1:8). “It is that which encircles the entire land of Ḥavila” – as it [Babylon] rose and encircled the entire Land of Israel, in whose regard it is written: “Have hope [hoḥili] in God, for I will yet thank Him” (Psalms 42:6). “Where the gold is” – this refers to the words of Torah, which “are more desirable than gold, than quantities of fine gold” (Psalms 19:11). “And the gold of that land is good” – this teaches that there is no Torah like the Torah of the Land of Israel, and no wisdom like the wisdom of the Land of Israel. “Bdellium is there, and onyx stone…” – [referring to] Bible, Mishna, Talmud, Tosefta, and agadda.24All these branches of Torah wisdom are to be found in the Land of Israel.  “And the name of the second river is Giḥon” – this refers to Media, as Haman would decimate its people like a serpent, after: “Upon your belly [geḥonekha] you shall go” (Genesis 3:14).  “Tigris [Ḥidekel] [it is that which goes east of Ashur]” – this refers to Greece, which was quick [kala] and harsh [ḥada] in its edicts, as it would say to Israel: ‘Write for yourselves on the horn of an ox that you have no share in the God of Israel.’ Rav Huna said: In three areas, the kingdom of Greece takes precedence over [they surpass] the Evil Empire:25Rome. This is expounding on “it is that which goes east [kidmat] of Ashur,” which can also mean “it is that which takes precedence over Ashur.” Ashur here refers to Rome, as the Midrash goes on to explain. In its legal system, in its script, and in its language. Rav Huna said in the name of Rav Aḥa: All the kingdoms may be called after Ashur26See Isaiah 27:13, Zechariah 10:10. because they enrich themselves [mitasherot] through Israel. Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: All the kingdoms may be called after Nineveh27See Nahum 1:1. The prophecy in that chapter is relevant to all the nations, not just Nineveh. because they adorn themselves [mitnaot] through Israel. Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta said: All the nations are called after Egypt [Mitzrayim]28See Isaiah 27:13. because they distress [metzirot] Israel. “The fourth river is Euphrates [Perat]” – this refers to Edom. Perat – because it voided [hefera]29It voided the treaty between the brothers, Jacob and Esau. The Romans are considered the descendants of Esau-Edom. and distressed his [Jacob’s] descendants. Perat – because it brings fertility [para] and abundance, due to the blessing of the elder [Isaac].30Isaac gave Esau (Edom) a blessing of fertility for the land (Genesis 27:39). Perat  – because in the future I will exact retribution [lehipara] against it. Perat – after its demise: “I alone have trodden the winepress [pura]…” (Isaiah 63:3).31This passage (Isaiah 63:1–6) refers to Edom.
“The Lord God took the man and placed him in the Garden of Eden, to cultivate it and to keep it” (Genesis 2:15). “The Lord God took [vayikaḥ] the man…” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: He elevated him, just as it says: “The peoples will lift them up [ulkaḥum] and bring them…” (Isaiah 14:2). Rabbi Neḥemya said: He enticed him, just as it says: “Take [keḥu] words32That is, words of persuasion. with you and return to the Lord…” (Hosea 14:3). “And placed him [vayaniḥehu]” – Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Berekhya, Rabbi Yudan said: He granted him rest, and protected him and indulged him33Vayaniḥehu can also mean he gave him rest, protection or comfort. with all the trees in the Garden of Eden. Rabbi Berekhya said: [He put him there] to grant him rest, protect him, and indulge him with all the trees in the Garden of Eden.34It was God’s intent when placing Adam in the garden to grant him all these things, but it did not actually come about due to Adam’s sin. “Vayaniḥehu” – He gave him the mitzva of Shabbat, just as it says: “And He rested [vayanaḥ] on the seventh day” (Exodus 20:11). “To cultivate it [le’ovda]” – “six days you shall work [taavod]” (Exodus 20:9), “and to keep it” – “Keep the Shabbat day” (Deuteronomy 5:12).35“To cultivate it and to keep it” all refer to the precept of Shabbat – to work for six days and rest on the seventh. Alternatively, “to cultivate it and to keep it” – this refers to sacrificial offerings, as it is stated: “You will serve [taavdun] God upon this mountain” (Exodus 3:12), and it is written [regarding the daily offering]: “You shall take care [tishmeru] to present it to Me at its appointed time” (Numbers 28:2).
“The Lord God commanded man, saying: From every tree of the garden you may eat” (Genesis 2:16). “The Lord God commanded man, saying: From every tree of the garden you may eat.” Rabbi Levi said: He commanded him regarding six mitzvot. “[The Lord God] commanded [vaytzav]” – regarding idol worship, as it says: “Because he willingly followed an order [tzav]” (Hosea 5:11). “The Lord” – regarding blasphemy, as it says: “One who blasphemes the name of the Lord” (Leviticus 24:16). “God [elohim]” – this refers to [the appointment of] judges, as it is stated: “You shall not curse judges [elohim]” (Exodus 22:27). “Man” – this refers to the shedding of blood, as it is stated: “One who sheds the blood of man [haadam]” (Genesis 9:6). “Saying [lemor]” – this refers to forbidden sexual relations, as it is stated: “Saying [lemor]: Behold, if a man sent away his wife, and she departed from him, [and she went to belong another man]” (Jeremiah 3:1).36One of the basic laws of sexual morality is that a married woman may not go and “belong to another man” unless her first husband “sent her away,” i.e., divorced her. “From every tree of the garden you may eat” – He commanded him regarding theft.37God informed Adam that all the trees were permitted to him only because they were not someone else’s private property. The Rabbis interpreted the entire passage [differently]. “The Lord God [Elohim] commanded” – [He said to him:] ‘I am merciful, but also I am a judge to exact retribution.’38“Lord” connotes God’s attribute of mercy, and “God” [Elohim] connotes His attribute of strict justice. Elohim – He said to him: ‘I am elohim, act towards me like a God [elo’ah], that you not curse Me,’ as it is stated: “You shall not curse elohim.”39Elohim can mean either “judges” or “God.” From where are forbidden sexual relations derived? “He shall cleave to his wife” (Genesis 2:24) – but not to another man’s wife, not to a male, and not to an animal. “You may eat [akhol tokhal]”40This can be translated: “When it is food, you may eat it.” – Rabbi Yaakov of Kefar Ḥanin said: When is it [meat] permitted for consumption? It is after it is slaughtered. He thus alluded to him regarding [the prohibition of eating] a limb [taken] from a living animal.  “But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, you shall not eat of it, as on the day that you eat of it you shall die” (Genesis 2:17). “You shall die [mot tamut]” – death for Adam, death for Eve;41The double expression mot tamut alludes to two deaths. death for him, death for his descendants.

=== 17 | 17 ===
“The Lord God said: It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make a helper for him alongside him” (Genesis 2:18). “The Lord God said: It is not good that [the man] should be” – we learned: The world was created with ten [divine] utterances.1Avot 5:1. These are: “In the beginning [God created the heavens and the earth]” (Genesis 1:1);2Although the words “God said” are not written here, it was through God’s command that the heavens and earth were created (see Psalms 33:6). “the wind3The Midrash interprets the word ruaḥ to mean wind, unlike the more common translation, “spirit.” of God hovered [over the surface of the water]” (Genesis 1:2);4Here too, although the words “God said” are not written, it was through God’s command that the wind came about. “God said: Let there be light” (Genesis 1:3); “God said: Let there be a firmament” (Genesis 1:6); “God said: “Let the water be gathered” (Genesis 1:9). “God said: Let the earth sprout [grass]” (Genesis 1:11). “God said: Let there be lights” (Genesis 1:14). “God said: Let the water swarm” (Genesis 1:20). “God said: “Let the earth produce” (Genesis 1:24). “God said: Let us make man” (Genesis 1:26). Menaḥem bar Yosei removes: “The wind of God hovered,” and inserts: “The Lord God said: It is not good that the man should be.” Rabbi Yaakov ben Kurshai said: A special utterance was devoted specifically to the wind.5Rabbi Yaakov concurs with the original count of the ten utterances.
“It is not good” – Rabbi Yaakov taught: Anyone who does not have a wife is without good, without help, without joy, without blessing, without atonement. Without good – “it is not good that the man should be alone.” Without help – “I will make a helper for him alongside him.” Without joy – as it is stated: “You shall rejoice, you and your household” (Deuteronomy 14:26). Without atonement – “he shall atone for himself and for his household” (Leviticus 16:11). Without blessing – “to lay a blessing upon your house” (Ezekiel 44:30). Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: He is also without peace, as it is stated: “You shall be in peace, and your household shall be in peace” (I Samuel 25:6). Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: He is also without life, as it is stated: “Appreciate life with a woman whom you love” (Ecclesiastes 9:9). Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Gamda said: He is not even a complete man, as it is stated: “He blessed them, and He called their name Man, on the day they were created” (Genesis 5:2) – when both of them are together they are called “Man.” Some say he even diminishes the [divine] image, as it is stated: “As He made man in the image of God” (Genesis 9:6). What is written thereafter? “And you, be fruitful, and multiply” (Genesis 9:7).6A man’s being in the image of God is contingent upon marrying and producing offspring.
“I will make a helper for him alongside him [kenegdo]” – if one merits, she [his wife] is a helper, but if not, she is against him [kenegdo]. Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya said: If he merits, [his wife will be] like the wife of Rabbi Ḥanina bar Ḥakhinai, but if not, she will be like the wife of Rabbi Yosei the HaGelili. The wife of Rabbi Yosei [HaGelili] was malicious, though she was his sister’s daughter. She would humiliate him in the presence of his students. His students said: Be rid of that malicious wife7Divorce her. who does not respect you. He said to them: Her marriage contract is too large for me, and I do not have enough [money] to be rid of her. One time he and Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya were sitting and studying. When they finished, he [Rabbi Yosei] said to him: ‘Rabbi, accept my suggestion, and let us go up to my house [to eat].’ He said to him: ‘Yes, let us go up.’ When he went up, she looked downward and walked out. He saw a pot and said to her: ‘Is there anything in that pot?’ She said to him: ‘There is only relish.’ He went and opened it and found pieces of chicken. Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya realized what he had heard.8He realized that Rabbi Yosei and his wife had a difficult relationship. They sat and ate. He said to him: ‘Rabbi, did she not say there was only relish? Yet we found pieces of chicken in it.’ He said to him: ‘They [came about] through a miraculous act.’ When they finished, he said to him: ‘Rabbi, be rid of that wife, because she does not act respectfully towards you.’ He said to him: ‘Her marriage contract is too large for me, and I do not have enough [money] to be rid of her.’ He said: ‘We will pay her the marriage contract, and you can be rid of her.’ They did this for him, and he was able to pay her marriage contract and be rid of her. He married a different wife, who was better than her.  The sins of that women brought about that she went and married the city watchman. Some time later, he experienced suffering9He contracted a disease. and became blind. She would hold his hand and take him around the city streets.10To beg for charity. When she reached the street of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, she stopped and turned back. Because that man knew well the [layout of the] city, he said to her: ‘Why did you not take me to the neighborhood of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, of whom I heard that he gives charity?’ She said to him: ‘I am his divorcée, and I cannot bear to see his face.’ One time, they came and called11They sought charity. in Rabbi Yosei’s neighborhood. He realized what she was doing12He sensed that she was turning around. on the first day and the second day, and then he began to hit her. Their voices were loud and audible, and they became disgraced throughout the city. Rabbi Yosei looked in the direction of their voices, and he saw them becoming disgraced in the streets. He said to him: ‘Why are you hitting her?’ He said to him: ‘Every day she causes me to lose the support [that I could take in] from this street.’ When Rabbi Yosei heard this, he took them and put them up in a house that he owned and supported them all the days of their lives, due to [the verse]: “Do not disregard your own flesh” (Isaiah 58:7).
“The Lord God formed from the ground every beast of the field and every bird of the heavens, and brought them to the man to see what he would call it; and whatever the man would call every living creature, that was its name” (Genesis 2:19). “The Lord God formed from the ground [every beast of the field]” – they raised a question before Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Zakai: It is written: “God said: Let the earth produce living creatures after their kinds” (Genesis 1:24). Why then does the verse state [here again]: “The Lord God formed [vayitzer] from the ground every beast of the field”? He said to them: There [the previous verse] it was referring to the creation [of the animals], and here it refers to domination,13He claims that “vayitzer” does not mean “God formed” the animals, but that He placed them under man’s domination. as it says: “When you besiege [tatzur] a city many days” (Deuteronomy 20:19). Rabbi Aḥa said: When the Holy One blessed be He came to create man, He consulted with the ministering angels. He said to them: “Let us make man” (Genesis 1:26). They said to Him: ‘This man, what is his nature?’ He said to them: ‘His wisdom is greater than yours.’ He brought the animals, the beasts, and the birds before them and said to them: ‘What is its name of this one?’ And they did not know. He passed them before Adam and said to him: ‘What is the name of this one?’ He said: ‘This is an ox; this is a donkey; this is a horse; this is a camel.’ [He then asked:] ‘And you, what is your name?’ He said to Him: ‘It is appropriate that I be called Adam, as I was created from the ground [adama].’ [He asked further:] ‘And I, what is My name?’ He said to Him: ‘It is appropriate to call you my Lord [adonai], as You are the Lord [adon] over all your creatures.’ Rabbi Aḥa said: “I am the Lord, that is My name” (Isaiah 42:8) – that is My name that Adam the first man called Me. He then passed them [the animals] before him in pairs. He [Adam] said: All of them have partners, but I do not have a partner – “and for the man, he did not find a helper to be alongside him” (Genesis 2:20). This is bewildering; why, in fact, did He not create her for him at the outset? The explanation is that the Holy One blessed be He foresaw that he [Adam] would complain about her in the future;14See Genesis 3:12. therefore, He did not create her until he requested her explicitly. After that, “the Lord God cast a deep slumber…” (Genesis 2:21).
“The Lord God cast a deep slumber upon the man, and he slept. He took one of his sides, and He closed it with flesh in its place [taḥtena]” (Genesis 2:21). “The Lord God cast [hipil] a deep slumber” – Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: The beginning of downfall [mapala] is sleep. When a person sleeps, he does not toil in Torah and does not do any work.15Too much sleep is a recipe for ruin. Hipil literally means, “He caused to fall down.” Rav said: There are three slumbers: the slumber of sleep, the slumber of prophecy, and the slumber of a trance. The slumber of sleep – “the Lord God cast a deep slumber upon the man, and he slept.” The slumber of prophecy – “it was when the sun was setting, and a deep slumber fell upon Abram” (Genesis 15:12). The slumber of a trance – “No one saw, and no one knew, and no one awoke, as they were all asleep, because a deep slumber from the Lord had fallen upon them” (I Samuel 26:12). The Rabbis said: There is also the slumber of foolishness, as it is written: “For the Lord poured upon you a spirit of deep slumber” (Isaiah 29:10). Rabbi Ḥanina bar Yitzḥak said: There are three microcosms; sleep is a microcosm of death; a dream is a microcosm of prophecy; Shabbat is a microcosm of the World to Come. Rabbi Avin adds another two: The orb of the sun is a microcosm of the supernal light; Torah is a microcosm of the supernal wisdom.
“He took one of his sides [mitzalotav]”16Mitzalotav can mean either “one of his ribs” or “one of his sides.” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: “One of his sides” – as it says: “For the side [tzela] of the Tabernacle” (Exodus 26:20). Shmuel said: He took one rib from between two [other] ribs [tzalotav].17Mitzalotav thus means “from the midst of his ribs.” It is not written here, “in its place [taḥteha],” but rather, “in their place [taḥtena].” Rabbi Ḥanina son of Rav Idi: From the beginning of the book until this point the letter samekh18Here it appears in the word vayisgor, “and He closed it”. is not written. [The allusion is this:] When she was created, Satan was created with her.19Satan begins with the letter sin, which is pronounced like samekh. With the creation of Eve, a course of events was set into action, culminating in Eve’s committing of the first sin, and Satan is the source of all sin.  If a person will say to you [in objection]: “It is that which encircles [hasovev]” (Genesis 2:11, 13), say to him [in response]: ‘Those verses are referring to the rivers.’20Our verse contains the first samekh in regard to the narrative of Creation; those samekhs were merely describing the locations of the rivers. Rabbi Ḥanina bar Yitzḥak said: The Holy One blessed be He made an enhancement for his bottom so that he would not be disgraced like an animal.21His anus is concealed. The Midrash interprets taḥtena as “[He closed with flesh] his bottom.” Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Yannai: one said: He made an enclosure and a seat attached to him, so that he would not be uncomfortable when he sits. The other said: He made cushions for him.22All these refer to the buttocks, which are unique to humans.  Rabbi Levi and Rabbi Ami: one said: He made burial for him.23i>  He understands the phrase to mean, “And He closed the flesh underneath [taḥtena],” that is, underground. And one said: He made shrouds for him.24He understands the phrase to mean, “And He covered up the flesh underneath [taḥtena],” that is, after death man is covered with shrouds and placed underground.
A noblewoman once asked Rabbi Yosei, saying to him: ‘Why [did God create Eve as if] by theft?’25Why did He take Adam’s side or ribs away from him without first seeking his permission? He said to her: ‘The analogy is: If one deposited with you an ounce of silver in private, and you returned to him a pound of gold in public, is that theft?’26Adam received something much more valuable than what was taken from him. She said to him: ‘Why was it done in stealth?’ He said to her: ‘At first He created her for him, but he saw that she was full of viscera and blood,27Having just been taken from his body. See Bereshit Rabba 18:4. so He took her away from him. He then fashioned her a second time.’ She said to him: ‘I will add to what you said: I was intended to marry my mother’s brother, but because I grew up with him in the same house, I was unattractive in his eyes,28Because he was familiar with how I looked as a small child.  and He went and married a different woman who is less pretty than I.’ It happened once that there was a certain pious man who was married to a pious woman, and they did not produce offspring together. They said: We are of no use to the Holy One blessed be He [if we remain childless]. They arose and divorced each other. He went and married a wicked woman, and she turned him wicked. She went and married a wicked man, and she turned him righteous. Thus, everything comes from the woman.29The spiritual tone of the family is set by the wife.
They asked Rabbi Yehoshua: ‘Why does a male emerge [from the womb] face down, while a female emerges face up?’ He said to them: ‘The male looks to the place of his creation30The earth. and the female looks to the place of her creation.’31The body. ‘Why do women have a need to perfume themselves, but men do not need to perfume themselves?’ He said to them: ‘Man was created from the ground, and the ground never becomes malodorous, while Eve was created from a bone. The analogy is: If you leave meat for three days without salting it, it will immediately spoil.’ ‘Why does a woman have a voice that carries far away, whereas a man does not?’ He said to them: ‘If you fill a pot with meat, it does not make a loud sound [as it boils], but if you place a bone in it, immediately it will make a loud sound.’ ‘Why is a man easily persuaded, but the woman is not easily persuaded?’ He said to them: ‘Man was created from soil, and once you put a drop of water on it, it immediately becomes drenched. Eve was created from a bone, which, even if you soak it in water for several days, does not become drenched.’ ‘Why is it that the man propositions the woman but the woman does not proposition the man?’ He said to them: ‘To what is the matter analogous? To one who lost an item; he seeks his lost item, but his lost item does not seek him.’32Adam’s rib (or side) is the “lost” item that he seeks to retrieve. ‘Why is it that the man deposits seed in the woman, and the woman does not deposit seed in the man?’33And the man would be the one to gestate and bear children. He said to them: ‘It is comparable to one who has in his possession an object he needed to deposit for safekeeping, and he seeks a reliable person with whom he can deposit it.’34The woman’s body, unlike that of the man, is shaped in a manner that makes her belly a suitable place for a fetus to grow. ‘Why do men go out [sometimes] with their heads uncovered, but a woman’s head is always covered?’ He said to them: ‘It is analogous to one who committed a transgression and is ashamed in front of people. That is why she goes out [only] with her head covered.’35Eve was the one who sinned first by eating the forbidden fruit. ‘Why do women walk in front of the dead [in a funeral procession]?’ He said to them: ‘It is because they caused death to exist in the world; that is why they walk in front of the dead.’ That is what is written: “Following him36A dead person. are all men, [and before him, those without number]” (Job 21:33).37The men follow the bier, while the women go in front. Women are called “those without number” because they are not counted in the Torah’s censuses. ‘Why were the laws involving menstruation given to her?’ ‘It is because she spilled the blood of Adam the first man; that is why she was given the laws involving menstruation.’ ‘Why was the mitzva of ḥalla38The separation of a portion of dough for the priest. given to her?’39See Mishna Shabbat 2:6. ‘It is because she brought ruin upon Adam the first man, who was the ḥalla at the completion of the world;40See Bereshit Rabba 14:1. that is why the mitzva of ḥalla was given to her.’ ‘Why was the mitzva of the Shabbat candle given to her?’ He said to them: ‘It is because she extinguished the [eternal] soul of Adam the first man; that is why the mitzva of the Shabbat candle was given to her.’

=== 18 | 18 ===
“The Lord God built the side that He had taken from the man into a woman, and brought her to the man” (Genesis 2:22). “The Lord God built [vayiven] the side” – Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Yosei ben Zimra: Understanding [bina] was inserted in her, more than in man, as we learned:1Mishna Nidda 5:6. A girl who is aged eleven years and one day, her vows are examined;2She is probed to determine whether or not she fully understands the import and consequences of vows. at age twelve years and one day her vows take effect [without examination]. And she is examined during her entire twelfth year.3From her eleventh birthday to her twelfth. A boy who is aged twelve years and one day, his vows are examined; at age thirteen years and one day his vows take effect [without examination]. And he is examined during his entire thirteenth year.4This shows that girls mature earlier than boys. Rabbi Yirmeya said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Yitzḥak: Some reverse it;5Some hold that boys mature intellectually at twelve and girls at thirteen. the woman typically sits inside her house, while a man typically goes out to the marketplace and gains understanding from [interaction with other] people.6That is why, although girls certainly mature physically earlier than boys, it is boys who have the intellectual advantage. According to this opinion, vayiven must be given a different interpretation.  Rabbi Aivu, and some say it in the name of Rabbi Benaya, and he taught it in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: He [God] adorned her [Eve] like a bride and then brought her before him [Adam]. There are places where they call braiding hair binyata.7And that is what is meant by vayiven. Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: Do you think that He brought her to him under a carob or under a sycamore?8With no adornment. It was only after He adorned her with twenty-four types of ornaments9See Isaiah 3:18–24. that He brought her to him. That is what is written: “You were in Eden, the garden of God; every precious stone was your canopy: Ruby, topaz…” (Ezekiel 28:13). The Rabbis and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, the Rabbis said: There were ten [canopies],10There are ten precious items listed in the aforementioned Ezekiel verse. and Rabbi Shimon said: Eleven. [This is because] Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, both of them say: When there is a generalization followed by details, the generalization is meant to add on something to the details, so that the word “every” is also included.11It is intended to add one more item to those listed explicitly. “Every precious stone was your canopy” is the generalization; “Ruby, topaz and clear quartz, beryl…” are the details, and the word “every” is included: “Every precious stone was your canopy.”12This is why Rabbi Shimon said there were eleven canopies. Rabbi Levi and Rabbi Simon, one said: There were nine [canopies], and one said: Ten. The one who said ten, it is in accordance with the opinion of the Rabbis.13In the previous paragraph. The one who says that there were nine, [this is because] the gold mentioned here14It is the final item on the list. is not one of the canopies.15Rather, it was given to Adam to put to his own use.  Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: He made the [canopy’s] walls of gold and the roofing of gems and pearls. Rabbi Elazar bar Bisena said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: He even made hooks of gold for it.
Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Vayaven is written16The letters of vayiven can also be read vayaven, He acted with thought. – He contemplated [hitbonen] from where to create her. He said: I will not create her from [Adam’s] head, so she should not hold her head high [in arrogance]; nor from the eye, so she should not be too curious; nor from the ear, so she should not be an eavesdropper; nor from the mouth, so she should not be a chatterer; nor from the heart, so she should not be envious; nor from the hand, so she should not be one who touches everything; nor from the foot, so she should not walk off. But rather, [I will create her] from a place that is covered up in man,17The Midrash here follows the opinion found in Devarim Rabba (6:11), that Eve was created from the inside of Adam’s thigh. as even when a person stands naked, that place is covered. Regarding each and every limb that He created for her, he said to her: ‘Be a modest woman, a modest woman.’ Nevertheless, [what happened was,] “You neglected all my counsel” (Proverbs 1:25). I did not create her from the head, yet she holds her head high, as it is stated: “They walk with outstretched necks” (Isaiah 3:16). Nor from the eye, yet she is excessively curious, as it is stated: “And they went with curious eyes” (Isaiah 3:16). Nor from the ear, yet she is an eavesdropper, as it is stated: “Sarah was listening at the entrance of the tent” (Genesis 18:10). Nor from the heart, yet she is envious, as it is stated: “Rachel was jealous of her sister” (Genesis 30:1). Nor from the hand, yet she touches everything, as it is stated: “Rachel stole the household idols” (Genesis 31:19). Nor from the foot, yet she walks off, as it is stated: “Dina went out [to see the daughters of the land]” (Genesis 34:1).
Rav Ḥisda said: He built her to be more suitable to storage than a man, broad below and narrow above, so that she should be able to retain fetuses. “And brought her to the man” – Rabbi Avin said: How fortunate is the villager for whom the king acts as groomsman.
“The man said: This time, it is bone from my bones, and flesh from my flesh; this one shall be called Woman, because this one was taken from Man” (Genesis 2:23). “The man said: This time [hapaam]” – Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi said: At first He created her for him, but he saw her full of viscera and blood,18Having just been taken from his body.  so He distanced her from him, and then fashioned her for him a second time. That is what is written: “This time” – this is the [same] one from that time. [Another interpretation:] This is the one who is destined to bang on me as [an anvil on] a bell.19That is, she will complain bitterly about me. See Bereshit Rabba 19:5. That is what it says: “A golden bell [paamon] and a pomegranate” (Exodus 28:34). This is the one who would excite me [mefaamtani] the entire night.20By inducing in me erotic thoughts. They asked before Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish: Why is it that all dreams do not exhaust a person, but this one21A dream involving a nocturnal emission. exhausts a person? It is because from the beginning of her [woman’s] creation it was only in a dream,22Eve was created while Adam was sleeping (Genesis 2:21). as it is stated: [“The Lord God cast a deep sleep upon the man” (Genesis 2:21).] “Bone from my bones, and flesh from my flesh” – Rabbi Tanḥuma said: If a person marries one of his relatives, in his regard it was said: “Bone from my bones.”  “This one shall be called Woman [isha], because this one was taken from Man [ish]” – from here we learn that the Torah was given in the sacred tongue [Hebrew]. Rabbi Pinḥas and Rabbi Ḥilkiya say in the name of Rabbi Simon: Just as the Torah was given in the sacred tongue, so, the world was created in the sacred tongue. Have you ever heard anyone saying: Gyne,23“Woman” in Greek. gynea;24This would be the masculine form of gyne, but it is not the Greek word for “man,” which is anthropos.  anthropos,25Man in Greek. anthropa;26This would be the feminine form of anthropos, but it is not the Greek word for “woman,” which is gyne. gavra,27Man in Aramaic. gavreta?28This would be the feminine form of gavra, but it is not the Aramaic word for “woman,” which is itta. There are completely different words for man and woman in Greek and Aramaic. But ish and isha – one form corresponds to the other.29Hebrew is the only language in which it makes sense to say, “This one shall be called Woman [isha], because this was taken from Man [ish],” as isha is the feminine form of ish.
“Therefore, a man shall leave his father and his mother, and he shall cleave to his wife, and they shall become one flesh” (Genesis 2:24). “Therefore, a man shall leave” – it is taught: A proselyte who converted while married to his sister, whether [the relationship is] paternal or maternal, he must divorce her; this is the statement of Rabbi Meir. The Sages say: If she is his maternal [sister] – he must divorce her, but if she is his paternal [sister], he may keep her, as there is no paternity for idolaters.30According to the Sages, the halakha does not recognize a connection between a person and his father if they are “Noahides,” that is, non-Jews. They raised an objection to him [Rabbi Meir]: But is it not written [regarding Abraham and Sarah]: “And also, indeed, she is my sister, the daughter of my father, [but not the daughter of my mother, and she became my wife]”? (Genesis 20:12).31The implication is that it is permissible for a Noahide to marry his sister from his father’s side, but not a sister from his mother’s side, in accordance with the view of the Sages. He said to them: He [Abraham] answered them32The Philistines, to whom he was speaking. according to their own opinion.33In Philistine culture this distinction was made, but not according to halakha. Rabbi Meir raised an objection to them: “Therefore, a man shall leave his father and his mother.”34This is understood to mean that a man may not marry his relatives, and it mentions both mother and father. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: They explained it to him: “Therefore, a man shall leave his father and his mother” – one who is related to his father or related to his mother.35One may not marry his aunt, whether it is his father’s sister or his mother’s sister. But the definition of sister is still only a maternal sister. Rabbi Abahu raised an objection [to Rabbi Meir]: But is it not written: “Amram took Yokheved his aunt [as his wife]” (Exodus 6:20)?36Yokheved was the sister of Kehat, Amram’s father. Yokheved and Kehat had a common father, Levi, but they may have had different mothers. Rabbi Shimon son of Rabbi Abahu said: If it is so [as Rabbi Meir says], before the giving of the Torah Israel did not observe the law even according to the standards of Noahides? This is astonishing. Rabbi Levi said: They explained it to him: “Therefore, a man shall leave [his father and his mother]…” – one who is related to his father or related to his mother.37This explanation was mentioned earlier, and is an exposition of the Sages’ view that the verse is referring to one’s aunts, but in any event only maternal sisterhood is recognized, not paternal sisterhood. The Midrash does not answer the question posed to Rabbi Meir concerning Amram; see commentaries. Rabbi Abahu said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Noahides incur liability [for committing adultery] for [consorting with] married women but are exempt for [consorting with] betrothed women.38If a woman is betrothed to a man, and another man has relations with her, it is not considered adultery for Noahides. Betrothal is not considered a marital relationship for Noahides.  Rabbi Yona said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel: A promiscuous woman39An unmarried woman who consorts with many different men. who is standing in the marketplace, and two men had relations with her, the first man is exempt,40He did not commit adultery. and the second incurs liability, because she is now “a woman who has had relations with a man” (Genesis 20:3).41This is the literal translation of be’ulat ba’al (Genesis 20:3), which is usually rendered “a man’s wife.” In any event, it is the definition of a woman who may not consort with another man, as that would constitute adultery. But did the first one intend to acquire her through intercourse?42How can a woman be considered married as a result of a non-committal act of intercourse? This shows that regarding Noahides, intercourse with a woman [even with no intent of marriage] effects acquisition [of her as a wife], which is not in accordance with the law [regarding Jews].43The law regarding Jews is that marriage cannot be effected without intent. What is the law regarding divorce for them [Noahides]? Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon and Rabbi Ḥanin said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Either they have no divorce, or each one must divorce the other.44This is derived from “He shall cleave to his wife.” Neither partner may dissolve the union unilaterally. Rabbi Yoḥanan [later] said: His wife may divorce him, and she pays him double the marriage contract.45According to all opinions, the divorce proceedings of Noahides are unlike those between Jews. Rabbi Ḥiyya taught: An idolater who divorced his wife and she went and married another, and both of them46The first husband and the woman. went and converted to Judaism, [and the first husband wants to remarry her,] I do not apply regarding him the verse: “Her first husband, who divorced her, [may not take her again to be a wife for him]” (Deuteronomy 24:4).47The prohibition against remarrying one’s wife after she has been married to another man in between applies only when the first marriage was dissolved by a divorce recognized by halakha, but marriages among Noahides are not dissolved by a halakhic divorce procedure, as was just explained. Rabbi Aḥa said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa: In the entire book of Malachi “The Lord of hosts” is written, but here [in the following verse], “God of Israel” is written, as it is stated: “For I hate divorce, said the Lord, the God of Israel” (Malachi 2:16). It is, as it were, that He associates His name [regarding divorce] only to Israel. Rabbi Ḥagai said: When Israel returned from the [Babylonian] exile, the women’s faces had become darkened in the sun,48On the long trek to the Land of Yisrael. and they [their husbands] would abandon them and go and marry Amonite women. They49The Israelite women. would circle the altar and weep [about this cruel treatment]. This is what Malachi says: “This is the second sin that you do” (Malachi 2:13) – the second, after Shitim.50There the Israelites sinned with the daughters of Moav (Numbers 25:1). “Covering the altar of the Lord with tears, weeping and moaning, [causing Him to no longer accept your offerings or receive them with favor from your hands … because the Lord is witness between you and the wife of your youth, whom you have betrayed]” (Malachi 2:13–14) – the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Who could accept [offerings] from them, due to the weeping and moaning [that they caused to their wives]? After you robbed, stole, and took her beauty from her, you send her away? That is shocking.’ From where is it derived that it is prohibited for them [Noahides] to engage in illicit sexual relations? It is as it is stated: “And he shall cleave to his wife” – but not to the wife of another, not to a male, and not to an animal. Rabbi Shmuel, Rabbi Abahu, and Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: A Noahide who has unnatural intercourse with his wife incurs liability for the death penalty. Rabbi Asi said: Any prohibition that is written regarding Noahides is neither a [mere] positive mitzva nor a [mere] negative prohibition, but one that incurs the death penalty. How does one arrive at this?51What Rabbi Shmuel et al. said. “And he shall cleave to his wife, and they shall become one flesh” – in the place that they can produce one flesh [a child].
“They were both naked, the man and his wife, and they were not ashamed” (Genesis 2:25). “They were both naked” – Rabbi Eliezer said: There are three cases where people did not spend six hours in peace and tranquility, and they are: Adam, Israel, and Sisera. Adam, as it is stated: “and they were not ashamed [velo yitboshashu]” – not even six [shesh] hours passed with him being in peace and tranquility.52He sinned and was driven from the Garden before he had lived six hours. Israel, as it is stated: “The people saw that Moses tarried [boshesh]” (Exodus 32:1) – six [shesh] hours had passed,53Of the fortieth day after Moses’ ascent, the day on which he had told them he would return. and Moses had not come. Sisera, as it is stated: “Why does his chariot tarry [boshesh] to arrive” (Judges 5:28) – every day he was accustomed to come home during the third hour or fourth hour [of the day], but now the sixth [shesh] hour had passed and he had not come. That is the meaning of “velo yitboshashu.” “The serpent was more cunning than any beast of the field that the Lord God had made. He said to the woman: Did God actually say: You shall not eat of any tree of the garden?” (Genesis 3:1). “The serpent was…cunning” – the verse [after this one] should have said only: “The Lord God made for Adam and for his wife [garments]… (Genesis 3:21)”54That would seem to be what should be written after we are told that they were naked. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa said: It is to inform you what misdeed prompted that evil one [the serpent] to assail them. It is because it saw them engaging in the way of nature55Intercourse. [in the open], and it lusted for her. Rabbi Yaakov of Kefar Ḥanin said: It was in order not to conclude the section with the passage of the serpent.56That is why the verse about God clothing Adam and Eve was placed at the end of the passage and not here.

=== 19 | 19 ===
“The serpent was more cunning than any beast of the field that the Lord God had made. It said to the woman: Did God actually say: You shall not eat of any tree of the garden?” (Genesis 3:1). “The serpent was…cunning” – it is written: “For with great wisdom is great anger, and he who increases knowledge increases pain” (Ecclesiastes 1:18). By increasing wisdom a person increases anger against himself; by increasing knowledge he brings pain upon himself. Solomon said: Because I increased wisdom for myself I increased anger against myself, and because I increased my knowledge I brought pain upon myself.1It is because Solomon was so wise that he became overconfident and transgressed (see Bamidbar Rabba 10:4). Have you ever heard anyone say: ‘This donkey is afflicted by a cold?’ [Or:] ‘So many inflammations afflict him.’ [Of course not.] Where is suffering found? It is among human beings.2Who have intelligence. Rav said: A Torah scholar does not require forewarning.3In order to incur liability for sinning. Most people are not punished unless they have been forewarned that they are committing a forbidden act, but the Torah scholar already knows that what he is doing is forbidden. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It is like fine linen garments that come from Beit She’an; if they get a bit dirty they are ruined [and it is a great loss]. But the linen garments of Arbel, what is their quality, and what is their value?4Being of lower quality, they are not ruined by a little stain, and in any event even if they do get ruined, they do not cost much. Rabbi Yishmael taught: In accordance with the camel, so is its burden.5The stronger the camel, the more weight is placed on it. This is a metaphor for what was said before: The higher one’s status is, the greater one’s liability. This is the ordinary way of the world : If two people enter a restaurant, and one says: ‘Bring me a piece of roast meat, white bread, and fine wine,’ and the other says: ‘Give me bread and beets.’ This one ]the first man] eats and suffers,6From eating too much rich food. and that one [the second man] eats and does not suffer. The food is too much for this one, but it is not too much for that one. It is taught in the name of Rabbi Meir: The downfall of the serpent was in accordance with its greatness – The more cunning, the more cursed. Rabbi Hoshaya Rabba said: It [the serpent]7Before it was punished and reduced to its current form. stood erect like a reed, and it had legs. Rabbi Yirmeya ben Elazar said: It was a heretic.8It said blasphemous things about God (Genesis 3:4–5). Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar said: It was like a camel. The world lost a great benefit, as were it not so [that the serpent was punished], man would have been able to send merchandise with it and it would have been able to come and go [by itself].9Due to its superior intelligence.
“It said to the woman: Did [af] God actually say…” – Rabbi Ḥanina ben Sansan said: There are four people who began a statement with af and perished by [divine] wrath [af], and they are: The serpent, the baker [in prison with Joseph], the congregation of Koraḥ, and Haman. The serpent – “It said to the woman: Did [af] God actually say…” The baker – “I, too [af], in my dream…” (Genesis 40:16). The congregation of Koraḥ – “Moreover, [af] not to a land…” (Numbers 16:14). Haman – “Moreover, [af] Esther did not bring…” (Esther 5:12).
“The woman said to the serpent: From the fruit of the trees of the garden we may eat” (Genesis 3:2). “The woman said to the serpent” – where was Adam at that time?10Why was it not speaking with Adam? Abba bar Korya said: He had engaged in the way of nature11He had had relations with Eve. and he was sleeping. The Rabbis say: The Holy One blessed be He was taking him and circulating throughout the entire world [telling him]: ‘This is a good place to plant, this is a good place to sow.’ That is what is written: “In a land that no man has ever crossed, and where no person [adam] has ever dwelled” (Jeremiah 2:6) – Adam the first man did not dwell there.12This was a land that Adam had been told was not fit for settlement. “But from the fruit of the tree that is in the midst of the garden, God said: You shall not eat of it, nor shall you touch it, lest you die” (Genesis 3:3). “But from the fruit of the tree that is in the midst of the garden…nor shall you touch it” – that is what is written: “Do not add to His words, lest He rebuke you, and you will be found to be false” (Proverbs 30:6). Rabbi Ḥiyya taught: [This teaches] that you should not make the fence [around an orchard] taller than the main object [being protected], so it should not fall and sever the saplings.13A fence is needed, but it should not be made in a way that it might harm what it is protecting. So, the Holy One blessed be He said [merely]: “As on the day that you eat of it [you shall die]” (Genesis 2:17). But she did not say that, rather [she added on to it14Constructing a fence, as it were, to guard against the actual prohibition. and said:] “God said: You shall not eat of it, nor shall you touch it.” When it saw her passing before the tree, it took hold of her and pushed her onto it. It said to her: ‘See, you did not die. Just as you did not die from touching it, so you will not die from eating of it. Rather [the real reason God forbade you to eat of it is:] “for God knows that on the day [you eat from it…you will be as God, knowing good from evil]”’ (Genesis 3:5).
“For God knows that, on the day you eat from it, your eyes will be opened, and you will be as God, knowing good from evil (Genesis 3:5). Rabbi Tanḥuma said: They asked me this question15The difficulty is that the latter part of the verse could be translated, “you will be as gods, who know good from evil,” which implies that there are multiple deities. in Antioch. I said to them: “For God knows [yodim]”16Plural. is not written, but rather, “for God knows [yode’a]17Singular. that, on the day you eat from it.”18The very same verse speaks of God in the singular. Therefore, the correct translation of the end of the verse must be: “You will be as God, [becoming people] who know good from evil.”  Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: It began to slander its Creator. It said: ‘He ate from this tree and then created the world, so He says to you: Do not eat from it so you will not create other worlds. For every person hates the craftsman that competes with him.’  Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: [The serpent said:] ‘Everything that was created after its counterpart dominates that counterpart.19The creations of each day are subservient to the creations created on the following day. The heavens were created on the first day and the firmament on the second. Does it [the firmament] not hold them up? That is a rhetorical question. The firmament was created on the second day and the vegetation on the third – does it [the firmament] not supply water for it? Vegetation was created on the third day and the luminaries on the fourth – do they [the luminaries] not cause its [the earth’s] produce to grow? The luminaries were created on the fourth day and the birds on the fifth – the ziz is a very large bird and when it flies it obscures the orb of the sun.20So there is a bird that overpowers the sun, by blocking it out. Man was created after everything in order to dominate everything. Hurry and eat [the fruit] now, before He creates additional worlds and they will dominate you.’ That is what is written: “The woman saw that the tree was good…” (Genesis 3:6) – she saw21That is, she understood and accepted. the arguments of the serpent.
“The woman saw that the tree was good for eating, and that it was an enticement to the eyes, and that the tree was desirable as a source of wisdom; she took from its fruit and ate; she also gave to her husband with her, and he ate” (Genesis 3:6). Rabbi Yosei bar Zimra said: Three matters were stated regarding that tree: That it was good for eating, pleasing to the eye, and suited for increasing wisdom” – and the three of them were stated in one verse. “The woman saw that…was good” – from here we learn that it was good; “and that it was an enticement to the eyes” – from here we learn that it was pleasing to the eye; “and that the tree was desirable as a source of wisdom [lehaskil]” – from here we learn that it was suitable for increasing wisdom, just as it says: “A contemplation [maskil] by Eitan the Ezrahite” (Psalms 89:1). “She took from its fruit and ate” – Rabbi Aivu said: She squeezed grapes22This is derived from the expression, “she took from its fruit,“ rather than she took its fruit. and gave it to him [Adam]. Rabbi Simlai said: She came to him persuasively. She said to him: ‘What, do you think that I will die and another Eve will be created for you? “There is nothing new under the sun” (Ecclesiastes 1:9).23So God will not create another woman for you. Or, perhaps [you think that] I will die and you will sit alone? “He did not create it [the world] for emptiness, He formed it to be inhabited”’ (Isaiah 45:18).24So God will not leave you alone either. The only possible outcome is that He will spare both of us. The Rabbis say: She began sobbing at him plaintively with her voice. “Also [gam]” is an inclusive term; [as well as Adam,] she also fed the animals, the beasts, and the birds. All of them heeded her [and ate of the fruit]25And that is why animals die. except for one bird that is called ḥol. That is what is written: “I will live many days, like the ḥol” (Job 29:18). The school of Rabbi Yanai says: It lives a thousand years, and at the end of a thousand years, fire emerges from its nest and burns it. An egg-bulk remains of it and it then grows limbs, and lives again. Rabbi Yudan ben Rabbi Shimon says: It lives a thousand years, and at the end of one thousand years, its body wastes away and its wings are shed. But an egg-bulk remains of it and it then grows limbs, and lives again.
“The eyes of both of them were opened, and they knew that they were naked; they sewed fig leaves, and they made themselves loincloths” (Genesis 3:7). “The eyes of both of them were opened” – Had they been blind? Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Zakkai and Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Akiva said: This is analogous to a villager who was passing by a glazier’s shop which had a basket filled with goblets and cut glass in front of it, and he grabbed them with his cane and shattered them. He [the glazier] got up and grabbed him. He said to him: ‘I know that I will not be able to get any benefit out of you,26You have no money to pay me for the damage you have done. but come with me [into my shop] and I will show you how much goodness you have destroyed.’ So, too, He showed them [Adam and Eve] how many generations they had destroyed [through their sin].27By introducing death into the world. It is in this sense that their "eyes were opened.”  “They knew that they were naked” – they had been stripped bare of even that one commandment that they had received.  “They sewed fig [te’ena] leaves” – Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: It is the leaf that brought grief [to’ana] to the world. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: [God said to them, in effect:] ‘You have ruined your handiwork, take a thread and sow it up.’28This is a metaphor. Just as when one tears clothing, one is expected to repair it, Adam and Eve were expected to find a solution for the problem they had created – the issue of their being naked.  “And they made themselves loincloths [ḥagorot]” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Ḥagora [singular], is not written here, but rather ḥagorot [plural] – several straps: istikhon, galyon, sedinim.29These are names of various types of belts or girdles, worn by men. And just as they made these for the man, so, they made for the woman: tziltzelin, kolasin, sekhanin.
“They heard the voice of the Lord God moving about in the garden with the day breeze; the man and his wife hid from the presence of the Lord God among the trees of the garden” (Genesis 3:8). “They heard the voice of the Lord God moving about [mithalekh] in the garden with the day breeze” – Rabbi Ḥalfon said: We have heard that walking about [hilukh] is [an expression] used regarding sound,30Even though “walking about” would seem to be appropriate only for people. as it is stated: “They heard the voice of the Lord God moving about [mithalekh] in the garden,” and that walking about is used regarding fire, as it is stated: “And fire went [vatihalakh] earthward” (Exodus 9:23). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Mehalekh is not written here, but rather, mithalekh, [which connotes] leaping up and ascending. The essence of the Divine Presence had been in the lower world, but when Adam the first man sinned the Divine Presence removed itself up to the first firmament; when Cain sinned, it removed itself up to the second firmament; at the generation of Enosh, to the third; at the generation of the Flood, to the fourth; at the generation of the dispersion, to the fifth; upon [the sins of] the Sodomites, to the sixth; upon [the sins of] the Egyptians in the generation of Abraham, to the seventh. Corresponding to them there arose seven righteous men, and these were: Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Levi, Kehat, Amram, Moses.31Each one the son of the preceding one. Abraham arose and brought it down to the sixth level; Isaac arose and brought it down from the sixth to the fifth; Jacob arose and brought it down from the fifth to the fourth; Levi arose and brought it down from the fourth to the third; Kehat arose and brought it down from the third to the second; Amram arose and brought it down from the second to the first; Moses arose and brought it down from above [in the first firmament] to down below [earth]. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: It is written: “The righteous will inherit the earth [and dwell [veyishkenu] upon it forever…” (Psalms 37:29). And what of the wicked, will they float in the air? It means, rather, that the wicked did not allow the Divine Presence [shekhina] to rest on earth.
“They heard [vayishme’u]”32The underlying question here is: It is impossible to understand “the voice of the Lord God” literally, as this would be ascribing physicality to God. – do not read it vayishme’u, but rather, vayashmiu [they made heard] – they heard the voice of the trees saying: ‘This is the thief who deceived his Creator.’33Vayashmiu means that they [the trees] made something heard to Adam and Eve. Another interpretation: They heard the voice of the angels saying: ‘The Lord God is going to those in the garden.’34To punish them. The beginning of the verse should thus be translated: “They heard a voice [saying:] The Lord God is going into the garden.” Rabbi Levi and Rabbi Yitzḥak, Rabbi Levi said: [The angels said:] ‘Is the one in the garden to die [met]?’35Mithalekh is interpreted as two words: Is he going to die [met], that man walking [holekh] in the garden? Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Is he to die [met], for having gone off [halakh] on his own way? That is astonishing. The Holy One blessed be He said to them: “With the day breeze [ruaḥ]” – the expansion [revaḥ] of the day. I will make this day alive for them. This is what I said to him: ‘“As on the day that you eat of it you shall die” (Genesis 2:17), but you do not know whether I meant one of My days or one of your days. But I will grant him one of My days, which is one thousand years.’36Psalms 90:4. He lived nine hundred and thirty years,37Genesis 5:5. and left seventy years for his descendants. That is what is written: “The days of our lives in it are seventy years” (Psalms 90:10). “With the day breeze [ruaḥ]” – He judged them by the eastern direction [ruaḥ] – by the direction that rises with the day.38The sun. Zavdi ben Levi said: He judged them by the western direction – by the direction that sets with the day. According to Rav’s opinion, [this means that] He treated him harshly, for as long as the day rises it gets hotter. According to Zavdi ben Levi, He treated him leniently, for as long as the day is setting, it gets cooler.  “The man and his wife hid” – Rav Aivu said: His [Adam’s] stature diminished and it became [a mere] one hundred cubits.39Originally he had been much taller. See Bereshit Rabba 8:1. “[The man and his wife hid …] among the trees [etz] of the garden” – this is an allusion to his descendants who would be placed in wooden [etz] caskets.40Because of his sin.
“The Lord God called to the man, and said to him: Where are you?” (Genesis 3:9). “The Lord God called to the man [and said to him: Where are you [ayeka]?]” – how [eikh] have you become like this? Yesterday41Previously. It cannot mean “yesterday” literally, because Adam did not yet exist on the previous day. you were loyal to My will, but now to the will of the serpent. Yesterday you extended from one end of the world to the other end, but now you fit “among the trees of the garden”? Rabbi Abahu said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: “But they were like men [adam] who violated the covenant” (Hosea 6:7) – they were like Adam the first man.42Who violated God’s command. They were like Adam the first man, whom I put into the Garden of Eden and commanded him, but he violated the command, and I sentenced him to banishment and expulsion, and I lamented over him: ‘How could it be [eikha]?’43Its spelling is identical to ayeka. I put him into the Garden of Eden, as it is stated: “He placed him in the Garden of Eden” (Genesis 2:15). And I commanded him, as it is stated: “The Lord God commanded the man, saying” (Genesis 2:16). And he violated the command, as it is stated: “Did you eat from the tree that I commanded you not to eat from it?” (Genesis 3:11). And I sentenced him to banishment, as it is stated: “The Lord God banished him from the Garden of Eden” (Genesis 3:23). And I sentenced him to expulsion, as it is stated: “He expelled the man” (Genesis 3:24). And I lamented over him: ‘How could it be [eikha],’ as it is stated: “The Lord God called to the man, and said to him: Where are you [ayeka]?” – eikha is written. So it was with His descendants: I brought them into the Land of Israel, I commanded them and they violated the command, I sentenced them to banishment and expulsion, and I lamented over them: Eikha. I brought them into the Land of Israel, as it is stated: “I brought you to a fruitful land” (Jeremiah 2:7). And I commanded them, as it is stated: “You shall command the children of Israel” (Exodus 27:20). And they violated the command, as it is stated: “All Israel has violated Your Torah” (Daniel 9:11). And I sentenced them to banishment, as it is stated: “Banish them from My presence” (Jeremiah 15:1). And I sentenced them to expulsion, as it is stated: “I will expel them from My house” (Hosea 9:15). And I lamented over them: Eikha, as it is stated: “How [eikha] does…it sit” (Lamentations 1:1).
“He said: Who told you that you are naked? Did you eat from the tree that I commanded you not to eat from it” (Genesis 3:11). “He said: Who told you that you are naked? Did [you eat] from the tree…?”44The underlying question is: Why did God ask Adam if he had eaten the fruit, since He obviously knew the answer. – Rabbi Levi said: This is analogous to a woman who needs to borrow vinegar, so she goes into the house of a snake charmer’s wife. She says to her: ‘How does your husband treat you?’ She answers her: ‘He treats me with all generosity, except for this barrel that is filled with snakes and scorpions, to which he does not allow me access.’ She says to her: ‘All his gems are there, and he wants to marry another woman and give it all to her.’ What did she do? She reached her hand into it, and they began biting her. When her husband came, he heard the sound of her screaming. He said to her: ‘Did you, perhaps, touch that barrel?’ So, the Holy One blessed be He said to Adam the first man: “Did you eat from the tree that I commanded you [not to eat from it?]”45You have no one but yourself to blame for your misery.
“The man said: The woman whom You gave to be with me, she gave me from the tree, and I ate” (Genesis 3:12). “The man said…” – there are four people whom the Holy One blessed be He tapped on their jug46This is an expression denoting testing someone’s character, as one would tap on a jug to see if there was anything in it. and found that they were jugs filled with urine.47Their character was found to be exceedingly poor. They are: Adam, Cain, Bilam, and Hezekiah.48All of them were asked questions by God and answered inappropriately. Adam, as it is stated: “The man said: The woman [whom You gave to be with me, she gave me…].” Cain – “The Lord said to Cain: Where is Abel…and he said: I do not know” (Genesis 4:9). The wicked Bilam, as it is stated: “Who are these people with you… Bilam said to God…” (Numbers 22:9–10). Hezekiah – “What did these people say to you?” (II Kings 20:14, Isaiah 39:3).49Isaiah asked this of Hezekiah, speaking in God’s name. In all these cases, the people should have realized that God’s question was actually an implied accusation, and they should have immediately admitted their guilt, rather than attempt to actually answer the question. But Ezekiel, He found him more perceptive than all of them, as it is stated: “Son of man, will these bones come to life? And I said: Lord God, You know” (Ezekiel 37:3).50He understood that when God asks a question it is not because He needs to know the answer. Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa said: This is analogous to a bird held in a hunter’s hand. He encountered someone and said to him: ‘This thing in my hand, will it live or die?’ He said to him: ‘If you wish it will live, and if you wish it will die.’ So, too, [when God asked Ezekiel] “son of man, will these bones live?” [His response was:] “I said: Lord God, You know.”
“The man said: The woman whom You gave…” – that is what is written: “I would speak, and I would not fear Him; for it is not so that I am, with myself [imadi]” (Job 9:35) – I am unlike the one who said: “The woman whom You gave to me [imadi]…” He heeded his wife’s words, but I did not heed my wife’s words.51Job’s wife told him, “Blaspheme God and die” (Job 2:9). Unlike Adam, Job didn’t take his wife’s advice. This is why Job said that he was unlike imadi, a word that alludes to Adam. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Dina52Jacob’s daughter. was Job’s wife. That is why he said to her: “You are speaking as one of the disgusting women [nevalot] would speak.53Regarding Dina it is written: “As he performed a disgusting act [nevala] in Israel to lie with Jacob's daughter” (Genesis 34:7). Shall we accept the good from God, [and not accept the bad]?” (Job 2:10). “Shall I accept,” is not written here, but rather, “shall we accept [nekabel]”54Although it was only Job who was suffering. – should we be pleased with the good but not be pleased with the bad?55Nekabel is interpreted as “pleased [na’im] about accepting [kabel].” That was a rhetorical question. “With all this, Job did not sin with his lips” (Job 2:10) – [the implication is:] with his lips he did not sin, but in his heart he did sin. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: “And I ate [veakhalti]”56This is unambiguously in past tense. is not written here, but rather, “vaokhel”57This word may indicate past or future tense. – I ate and I will eat again.58He defiantly declared that he would do it again.  Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: Adam the first man was banished only after he blasphemed and spoke sacrilegiously.59By being defiant towards God, as was just explained. That is what is written: “He hoped to produce grapes, but it produced sour grapes” (Isaiah 5:2). “The Lord God said to the woman: What is this you have done? The woman said: The serpent enticed me, and I ate” (Genesis 3:13). “The woman said: The serpent enticed me [hishiani], and I ate” – [hishiani has three meanings:] It enticed me, it brought liability upon me, and it misled me. It enticed me, as it says: “The enemy will not entice [yashi] you” (Psalms 89:23). It brought liability upon me, as it says: “When you lend [tashe] to your neighbor” (Deuteronomy 24:10).60Through the loan, monetary liability is created, and the serpent’s evil behavior brought her liability for sin. It misled me, as it says: “Now, do not allow Hezekiah to mislead [yashi] you” (II Chronicles 32:15).

=== 20 | 20 ===
“The Lord God said to the serpent: Because you did this, cursed are you from all the animals, and from all the beasts of the field; on your belly you shall go, and you shall eat dust all the days of your life” (Genesis 3:14). “The Lord God said to the serpent” – “The slanderer shall not stand in the land; [may evil trap unjust men, bringing about banishments]” (Psalms 140:12) – Rabbi Levi said: In the Messianic future the Holy One blessed be He will take the idolaters and send them down to Gehenna, and say to them: ‘Why did you punish my children?’ They will say to Him: ‘It is from them themselves, as they would come and slander one another.’ The Holy One blessed be He will then take both these and those1The idolaters and the Jewish slanderers. and send them down to Gehenna.2These are the banishments (plural) mentioned in the verse. Another matter, “The slanderer” – this is the serpent who slandered his Creator. “Shall not stand in the land” – “on your belly [you shall go].” “May evil trap unjust men [bringing about banishments]” – “banishment” is not written here, but rather,  “banishments.” Adam was cursed, Eve was cursed, and the serpent was cursed.
“The Lord God said to the serpent: Because you did this…” – “A contrary man incites strife, and a malcontent distances the ruler” (Proverbs 16:28). “A contrary man” – this is the serpent who stated contrary matters about His Creator. “And a malcontent” – as it voiced grievances against its Creator, saying [to the woman:] “You will not die” (Genesis 3:4). “Distances the ruler” – as it alienated the Ruler of the world, and was immediately cursed. “The Lord God said to the serpent…” – with Adam He had a discussion,3Before cursing him. with Eve He had a discussion, but with the serpent, He did not have any discussion. Rather, the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘This serpent is a wicked one, with all the answers. If I say something to it, now it will say to me: You commanded them, and I commanded them. Why did they forsake your command and follow my command?’ Instead, He summarily issued his sentence.
“The Lord God said to the serpent: Because you did this…” – Rabbi Ḥiyya taught: When it comes to showing honor, one begins with the greatest one, but when it comes to disgrace, one begins with the lesser one. When it comes to showing honor, one begins with the greatest one, as it is stated: “Moses said to Aaron, to Elazar, and to Itamar” (Leviticus 10:6). When it comes to disgrace, one begins with the lesser one, as it is stated: “The Lord God said to the serpent,” [then] “to the woman He said: I will increase your suffering and your pregnancy” (Genesis 3:16), [then] “to Adam, He said: Because you heeded your wife’s voice” (Genesis 3:17). It teaches that initially the serpent was cursed, then Eve was cursed, and then Adam was cursed. All creatures cohabit front facing back, with the exception of two who mate back to back, and they are the camel and the dog, and with the exception of three who mate face to face because the Divine Presence spoke to them. These are: man, the serpent, and the fish. Man, as it is stated: “To Adam, He said: Because you heeded your wife’s voice” (Genesis 3:17); the serpent – “the Lord God said to the serpent” (Genesis 3:14); the fish – “The Lord said to the fish, and it spewed Jonah” (Jonah 2:11).
“Because you did this [zot]”4Zot being the feminine form of “this.” – Rabbi Hoshaya said: It was because of this woman.5Because the snake lusted after Eve. Was every action that you took not because of her? Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said in the name of Rabbi Hoshaya: From the beginning of the book until here there are seventy-one mentions of God’s name. This tells you that it [the serpent] was judged before an entire Sanhedrin.6The Great Sanhedrin consisted of seventy-one members. Rabbi Hoshaya of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: He cursed it [the serpent] with leprosy. Those stone-shaped blotches on it are leprous. Rabbi Elazar said: Have you ever seen that after a person strikes another with a rod he then strikes him with a strap?7The strap inflicts less of a blow than a rod. So, “cursed are you from all the animals” (Genesis 3:14), all the more so [was it cursed] “from all the beasts of the field” (Genesis 3:14).8If the serpent was cursed to be worse off than the animals, this is already more severe than a curse to be worse off than the beasts (wild animals). Why, then, was it necessary to state the lesser curse after already having stated the more severe one? Large domesticated animals give birth after nine or twelve months of gestation, whereas wild animals give birth after only six months (see later). This shows that animals are worse off than beasts. It was taught: A large kosher animal gives birth after nine months [of gestation], a large non-kosher animal gives birth after twelve months; a small kosher animal gives birth at five months, and the dog at fifty days, the cat at fifty-two, the pig at sixty days, the mongoose at seventy days, the deer and the fox at six months, and all the other swarming creatures at six months, the lion, the bear, the tiger, the elephant, the monkey, the hedgehog at three years, the serpent at seven years, and the adder at seventy years.9There are thus beasts that are in fact worse off (in length of gestation) than animals.  A certain scholar once sought to ascertain after how long the serpent bears an offspring. When he saw them mating with one another, he took them10The females. and placed them in a barrel, and provided them with sustenance until they gave birth. When the elders once traveled to Rome, he [the scholar] asked Rabban Gamliel: After how long does the serpent bear an offspring? He was unable to answer him and his face turned pallid. Rabbi Yehoshua encountered him and his face was sickly. He said to him: ‘Why is your face sickly?’ He said to him: ‘I was asked a question and I was unable to answer it.’ He said to him: ‘What was it?’ He said: ‘After how long does the serpent bear an offspring?’ He said to him: ‘After seven years.’ He said to him: ‘From where do you know this?’ He said to him: ‘The dog is a non-kosher beast and bears offspring after fifty days. A non-kosher animal gives birth at twelve months. It says [of the serpent]: “Cursed are you from all the animals and from all the beasts of the field.” Just as the animal is seven times more cursed than the beast [dog], so, the serpent is seven times more cursed than the animal.’ Towards evening, he [Rabban Gamliel] ascended and said it to him [the scholar]. He began banging his head against the wall. He said: ‘After everything that I toiled for seven years, this man comes and presented it to me with a reed.’11That is, effortlessly.
“On your belly you shall go” – when the Holy One blessed be He said to it: “On your belly you shall go,” the ministering angels descended and severed its arms and its legs, and its voice carried from the end of the world to its end. The serpent comes to shed light on the downfall of Egypt, but in the end is itself illuminated by it, as it is stated [regarding Egypt]: “Its outcry will sound out like a serpent” (Jeremiah 46:22).12The image of the serpent’s cry is used to describe and shed light on the shouts of the anguished Egyptians. Earlier it says, also of Egypt: “Your scream filled the land” (Jeremiah 46:12). From this we learn that the cry of the serpent when its legs were severed was so intense that it spread throughout the world.  Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Huna, one of them said: [God told the serpent:] ‘You caused people to walk bent over [in grief] over their dead;13It was because of the serpent that death was introduced to mankind. you, too, will go on your belly.’ Rabbi Eliezer said: Even the curse of the Holy One blessed be He contains a blessing.14Everything God does is a blessing – even the curses He utters. Had the Holy One blessed be He not said to it: “On your belly you shall go,” how would it flee into a wall, enter a hole and be saved? “And you shall eat dust all the days of your life” – Rabbi Ḥilfai said: Not the dust on all sides, but rather, it breaks through [the soil] and descends until it reaches bedrock, and it loosens soil fibers and eats.  Rabbi Levi said: In the Messianic future, everyone will be cured [from their disabilities] except for the serpent and the Givonites. The serpent, as it is stated [of the Messianic future]: “A serpent, dust will be its food. None will harm or destroy [on the entire mountain of My holiness]” (Isaiah 65:25). The Givonites – “the workers of the city15The Givonites were condemned to be eternal servants for public needs (Joshua 9:23). from all the tribes of Israel will cultivate it” (Ezekiel 48:19). Rabbi Asi and Rabbi Hoshaya said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: The Holy One blessed be He said to it [the serpent]: ‘I made you king over animal and beast, but you did not want it.16So now, “cursed are you from all the animals, and from all the beasts.” I made you such that you would walk upright like man, but you did not want it; now, “on your belly you shall go.” I made you such that you would eat food like man, but you did not want it; now, “you shall eat dust all the days of your life.” You sought to kill Adam and to marry Eve; so “I will place enmity between you and the woman”’ (Genesis 3:15). That is, what it sought was not given to it, and what had been in its possession was taken from it. We find likewise regarding Cain, Koraḥ, Bilam, Doeg, Aḥitofel, Geiḥazi, Absalom, Adoniyahu, Uziyahu, and Haman. What they sought was not given to them, and what had been in their possession was taken from them.
“To the woman He said: I will increase your suffering and your pregnancy; in pain you shall give birth to children, and your desire shall be for your husband, and he shall rule over you” (Genesis 3:16). “To the woman He said: I will increase your suffering and your pregnancy” – Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon and Rabbi Yoḥanan in the name of Rabbi Elazar ben Rabbi Simon: The Holy One blessed be He never deigned to speak with a woman except for that righteous woman [Sarah], and that, too, was for a specific reason.17God had been speaking to Abraham: “Why is it that Sarah laughed?” (Genesis 18:13). Sarah interrupted with her denial: “I did not laugh” (Genesis 18:15). Then it was necessary for the Holy One blessed be He to set her straight: “No, but you did laugh” (Genesis 18:15). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: How He spoke in a roundabout manner with her: “No, but you did laugh” (Genesis 18:15).18Instead of saying: “Yes, you laughed,” He said it in an indirect manner. But is it not written [of Hagar]: “She called the name of the Lord, who spoke to her”? (Genesis 16:13). Rabbi Yehoshua bar Rabbi Neḥemya said in the name of Rabbi Idi: [He spoke to her] through an angel. Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Yosei ben Zimra: Through Shem.19Hagar had gone to consult Shem son of Noah, who was a spiritual leader at the time. “I will increase [harba arbe] your suffering and your pregnancy” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana says in the name of Rabbi Shmuel: Any fetus who has reached harba, I shall grant it growth [arbe]; any fetus that is [born after] two hundred and twelve days20That is, seven months. It is the numerical value of harba: heh – 5 + reish – 200 + beit – 2 + heh – 5 = 212. [of gestation] can survive. Rabbi Huna said: If it [the fetus] was formed to be born after nine months and is born at seven months, it will not survive; at eight months, it will not survive. If it is formed to be born after seven months and is born after eight, it will survive; all the more so after nine months. They asked Rabbi Abahu: From where is it derived that a fetus born during the seventh month can survive, [but one born during the eighth cannot]? He said to them: From your own [language] I will prove it to you: Zeta21This is the name of the seventh letter of the ancient Greek alphabet, and also means ‘live.’  – epta22It means seven. Seven thus indicates life.; eta23The name of the eighth Greek letter, also meaning “dying.”  – okto.24It means eight. Eight thus indicates death. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel: A woman will always give birth only after two hundred and seventy-one, two hundred and seventy-two, or two hundred and seventy-three days, which is nine months plus the days of their conception.25Conception can take place from one to three days after insemination. From that time gestation will last for two hundred and seventy-one days. Ḥiyya bar Ada was sitting before Rav. He was explaining [a point] to him, but he did not grasp it. He said to him: ‘Why do you not grasp it?’ He said to him: ‘My donkey is supposed to give birth, and I am worried it might catch a chill and die.’ He said to him: ‘Why does it concern you?’26It is not yet time for it to give birth. He said to him: ‘Sometimes it gives birth early, and sometimes it gives birth late. When it gives birth early, it is never less than a lunar year; when it gives birth late, it is never more than a solar year.’27So there is an eleven day range of when it can give birth. He said to him: ‘But is it not written: “Do you know the time when ibexes give birth…will you count the months of their reaching term”?’ (Job 39:1–2).28This implies that there is a set term for animal pregnancies. He said to him: ‘There it is regarding a small animal, and here it is with a large animal.’ He said to him: ‘But Antoninus’s cattle were once inseminating, and they inseminated Rabbi’s cattle from them. Some of them calved at one time and some of them calved later.’29And the gap between the births was more than eleven days. He said to him: ‘That was regarding a kosher animal, this is regarding a non-kosher animal [a donkey]’. “Your suffering” – this is the pain of conception; “and your pregnancy” – this is the discomfort of menstruation; “in pain” – this is the pain of miscarriage; “you shall give birth” – this is the pain of childbirth; “to children” – this is the difficulty of raising children. Rabbi Elazar ben Rabbi Shimon said: It is easier for a man to support an entire legion with olives in the Galilee, than it is to raise one child in the Land of Israel.
“And your desire shall be for your husband” – there are four desires. The desire of a woman is only for her husband, as it is stated: “And your desire shall be for your husband.” The desire of the evil inclination is only for Cain and his counterparts, as it is stated: “[Sin crouches at the entrance,] and its desire is for you” (Genesis 4:7). The desire of rain is only for the ground, as it is stated: “You remember the earth and fulfill its desire…[the streams of God are full of water]” (Psalms 65:10). The desire of the Holy One blessed be He is only for Israel, as it is stated: “His desire is for me” (Song of Songs 7:11). Another matter, “his desire [teshukato] [is for me]” – we are exhausted [tashim], but even though we are exhausted, we hope [mekavim] for the salvation of the Holy One blessed be He, and we declare the unity of His name each day. Another matter, “and your desire shall be for your husband” – when a woman is sitting on the birthing stool, she says: ‘I will never be intimate with my husband anymore.’ But the Holy One blessed be He says to her: ‘You will return to your desire, you will return to desiring your husband.’ Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: Because her30Referring to the woman who has just given birth. heart fluttered, that is why she brings a fluttering offering – two turtledoves or two young pigeons.31Leviticus 12:8.  “And he shall rule over you” – Rabbi Yosei HaGelili said: One might think that this means dominion in every sense. Therefore the verse states: “[When a man has taken a new wife…he shall cheer his wife whom he has taken. He shall not yaḥavol the upper and lower millstones” (Deuteronomy 24:5–6).32Yaḥavol is usually understood here as taking an object for collateral for a loan. The Midrash interprets the word in its more usual sense, to injure, and it interprets the millstones as a metaphor for one’s wife (see Ibn Era on Deuteronomy 24:6). Thus the verse forbids physical aggressiveness against one’s wife.  There was an incident involving a certain woman from the Tevaryanus family who was married to a robber, and her husband mistreated her. The Sages heard, and they went to her house to rebuke him. When she came before the Sages, she took out before them a golden candlestick with an earthenware lamp upon it,33This symbolized the coarse man upon the gentle woman. affirming what is stated: “And your desire shall be for your husband.”34No matter what, she desires him.
“And to Adam He said: Because you heeded your wife’s voice, and ate from the tree that I commanded you, saying: You shall not eat from it, the ground is cursed on your account; in suffering you shall eat of it all the days of your life” (Genesis 3:17). “And to Adam He said: Because you heeded your wife’s voice” – Rabbi Simlai said: She approached him persuasively. She said to him: ‘What do you think, that I will die and another Eve will be created for you? “There is nothing new under the sun” (Ecclesiastes 1:9). What do you think, that I will die and you will sit alone? “He did not create it for emptiness; He formed it to be inhabited”’ (Isaiah 45:18). The Rabbis say: She began sobbing at him with her voice. That is what is written: “And to Adam He said...” “Because you heeded your wife’s words” is not written here, but rather, “your wife’s voice.”  “And ate of the tree” – this supports what Rabbi Abba of Akko said, that it [the tree of knowledge] was a citron tree.35The taste of the citron tree is similar to its fruit. Thus, by eating the fruit, it was as if Adam “ate from the tree” itself.  “That I commanded you, saying” – what is “saying”?36Literally, “to say.” [Adam had been told] to warn the animals, the beasts, and the birds.37Adam had been commanded “to say” to all the animals that they must not eat of the forbidden fruit. Not only did you not warn them, but you gave it to them and they ate. “The ground is cursed on your account” – it will bring forth for you cursed things, e.g., gnats, fleas, and flies. Let it, then, produce a camel for him.38That would be a much larger pest. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: He, too, could derive benefit from that, as he could sell it and benefit from its proceeds.
“In suffering you shall eat of it” – Rav Asi said: Earning a livelihood is twice as difficult as childbirth. Regarding childbirth it is written, “in pain [be’etzev] you shall give birth to children,” whereas regarding earning a livelihood it is written, “in suffering [be’itzavon] you shall eat of it.”39Be’itzavon is an extended form of be’etzev, indicating a greater level of difficulty. Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman, Rabbi Eliezer said: Redemption is compared to earning a livelihood, and earning a livelihood to redemption, as it is stated: “He rescued us from our foes, for His kindness is forever,” (Psalms 136:24) and adjacent to that: “He gives food to all flesh, for His kindness is forever” (Psalms 136:25). Just as redemption is miraculous, so, too, earning a livelihood is miraculous. Just as earning a livelihood is every day, so, too, redemption is every day. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: It [earning a livelihood] is even greater than redemption, as redemption is carried out through an angel, but livelihood is [directly] through the Holy One blessed be He. Redemption is carried out through an angel, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “The angel who redeems me from all evil” (Genesis 48:16). That livelihood is through the Holy One blessed be He? As it is stated: “You open Your hand, and satisfy the desire of every living thing” (Psalms 145:16). Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: It [earning a livelihood] is greater than the splitting of the Red Sea, as it is stated: “Who split apart the Red Sea” (Psalms 136:13), and it says: “He gives food to all flesh…” (Psalms 136:25).40Giving food to all flesh is mentioned after the splitting of the Red Sea, indicating that it is greater.
“And thorns and thistles it will grow for you, and you shall eat the vegetation of the field” (Genesis 3:18). “And thorns [kotz] and thistles [dardar] it will grow for you.” Kotz –  this is artichoke; dardar – this is cardoon.41Both plants have thorns on them. Some transpose it, kotz –  this is cardoon; dardar – this is artichoke, as it is constituted of rows upon rows [darin darin]. “And you shall eat the vegetation of the field” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: [God said to him:] ‘Had you merited, it [the ground] would have caused all the trees of the Garden of Eden to grow for you. Now that you did not merit, “thorns and thistles it will grow for you.”’ Rabbi Neḥemya said: [God said:] ‘Had you merited, you would have taken plants from inside the Garden of Eden and tasted in them all the delicacies of the world. Now that you did not merit, “you shall eat the vegetation of the field.”’42Without experiencing any delectable taste. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: It is regarding these generations [the present time] that it says: “and you shall eat the vegetation of the field,” when a person plucks from his field and eats it while it is still vegetation. When Adam the first man heard [this curse], his face began perspiring. He said: ‘What, am I to be tied to a trough like an animal?’ The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Since your face perspired, you will eat bread.’43This is the meaning of “by the sweat of your brow you shall eat bread” (Genesis 3:19). Rabbi Levi said: It would have been preferable for him had he remained with his original curse.44Had man’s diet been limited to plants, he would not have to toil so much to make bread. “By the sweat of your brow you shall eat bread, until you return to the ground, for from it you were taken; for you are dust, and to dust you will return” (Genesis 3:19). “By the sweat of your brow you shall eat bread” – this is one of five phenomena that are good omens for the ill.45They are indications that their health is taking a turn for the better. They are: A sneeze, perspiration, sleep, a dream, and a seminal emission. A sneeze, from where is it derived? As it is stated: “Its sneezes flash light” (Job 41:10). Perspiration, from where is it derived? As it is stated: “By the sweat of your brow you shall eat bread.” Sleep, from where is it derived? As it is stated: “I would sleep; then I would be relieved” (Job 3:13). A dream [ḥalom], as it is stated: “You will heal me [vataḥlimeni] and revive me” (Isaiah 38:16). A seminal emission, from where is it derived? As it is written: “He will see seed and live long” (Isaiah 53:10). The Rabbis of Caesarea say: A regular bowel movement as well. What is the source? “The wanderer [tzo’e]46This is expounded as tzo’a – excrement. will be quickly released [and he will not die]” (Isaiah 51:14). Rabbi Ḥagai said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: Provided that “his bread will not be lacking” (Isaiah 51:14).47If after the bowel movement he is able to eat, it is a good omen. “Until you return to the ground, for from it…” He said to him: That handful of dust from which you were created, is it not stolen in your hand?48You were created with a certain destiny, and you failed to live up to that destiny. As a thief, you must “return” the dust to its place. “For you are dust, and to dust you will return” – Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: From here there is an allusion to the revival of the dead from the Torah. “For you are dust, and to dust you will go” is not written, but rather, “you will return.”
“The man called the name of his wife Eve [Ḥava], because she was the mother of all living [ḥai]” (Genesis 3:20). “The man called the name of his wife Eve [Ḥava], because she was the mother of all living [ḥai]” (Genesis 3:20). She was given to him to enliven him, but she gave him counsel like a serpent [ḥivya]. Another matter, Ḥava – Adam the first man told [ḥiva] her how many generations she had caused to perish. Rabbi Aḥa said: [Adam said:] The serpent was your serpent and you were Adam’s serpent [ḥivya].49The serpent was the cause of your downfall, and you, in turn, were the cause of Adam’s downfall. “Because she was the mother [em] of all living” – Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar said: With [im] all life.50”Life” referring to a comfortable standard of living. It is taught: If [someone’s husband] becomes wealthy she ascends with him,51If a husband becomes wealthy and hires servants, his wife is excused from her domestic duties. She thus ascends in status, as at the time of her marriage she had been required to perform them. but if he becomes poor she does not descend with him.52If a husband was rich at first, able to hire servants, thus exempting his wife from household chores, and then he becomes poor and unable to afford domestic help, his wife nevertheless remains excused from household chores, and does not descend from her original status.  Rabbi Simon said: “Mother of all living” – the mother of all living beings, as Rabbi Simon said: All one hundred and thirty years that Eve was estranged from Adam, the male spirits53Demons. would be aroused by her and she would bear offspring from them, and the female spirits would be aroused by Adam and would bear offspring from him. That is what is written: “Who, when he commits iniquity, I will rebuke him with the staff of men and with the afflictions of the children of man [adam]” 54With punishments inflicted by malevolent spirits, described here as “children of Adam.” (II Samuel 7:14); the children of Adam the first man. There is one opinion that says that house spirits55Malevolent spirits that inhabit one’s house. are better [for the resident of the house], because they grow up with him. And there is an opinion that says that they are worse, because they are intimately familiar with his sinful thoughts. Spirits of the field – there is an opinion that says they are better for a person, because they are not intimately familiar with his sinful thoughts. And there is an opinion that says that they are worse, because they did not grow up with him.
“The Lord God made for Adam and for his wife garments of hide [or],56With an ayin. and clothed them” (Genesis 3:21). In Rabbi Meir’s Torah, they found that “garments of or”57With an alef, meaning light. was written. These are the garments of Adam the first man, that were similar to the common rue,58A yellow plant. A variant reading has לפנס, “to a torch.” broad at the bottom and narrow at the top.  Rabbi Yitzḥak Ravya says: They were as smooth as a fingernail and as pretty as jewels. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: It was like the thin linen garments that come from Beit She’an. [And they were called] garments of hide because they adhered to the skin. Rabbi Elazar said: Goat hides. Rabbi Aivu said: Garments that cover the skin. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Hare hides. Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: Hides with their wool. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: Radiant hides. And the firstborn sons would use them.59For religious rites, which was their purview, until they were replaced by the Levites. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: They were camel wool and hare wool. [And they were called] “garments of hide” because they were garments that come from hide. Rabbi Levi said: The Torah teaches you proper conduct: Eat according to your means, wear clothing that is less than your means, and dwell in a place that is more than your means. Eat according to your means – “From every tree of the garden you may eat” (Genesis 2:16). Wear clothing that is less than your means –“The Lord God made for Adam and for his wife [garments of hide].”60The whole world belongs to God, and He could have made them garments of precious linen or silk. And dwell in a place that is more than your means – as two people resided in the entire world.

=== 21 | 21 ===
“The Lord God said: Behold, the man has become as one of us, to know good and evil, and now, he might extend his hand, and take also from the tree of life, and eat, and live forever” (Genesis 3:22). “The Lord God said: Behold, the man [hen haadam] has become as one of us [mimenu]” – “I heard a holy one speaking, and the holy one said to Palmoni who was speaking…” (Daniel 8:13). “I heard [a holy] one” – this is the Holy One blessed be He, as it is stated: “Hear, Israel: The Lord is our God, the Lord is one” (Deuteronomy 6:4). “Holy” – because everyone says ‘holy’ before Him. “Speaking [medaber]” – he issued harsh edicts1“Speaking” [dibbur], as opposed to “saying” [amira] is used for harsh speech (Makkot 11a). against His creations: “Thorns and thistles it will grow for you” (Genesis 3:18). “And the holy one said to Palmoni who was speaking” – to so-and-so.2Palmoni refers to an anonymous person, or in this case, an angel. Akila the proselyte translated it [“to Palmoni”] as “to the innermost one [penimi]” – this is Adam the first man, whose station was more internal3Closer to God. than that of the ministering angels. “Until when will be the eternal vision?” (Daniel 8:13)4This is what Palmoni asked of God. – ‘Was the edict that was decreed upon Adam the first man to be eternal?’ he asked in astonishment. “And the desolating transgression” (Daniel 8:13) – will his transgression render him [permanently] desolate in the grave? “Giving the holy one and his host for trampling” (Daniel 8:13) – will he and his descendants be [forever] given for trampling before the angel of death? “He said to me: Until evening-morning two thousand three hundred…” (Daniel 8:14) – Rabbi Azaria and Rabbi Yonatan in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: Whenever it is evening it is not morning and whenever it is morning it is not evening.5Yet here the verse refers to “evening-morning,” as if they were simultaneous. However, when the morning of the idolaters becomes evening, and the evening of Israel becomes morning,6When the present good fortune of the idolaters turns to misfortune, and Israel’s present gloomy state turns to brightness. at that moment, “the holy one will be vindicated” (Daniel 8:14) – at that moment, I will absolve them [mankind] from that edict.7In the Messianic future, mankind will be released from Adam’s curses. That is what is written: “The Lord God said: Behold, the man has become as one of us.”8He is destined in the future to become as one of us.
That is what is written: “I have passed by the field of an indolent man [ish] and the vineyard of a person [adam] lacking heart” (Proverbs 24:30) – Rav Huna said: If someone bought a field and bought a vineyard, he is called ish  and he is called adam,9Which are terms of respect. yet he is also called “indolent” – what good is he? Rather, “I have passed by the field of an indolent man” – this is Adam the first man.10He was indolent in his failure to show remorse after his sin. “And the vineyard of a person [adam] lacking heart” – this is Eve. Rav Huna said: Where have we found that Eve was called adam? “Like the splendor of a person [adam], to sit in a house” (Isaiah 44:13).11She is the housewife (see Targum there). “And behold, it was all overgrown with thistles” (Proverbs 24:31) – “thorns and thistles it will grow for you” (Genesis 3:18). “Its surface covered with nettles” (Proverbs 24:31) – “by the sweat of your brow you shall eat bread” (Genesis 3:19). “And its stone fence destroyed” (Proverbs 24:31) – “the Lord God sent him out of the Garden of Eden” (Genesis 3:23). When He sent him away, He began lamenting over him: “The Lord God said: Behold, the man was as one of us” – he had been like one of us.12But has now brought about his own downfall.
“Though his exaltedness ascends to the heavens, and his head reaches the clouds” (Job 20:6) – “though his exaltedness ascends to the heavens” – his stature; “and his head reaches the clouds” – until it reaches the clouds. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Rabbi Ḥanina and Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Elazar: He created him [Adam] filling the entire world from east to west, as it is stated: “Back and front You shaped me” (Psalms 139:5). From north to south, from where is it derived? “[From the day God made Adam on the earth,] and from one end of the heavens to the other end” (Deuteronomy 4:32). From where is it derived that he even filled the space of the world? The verse states: “You placed Your palm upon me” (Psalms 139:5). “He will perish forever like his dung [kegelelo]” (Job 20:7) – because he rolled away [galal] a minor commandment, he was expelled from the garden of Eden. “They who saw him will say: Where is he?” (Job 20:7) – that is Adam. When He sent him away, He began lamenting over him and saying: “Behold, the man…”
“You grant him power forever, and he is gone; You alter his countenance and send him away” (Job 14:20) – the power that the Holy One blessed be He gave to Adam the first man was “forever” – it was eternal. But once he forsook the mindset of the Holy One blessed be He and followed the mindset of the serpent – “alter his countenance and send him away.” When He sent him away, He began lamenting over him: “The Lord God said: Behold, the man was as one of us.”
Rabbi Papus expounded: “Behold, the man has become as one of us” – like one of the ministering angels. Rabbi Akiva said to him: Enough, Papus.13Were that the case, it would have said: “Has become as one of you.” He said to him: How then do you explain: “Behold, the man has become as one of us”? He said to him: That the Holy One blessed be He gave him two paths, the path of life and the path of death, and he selected for himself another path.14He chose the path of death. Mimenu is interpreted as “from him.” He chose “one” path, by himself.  Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: Like the Unique One of the world, as it is stated: “Hear, Israel, the Lord is our God the Lord is one” (Deuteronomy 6:4). The Rabbis say: Like Gavriel, as it is stated: “And behold, one man dressed in linen” (Daniel 10:5) – like this grasshopper whose garment is an intrinsic part of him.15This is according to the opinion that before the sin, Adam and Eve were covered with a fingernail-like covering. All of these opinions focus on the word haya and interpret it as “was” – now that he sinned, he is no longer. Reish Lakish said: Like Jonah – just as this one fled from his mission, as it is stated: “Jonah rose to flee to Tarshish from before the Lord” (Jonah 1:3), so, too, that one fled from fulfilling the command of the Omnipresent. Just as this one did not spend the night in his glory,16The verse: “The word of the Lord was with Jonah a second time, saying” (Jonah 3:1), is expounded to mean that He spoke to him a second time but not a third time. That is, Jonah lost his prophetic spirit on that very day. so, too, that one did not spend the night in his glory.  Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: Like Elijah – just as this one did not taste the taste of death, so, too, that one was not supposed to taste the taste of death. This is the opinion of Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Ḥanin, who said: As long as he was Adam, he was as one.17Like Elijah, one, in the sense of the special one. Once his side was taken from him [to form Eve] – “to know good and evil.”
“And now, he might extend his hand” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: This teaches that the Holy One blessed be He opened for him an opportunity for repentance. “And now” – “and now” is nothing other than repentance, as it is stated: “And now, Israel, what does the Lord your God [ask of you? Only to fear the Lord your God, to walk in all His ways…]” (Deuteronomy 10:12). But he [Adam] said: “Might [pen]” – and pen is nothing other than no. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Will he now extend his hand and eat from the tree of life?’ It was a rhetorical question. And if he eats, he will live forever. Therefore, “the Lord God sent him out of the Garden of Eden” (Genesis 3:23). When He sent him away, He began lamenting over him and said: “Behold, the man has become as one of us.”
“The Lord God sent him out of the Garden of Eden, to cultivate the ground from which he was taken” (Genesis 3:23). “The Lord God sent him out of the Garden of Eden” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: He sent him out of the Garden of Eden in this world, and he [also] sent him out of the Garden of Eden of the World to Come. Rabbi Neḥemya said: He sent him out of the Garden of Eden in this world, but not that of the World to Come. According to Rabbi Yehuda’s opinion, He dealt with him harshly. According to Rabbi Neḥemya’s opinion, He dealt with him mercifully. Rabbi Huna said: Rabbi Ada bar Ahava and Rabbi Hamnuna disagreed. One said in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda, and one said in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Neḥemya. The following supports Rabbi Neḥemya: “I, in justice [betzedek], will see Your face; Your image will fill my waking vision” (Psalms 17:15). When the one who was created in Your image awakens, at that moment, “I, in justice [betzedek], will see Your face” – at that moment I will exonerate him from that decree. At that moment, “behold, the man has become as one of us.” Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: When He created him, He created him through the attribute of justice and the attribute of mercy, and when He expelled him, He expelled him through the attribute of justice and the attribute of mercy.18Concerning both Adam’s creation and his banishment, God is referred to as “Hashem Elohim,” indicating His attribute of mercy and His attribute of strict justice. “Hen haadam” – O Adam [hah haadam], were you unable to observe your command for even one hour? It was a rhetorical question. Rabbi Yehuda ben Pedaya expounded: Who will remove the dust from your eyes, Adam the first man,19This is what people will say of Adam in future generations, after he was dead and buried. and reveal that you were unable to observe the command for even one hour? Your descendants wait for orla20It is prohibited to eat fruit that grows on a tree during the first three years after it is planted. That fruit is called orla. three years, as it is stated: “Three years it shall be sealed off for you; it shall not be eaten” (Leviticus 19:23).21You were unable to be even “like one of us” of the later generations. Rav Huna said: When bar Kappara heard this, he said: You have expounded well, my sister’s son.
“He banished the man; He stationed the cherubs east of the Garden of Eden, and the flame of the ever-turning sword, to guard the path of the tree of life” (Genesis 3:24). “He banished [vaygaresh] the man” – Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Like a priest’s daughter22Who married a priest. who was divorced [nitgarsha] and cannot return.23She cannot return to her husband because it is prohibited for a priest to marry a divorcee. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: Like an Israelite’s daughter24Who married an Israelite. who was divorced and can return. According to Rabbi Yoḥanan’s opinion, He dealt with him harshly. According to Reish Lakish’s opinion, He dealt with him mercifully. Another matter, “He banished” – He showed him the destruction of the Temple, just as it says: “He has ground [vayagres] my teeth with gravel” (Lamentations 3:16). Rabbi Luleyani bar Tavri said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: He banished him to an empty field [migrash] adjacent to Eden and deployed guards there to guard it. That is what is written: “I will command the clouds from pouring rain upon it” (Isaiah 5:6).25That passage deals with God’s disappointment with Israel, who is compared to a derelict vineyard. This reflects God’s disappointment with Adam, and the need to post guards to keep him from returning to the Garden.
“East” – Rav said: In every place, the eastern direction offers refuge. Adam the first man – “He banished the man; He stationed the cherubs east of the Garden of Eden.” Cain – “Cain departed from the presence of the Lord, and lived in the land of Nod, east of Eden” (Genesis 4:16). The killer – “Then, Moses designated three cities on the eastern side of the Jordan [that a killer may flee there who kills his neighbor unwittingly]” (Deuteronomy 4:41–42). Another matter, “[He stationed the cherubs] east [mikedem] [of the Garden of Eden]” – the angels were created before [kodem] the Garden of Eden. That is what is written: “This was the Ḥaya angel that I had seen beneath the God of Israel at the Kevar River, and I knew that they were cherubs” (Ezekiel 10:20).26This verse proves that “cherubs” are angels. “And the flame” – based on: “His servants are flaming fires” (Psalms 104:4). “The ever-turning [hamithapekhet]” – as they [angels] have various forms [mithapekhim], sometimes men, sometimes women, sometimes winds, sometimes angels. Another matter, “mikedem” – Gehenna27Alluded to here by the flaming sword, as the Midrash will explain. was created before [mikodem] the Garden of Eden; Gehenna on the second day and the Garden of Eden on the third. “And the flame [lahat] of the ever-turning sword” – based on: “The day that is coming will burn [velihat] them” (Malachi 3:19). “Ever-turning”– as it turns over upon the person and burns him from head to toe and from toe to head. Adam said: ‘Who will save my descendants from this fire?’ Rabbi Huna said in the name of Rabbi Abba: The sword of circumcision, as it is stated: “Make flint swords for yourself [and circumcise the children of Israel]” (Joshua 5:2). The Rabbis say: The sword of Torah, as it is stated: “And a double-edged sword in their hand” (Psalms 149:6). When Adam saw that his descendants were destined to descend to Gehenna, he restrained himself from procreation. But when he saw that after twenty-six generations Israel was destined to receive the Torah, He consorted in order to produce descendants, as it is stated: “The man was intimate with Eve, his wife” (Genesis 4:1).

=== 22 | 22 ===
“And the man was intimate with Eve his wife and she conceived and gave birth to Cain, and said: I have acquired a man with the Lord” (Genesis 4:1). And the man was intimate with Eve his wife” – “Remember, Lord, Your mercy and kindness, for they are eternal” (Psalms 25:6). They are not from now, but rather, they are eternal. Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya said: With them You conducted Yourself with Adam the first man, as You said to him: “As on the day that you eat of it you shall die” (Genesis 2:17). Had You not given him one of Your days, which is one thousand years,1Psalms 90:4. how could he have consorted to produce offspring?
“And the man was intimate [vehaadam yada]” – Rabbi Huna and Rabbi Yaakov bar Avin said in the name of Rabbi Abba bar Kahana: No creature engaged in cohabitation before Adam the first man – vayeda is not written here, but rather, “vehaadam yada Eve his wife”2Adam is mentioned before the verb, indicating that Adam was the first to engage in intercourse. – he taught the means of cohabitation to all. Another matter, “[He banished the man…] and the man was intimate [yada] [with Eve [ḥava]]” (Genesis 3:23–4:1) – he realized [yada] from what tranquility he had been displaced, and he realized [yada] what Eve had done to him. Rav Aḥa said [of Eve]: The serpent was your serpent and you were Adam’s serpent [ḥivia].3That is, the serpent was the cause of your downfall, and you, in turn, were the cause of Adam’s downfall. “She conceived and gave birth to Cain” – Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya said: Three miracles occurred on that day. On that day they were created, on that day they cohabited, and on that day they produced offspring Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa said: Two people went up into the bed and seven descended: Cain and his twin sister and Abel and his two twin sisters. “And said: I have acquired a man with [et] the Lord” – when a woman bears children, she says: I have now acquired my husband4Ish (translated in the verse as “man”) can also mean husband. into my possession. Rabbi Yishmael asked Rabbi Akiva, saying to him: Because you studied under Naḥum of Gam Zo for twenty-two years, [who taught:] The words akh and rak are restrictive expressions, et and gam are inclusive expressions, [I ask you:] What is the meaning of the et that is written here? He said: Had it been written: Kaniti ish Hashem it would have been difficult,5Omitting et, It would have implied that she had acquired the Holy One blessed be He. so instead, it stated “with God” [et Hashem].6Thus, et is not superfluous here, and no teaching should be derived from its use.  He said to him: “For it is not an empty matter for you [mikem]” (Deuteronomy 32:47) – if it is empty, it is because of you [mikem],7If you find something in the Torah that appears devoid of significance, it is because of your own ignorance. because you do not know how to expound. Rather, et Hashem – previously, Adam was created from earth and Eve was created from Adam. But from now on, [Eve said,] offspring will come about in our image and in our likeness – a man will not [produce offspring] without woman, nor will a woman without a man, nor both of them without the Divine Presence.8Kaniti ish et Hashem means: I have acquired this child through a man and through God.
“She gave birth once again, to his brother Abel. Abel was a shepherd, and Cain was a cultivator of the ground” (Genesis 4:2). “She gave birth once again, to his brother Abel” – this supports Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa, who said: Two entered the bed and seven descended.9Eve gave birth to five children at one time. “She gave birth once again, to his brother Abel” – she gave birth once again, but did not become pregnant once again. “Abel was a shepherd, and Cain was a cultivator of the ground” – there were three people who were enthusiastic about the earth, but ultimately their efforts were of no avail. They are: Cain – “a cultivator of the land”; Noah – “Noah, man of the soil, began …” (Genesis 9:20); Uziyahu – “He had farmers and viticulturists in the mountains and on the fertile lands, as he was a lover of the soil” (II Chronicles 26:10).10Cain became a murderer; Noah, a drunkard; and Uziyahu, a leper.
“It was, after some time, Cain brought an offering of the fruit of the ground to the Lord” (Genesis 4:3). “It was, after some time” – Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua, Rabbi Eliezer said: The world was created in Tishrei. Rabbi Yehoshua said: The world was created in Nisan. The one who says the world was created in Tishrei, Abel was alive from Sukkot until Hanukkah. According to the one who said the world was created in Nisan, Abel was alive from Passover until Shavuot. Both according to this opinion and according to that opinion, Abel did not live more than fifty11A variant reading has seventy days. days.
“Cain brought an offering of the fruit of the ground  to the Lord” – from the refuse. This is analogous to a malevolent sharecropper who eats the ripe fruit himself and provides the field owner with the unripe fruit. “And Abel, he, too, brought from the firstborn of his flock and from their fats, and the Lord turned to Abel and to his offering” (Genesis 4:4). “And Abel, he, too, brought from the firstborn of his flock and from their fats [umeḥelvehen]” – Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina, Rabbi Elazar said: The children of Noah12A term denoting all people before the giving of the Torah, and all non-Jews thereafter. sacrificed [even] peace offerings. Rabbi Yosei said: They sacrificed only burnt offerings. Rabbi Elazar raised an objection to Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina: But is it not written: “And Abel, he, too, brought from the firstborn of his flock and from their fats” – referring to something whose fats are sacrificed?13Namely, a peace offering. What does Rabbi Yosei do about this? He explains it: From the fattest among them. Rabbi Elazar raised an objection to Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina: But is it not written: “He sent the young men of the children of Israel and they offered up burnt offerings and they slaughtered peace offerings (shelamim) of bulls to the Lord”? (Exodus 24:5). What does Rabbi Yosei do about this? They14They brought only burnt offerings, but those were offered up whole. were whole (shelemim), as they did not undergo flaying and cutting.15Only the burnt offerings sacrificed after the Torah was given required flaying and cutting. Rabbi Elazar raised an objection to Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina: But is it not written: “Yitro, father in law of Moses, took a burnt offering and feast offerings to God”? (Exodus 18:12). What does Rabbi Yosei do about this? It is according to the one who said: Yitro came after the giving of the Torah. Rav Huna said: Rabbi Yanai and Rabbi Ḥiyya Rabba disagreed. Rabbi Yanai said Yitro came before the giving of the Torah. Rabbi Ḥiyya Rabba said: He came after the giving of the Torah. Rabbi Ḥanina said: They do not disagree:16Their dispute was not based on their interpretation of that passage, but is a consequence of a dispute about a different matter. The one who said that he came before the giving of the Torah holds that the descendants of Noah sacrificed peace offerings, and the one who said that he came after the giving of the Torah holds that they sacrificed [only] burnt offerings. This supports Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina: “Awake north” (Song of Songs 4:16)17This verse alludes to the time of the beginning of the sacrificial service in the Tabernacle. – this refers to the burnt offering that was slaughtered in the north.18Leviticus 1:11. What is meant by “awake”? Something that was dormant and is now re-awakened. “And come south” (Song of Songs 4:16) – this is the peace offering that could be slaughtered in the south. What is meant by “and come”? Something that was a new concept. Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: This verse supports Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina, as it is written: “This is the law of the burnt offering: that is the burnt offering” (Leviticus 6:2) – which the descendants of Noah used to sacrifice. But when it comes to the peace offering: “This is the law of the peace offering that one will sacrifice to the Lord” (Leviticus 7:11) – “that they sacrificed” is not written here, but rather, “that one will sacrifice”; from here on.
“The Lord turned to Abel and to his offering” – He was contented with him [personally].19Abel and his offering are listed separately, and of both it is stated that God “turned toward” them. “But to Cain and to his offering He did not turn. Cain was very incensed, and his face became downcast” (Genesis 4:5). “But to Cain and to his offering He did not turn” – He was not contented with him. “Cain was very incensed (vayiḥar), and his face became downcast” – it became like fire.20Vayiḥar can also mean “he was burning.” “The Lord said to Cain: Why are you incensed, and why did your face become downcast?” (Genesis 4:6). “Truly, if you do good, it will be lifted up, and if you do not do good, sin crouches at the entrance and its desire is for you, but you may rule over it” (Genesis 4:7). “The Lord said to Cain: Why are you incensed, and why did your face become downcast? Truly, if you do good, it will be lifted up [se’et]” – blessing, as it says: “Aaron raised [vayisa] his hands toward the people, and blessed them” (Leviticus 9:22). “And if you do not do good,” there will [also] be se’et – a curse, as it is written: “They will cause them to bear [vehisiu] the iniquity of guilt” (Leviticus 22:16). Another matter, “if you do good,” I will forgive you all your sins,21Se’et in the sense of noseh avon – bearing iniquity. but if not, the sin of that man will be overflowing.22Se’et in the sense of se’a – a large dry measure. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Ami: “A contemplation by David. Happy is he whose crime is forgiven [nesui], whose sin is pardoned” (Psalms 32:1). Happy is the man who stands above his transgression23Nesui literally means raised. and his transgression does not stand above him,24He subdues the temptation to sin, and not vice versa. as it is stated: “Sin [ḥatat] crouches [rovetz] at the entrance.” Ḥatat rovetzet is not written here, but rather, ḥatat rovetz.25Ḥatat rovetzet – the subject and the verb are both feminine. Ḥatat rovetz – the verb is masculine. Initially, it26The evil inclination. is weak like a female, but then it becomes strong like a male. Rabbi Akiva said: Initially it is similar to a spider web, but ultimately, it is like a ship’s rope. That is what is written: “Woe to those who pull iniquity with cords of pointlessness, and sin like the rope of a wagon” (Isaiah 5:18). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Initially it has the status of a guest, but ultimately, it becomes the master of the house. That is what is written [in the prophet’s rebuke of David for succumbing to temptation]: “He was loath to take from his flock or his cattle to prepare for the guest who had come to him” (II Samuel 12:4) – this is the guest; “and he took the ewe of the poor man and prepared it for the man who had come to him” (II Samuel 12:4) – this is the master of the house. Rabbi Tanḥum bar Meryon said: There are dogs in Rome who know how to work at sustaining themselves. They go and sit before the bakery and pretend to be dozing. Then, the owner of the bakery dozes off, and they knock the loaves onto the ground. While he is collecting them, they take a loaf and flee with it. Rabbi Abba said: The evil inclination is similar to a hunched robber27He feigned weakness, so that people would approach him unaware. who was sitting at a crossroads. To everyone who passed, he would say: ‘Give me what you have with you.’ A certain clever person passed, and he realized that he had no hope of robbing him of anything, and the man began beating him back. So, too, the evil inclination caused the demise of several generations: The generation of Enosh, the generation of the Dispersion, and the generation of the Flood. When Abraham our patriarch stood and [the evil inclination] saw that it had no hope against him, he began beating it back. That is what is written:28Regarding Abraham. “I will beat his foes before him and smite those who hate him” (Psalms 89:24). Rabbi Ami said: The evil inclination does not walk on the sides of the street but rather in the middle of the highway. When it sees a person beautifying his eyes, fixing his hair, and raising his heels,29All these are conduct indicating that this is a haughty person. it says: ‘This one is mine.’ What is the source? “Have you seen a man wise in his own eyes? There is more hope for a fool than for him” (Proverbs 26:12). Rabbi Avin said: Anyone who indulges his evil inclination in his youth, it will ultimately become his master in his old age. What is the source? “One who indulges his servant from youth, will have him ultimately become the master” (Proverbs 29:21). Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa said: If your evil inclination comes to make a fool of you, fend it off with matters of Torah, if you do so, I will ascribe to you as though you created peace,30From ‘if you do so’ to ‘created peace’ are extraneous words and should be deleted (Etz Yosef). as it is stated: “If the inclination is near, protect yourself (titzor) with peace, [with peace]” (Isaiah 26:3). If you do so, I will ascribe to you as though you created peace. “With peace” is not written here, but rather, “with peace, with peace” (Isaiah 26:3).31Protect yourself with peace, and it is as though you created peace. And if you say it is not under your control, the verse states: “Because you can rely on yourself” (Isaiah 26:3). And I already wrote for you in the Torah: “Its desire is for you, but you may rule over it…” (Genesis 4:7).  Rabbi Simon said: Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa said: If your evil inclination comes to make a fool of you, cause it to rejoice with matters of Torah, as it is stated: “If the inclination is near, protect yourself (titzor) with peace.” If you do so, I will ascribe to you as though you created (yatzarta) two worlds.32Interpreting titzor as “create” rather than “protect yourself.” “Titzor peace” alone is not written here, but rather, “peace, peace. And if you say it is not under your control, I already wrote in the Torah: “Its desire is for you, [but you may rule over it].”
“Cain said to Abel his brother. It was when they were in the field. Cain rose up against Abel his brother and killed him” (Genesis 4:8).  “Cain said to Abel his brother. It was when they were…” – about what were they quarreling? They said: ‘Let us divide the world between us.’ One took the land and one took the movable property. This one said: ‘The land on which you are standing is mine.’ That one said: ‘What you are wearing is mine.’ That one said: ‘Take it off.’ This one said: ‘Fly.’ As a result: “Cain rose up against Abel his brother and killed him.” Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Both of them took the land and both of them took the movable property. Regarding what, then, were they quarreling? Rather, this one said: ‘The Temple shall be built in my domain,’ and that one said: ‘The Temple shall be built in my domain,’ as it is stated: “It was when they were in the field,” and “field” is nothing other than the Temple, as it says: “Zion will be plowed like a field” (Micah 3:12). As a result: “Cain rose up against Abel his brother…” Yehuda bar Rabbi said: They were quarreling over [who would wed] the first Eve.33See Bereshit Rabba 17:7, 18:4. Rabbi Aivu said: The first Eve had returned to dust. Regarding what, then, were they quarreling? Rabbi Huna said: An extra twin sister was born with Abel.34Two sisters were born together with Abel. This one [Cain] said: ‘I will take her, as I am the firstborn.’ That one [Abel] said: ‘I will take her, as she was born with me.’ As a result: “Cain rose up.”
Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Abel was stronger than Cain, as the verse need not have stated: “rose up.” Rather, it teaches that he had been situated underneath him. He [Cain] said to him: ‘There are the two of us in the world, what will you go and say to Father?’35If you kill me. He [Abel] became filled with mercy for him [and released him]. Immediately, he [Cain] rose up against him and killed him. From there they say: Do not do a favor for a wicked person, and evil will not befall you.  “And killed him” – with what did he kill him? Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: He killed him with a stick, as it is stated: “Or [have I slain] a child by my bruise?” (Genesis 4:23)36Lemekh was telling his wives here that he, unlike Cain, did not kill anyone by inflicting a bruise. – an item that causes a bruise. The Rabbis say: He killed him with a stone, as it is stated: “Have I slain a man by my wound?” (Genesis 4:23) – an item that causes wounds. Rabbi Azarya and Rabbi Yonatan bar Ḥagai said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: Cain looked from where his father had slaughtered that bull in whose regard it is stated: “And may it be pleasing to the Lord like an ox and bull” (Psalms 69:32), and he killed him from there, from the place of the neck, from the place of the signs.37The trachea and the esophagus are the human counterparts of the animal’s windpipe and gullet, which are referred to as an animals’s ‘signs.’ During ritual slaughter, one must cut a majority of each of these ‘signs’ to render the animal kosher. Who buried him? Rabbi Elazar ben Pedat said: The birds of the heavens and the kosher beasts buried him, and the Holy One blessed be He rewarded them with the two blessings that one recites over them – one for slaughter and one for covering the blood.38See Leviticus 17:13.
Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: It is written, “The wicked draw their swords [and stretch their bows to topple the poor and the needy, to slaughter those who are upright in conduct]” (Psalms 37:14). “The wicked draw their swords and stretch their bows” – this is Cain. “To topple the poor and the needy, to slaughter those who are upright in conduct” – this is Abel. “Their swords will come into their own hearts” (Psalms 37:15) – “restless and itinerant you shall be on the earth” (Genesis 4:12). “The Lord said to Cain: Where is Abel your brother? He said: I do not know; am I my brother's keeper?” (Genesis 4:9). “The Lord said to Cain: Where is Abel your brother?” This is analogous to a governor who was walking in the middle of a highway. He found a slain corpse with someone standing over him. He said to him: ‘Who killed him?’ He said to him: ‘I am inquiring about him from you, and you are inquiring about him from me?’39You are responsible for the welfare of the people in your realm, not I. I should be questioning you, not you me. He said to him: ‘What you have said is of no consequence.’40My question was not to elicit information from you; it was rhetorical. I know that you must have killed him.  “He said: What have you done? The voice of your brother’s blood is crying out to Me from the ground” (Genesis 4:10). This is analogous to one who entered a garden, picked berries, and ate them. The owner of the garden pursued him. He said: ‘What is in your hand?’ He said to him: ‘There is nothing in my hand.’ He said to him: ‘But your hands are stained.’ So, Cain said to the Holy One blessed be He: “Am I my brother’s keeper?” The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Wicked one, “The voice of your brother’s blood is crying out…”’ (Genesis 4:10). This is analogous to one who entered a pasture, abducted a goat, and held it behind him. The owner of the pasture pursued him. He said to him: ‘What is in your hand?’ He said: ‘There is nothing in my hand.’ He said to him: ‘But it is bleating behind you.’ So, the Holy One blessed be He said to Cain: “The voice of your brother’s blood…” Rabbi Yudan, Rabbi Huna, and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yudan says: “Your brother’s blood [dam]”41Singular. is not written here, but rather, “Your brother’s bloods [damim]” – his blood and the blood of his potential descendants. Rabbi Huna said: “The bloods [demei] of Navot” (II Kings 9:26). “The blood of Navot and the blood of his sons” is not written here, but rather, “the bloods [demei] of Navot and the bloods [demei] of his sons” – his blood and the blood of his potential descendants. The Rabbis say: “For the blood of [the sons of] Yehoyada…he died” (II Chronicles 24:25) is not written here, but rather, “the bloods of Yehoyada” – his blood and the blood of his potential descendants. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: It is difficult to say it, and it is impossible for the mouth to enunciate it: This is analogous to two athletes who were standing and wrestling before the king. Had the king wished, he could have separated them, but the king did not wish to separate them. One overpowered his counterpart and killed him. He [the victim] was screaming and saying: ‘Who will demand justice for me before the king?’42The king is responsible for my death because he did not separate us. So, “the voice of your brother’s blood is crying out to Me from the ground.” It [Abel’s soul] could not ascend On High because no soul had ever ascended to there yet. And it could not go down [into the ground] and remain there, as no man had ever been buried there, so his blood was cast upon the trees and upon the stones.43Thus it is stated “from the ground,” as opposed to “from beneath the ground.”
“Now, you are cursed from the ground that opened its mouth to take your brother's blood from your hand” (Genesis 4:11). “Now, you are cursed” – Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: In three places the verse spoke tersely.44Without details. “Now you are cursed”; “if the Lord will create a creation” (Numbers 16:30); “I opened my mouth to the Lord” (Judges 11:35).45The verse does not specify what this curse was, nor which creation the Lord would make, not what came from Yiftaḥ’s mouth. “When you cultivate the ground, it will not continue giving its strength to you; restless and itinerant you shall be on the earth” (Genesis 4:12). “When you cultivate the ground, it will not continue giving its strength to you” – Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Yosei ben Rabbi Ḥanina, Rabbi Elazar said: To you it will not give, but to others it will give. Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: Neither to you nor to others. Similarly, “Much seed you will take out to the field, [but little you will gather]” (Deuteronomy 28:38) – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: One would plant one se’a  and gather in one se’a. Rabbi Neḥemya said: If so, from where would he earn a livelihood? Rather, that which is fit to produce twenty units will produce sixteen, and that which is fit to produce ten will produce five. Alternatively, “When you cultivate the ground, it will not continue giving its strength to you” – its strength it will not give to you, but your strength it will give to you.46It will produce in accordance with the exertion and toil that you invest. All your strength it will not give you; it will give you some of your strength.47You will produce enough to subsist, but not to live in comfort.
“Cain said to the Lord: “Is my iniquity too great to bear?” (Genesis 4:13). “Cain said to the Lord: “Is my iniquity too great to bear?” (Genesis 4:13). You bear the upper worlds and the lower worlds, but You are unable to bear my transgression?  Another matter, My iniquity is greater than Father’s. Father violated a lesser commandment and was expelled from the Garden of Eden. This [what I have done] is the severe transgression of bloodshed, all the more so that my iniquity is great.48Cain was not questioning the punishment. Rather, he was confessing his sin. “Behold, You have banished me today from the face of the land and from Your face shall I be hidden, and I will be restless and itinerant on the earth and anyone who finds me will kill me” (Genesis 4:14). “Behold, You have banished” – yesterday You banished Father,49Hence “have banished,” in the past tense. and today you are banishing me; “Behold, You have banished me today.” Can I possibly be hidden from Your face, being restless and itinerant on the earth…?
“The Lord said to him: Therefore, anyone who kills Cain, vengeance will be taken on him sevenfold. The Lord placed a sign for Cain, so that anyone who would find him would not smite him” (Genesis 4:15). “The Lord said to him: Therefore, anyone who kills Cain” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: The animals, the beasts, and the birds all gathered to demand justice for Abel’s blood. He [God] said to them: “Therefore”50Because of your actions. I am saying: “Anyone who kills Cain” will be killed. Rabbi Levi said: The primeval serpent came to demand justice for Abel. The Holy One blessed be He said to it: “Therefore” I am saying: “Anyone who kills Cain” will be killed. Rabbi Neḥemya said: Cain’s sentence was unlike the sentence of murderers,51He was not sentenced to death like other murderers. as he had no one from whom he could learn. From here on, “anyone who kills Cain” will be killed. “The Lord placed a sign for Cain” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: “He caused the orb of the sun to shine for him.52Regarding the creation of the lights, including the sun, it is written: “They will be as signs” (Genesis 1:14). Rabbi Neḥemya said: Would the Holy One blessed be He cause the orb of the sun to shine on behalf of that wicked one? Rather, it teaches that he caused leprosy to glow on him, just as you say: “It will be that if they do not believe you, and do not heed the voice of [the first] sign, [they will believe the voice of the latter sign]” (Exodus 4:8).53The latter sign was leprosy, indicating that leprosy is called a sign.  Rav said: He gave him [Cain] a dog. Abba Yosei ben Kesari said: He caused a horn to sprout forth for him.54Both the dog and the horn were intended to ensure “that anyone who would find him would not smite him.”  Rav said: He rendered him a “sign” for murderers.55To warn others not to follow Cain’s practice. Rabbi Ḥanin said: He rendered him a “sign” for penitents.56For others to follow his practice. Cain confessed his sin (see section 11). Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish: His sentence was pending until the Flood came and washed him away, as it is stated: “He obliterated all existence [haykum] that was on the face of the earth” (Genesis 7:23), just as it says: “Cain rose [vayakam]” (Genesis 4:8).
“Cain departed [vayetze] from the presence of the Lord, and lived in the land of Nod, east of Eden” (Genesis 4:16). “Cain departed from the presence of the Lord” – from where did he depart?57God’s presence is everywhere. Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Rabbi Aivu: He cast the words58God’s rebuke. behind him and departed, as though deceiving the Most High. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Elazar ben Rabbi Shimon: He departed as one who shows a split hoof,59The pig seeks to create the impression that it is kosher because it has split hooves, even though it lacks the other, hidden, requirement of kashrut, as it does not chew its cud. So, Cain pretended to be humbled, but remained arrogant. and as one who deceives his Creator. Rabbi Ḥama said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina bar Rabbi Yitzḥak: He departed joyfully, just as it says: “Here he is going out [yotze] to meet you [and he will see you and he will rejoice in his heart]” (Exodus 4:14). Adam the first man encountered him. He said to him: ‘What became of your sentence?’ He said to him: ‘I repented and reached a settlement.’ Adam the first man began beating himself on the face, saying: ‘Such is the power of repentance, and I did not know.’ Immediately, Adam the first man stood and said: “A psalm, a song for the Shabbat day…” (Psalms 92:1). Rabbi Levi said: Adam the first man said this Psalm, but it was forgotten from his generation, and Moses came and reintroduced it in his own name:60Psalms 90–100 are attributed to Moses (Bava Batra 14b and Rashi). Moreover, the first letters of the words of the verse: Mizmor shir leyom haShabbat – mem, shin, lamed, heh – can be combined to create leMoshe – to Moses. “A psalm, a song for the Shabbat61Shabbat is expounded in the sense of repentance [teshuva]. day. It is good to give thanks [lehodot]62Lehodot is expounded in the sense of confession [vidui]. to the Lord…” (Psalms 92:1–2).

=== 23 | 23 ===
“Cain was intimate with his wife and she conceived, and gave birth to Ḥanokh; he was the builder of a city, and he called the name of the city after the name of his son Ḥanokh” (Genesis 4:17). “Cain was intimate with his wife.” “Their houses will endure in their midst forever” (Psalms 49:12). Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Pinḥas, Rabbi Yudan said: What do the wicked believe? “Their houses will endure in their midst forever…they name their lands after themselves” (Psalms 49:12); Tiberias after Tiberius, Alexandria after Alexander, Antioch after Antiochus. Rabbi Pinḥas said: “Their houses will endure in their midst (kirbam) forever”; tomorrow their house will become their graves (kivram). “Their abodes will remain for all generations” (Psalms 49:12), as they will neither live nor be judged [at the resurrection].1The grave will be their “abode for all generations.” Moreover, “they name their lands after themselves” – “he was the builder of a city, and he called the name of the city after the name of his son Ḥanokh.”
“Irad was born to Hanokh and Irad begot Mehuyael and Mehuyael begot Metushael and Metushael begot Lemekh” (Genesis 4:18). “Irad was born to Hanokh…” – Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: These are all expressions of rebellion.2The meanings of their names express God’s reactions to rebellion. Irad – ‘I will expel them [ored] from the world’; Meḥuyael – ‘I will eradicate them [moḥeh] from the world’; Metushael – ‘I will uproot them [metish] from the world’; Lemekh – ‘What do I have to do with Lemekh3Lemekh is an acronym for ‘ma li valakh’ – ‘what need do I have of you?’ and his offspring?’ “Lemekh took for himself two wives; the name of one was Ada, and the name of the other Tzila” (Genesis 4:20). Rabbi Azarya said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon: This is what the people of the generation of the Flood would do: Each one would take two wives for himself, one for procreation and one for intercourse. The one that was designated for procreation would sit as though she were a widow in her lifetime [variant reading: in the life of her husband]. The one that was designated for intercourse, he would give her a sterility potion so she would not bear children, and she would sit by him adorned like a harlot. That is what is written: “He consorts with the barren who will not give birth, and to the widow he will do no good” (Job 24:21). You may know that it is so, as Lemekh was the most outstanding among them and he took two wives. That is what is written: “Lemekh took for himself two wives; the name of one was Ada” – as she was removed [ada] from him; “and the name of the other Tzila” – as she was sitting in his shadow [tzilo].
“Ada bore Yaval; he was the forerunner of those who dwell in tents and raise livestock (mikneh). And the name of his brother was Yuval; he was the forerunner of all those who handle the harp and flute” (Genesis 4:20–21). “Ada bore Yaval; [he was the forerunner of those who dwell in tents and raise livestock (mikneh)]” – initially, they would infuriate (makneh) the Holy One blessed be He discreetly;4In “the tents,” i.e. in private. then they proceeded to infuriate him publicly.5With musical accompaniment, with “the harp and flute.” That is what is written: “Where there was the seat of the infuriating (kin’a) image” (Ezekiel 8:3). “And the name of his brother was Yuval; he was the forerunner of all those who handle the harp and flute” (Genesis 4:21) – harpists and flutists.6They would play the instruments in rites of idol worship. “And Tzila, too, gave birth, to Tuval Cain, a forger of every sharp instrument of bronze and iron, and the sister of Tuval Cain was Naama” (Genesis 4:22). “And Tzila, too, gave birth, to Tuval Cain.” Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: This one improved upon [tibel] Cain’s transgression; Cain killed, but he did not have an instrument with which to kill, but this one was “a forger of every sharp instrument of bronze and iron.”7He developed weapons suitable for killing. “And the sister of Tuval Cain was Naama.” Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Naama was Noah’s wife. Why did they call her Naama? It is because her actions were pleasing [ne’imim]. The Rabbis say: Naama was someone else, [not Noah’s wife].8Being Cain’s descendant, she must have perished in the Flood, and could not have been Noah’s wife. And why did they call her Naama? It is because she played the tambourine pleasantly [man’emet] for idol worship.
“Lemekh said to his wives, Ada and Tzila: Hear my voice, wives of Lemekh, listen to my speech, for have I slain a man for my wound or a child for my injury?” (Genesis 4:23) “Lemekh said to his wives, Ada and Tzila: Hear my voice.” Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: He propositioned them for intercourse, but they said to him: ‘Tomorrow the Flood is coming [to destroy all mankind]. Shall we heed you and bring forth children only to be cursed?’ He said to them: ‘“Have I slain a man for my wound,” that wounds should befall me on his account? “[Have I slain] a child for my injury,” that injuries should befall me on his account?’ This was a rhetorical question: Cain committed murder and yet [his punishment] was suspended for him for seven generations;9Genesis 4:15. I, who did not kill anyone, all the more so [punishment] should be suspended for me for that.10For seventy-seven generations (Genesis 4:24). Hence, you may be assured that no harm will befall your future offspring. Rabbi says: This is a flawed a fortiori argument: If so, from whom would the Holy One blessed be He ever collect His promissory note?11To destroy Cain’s descendants after seven generations. Rabbi Yaakov bar Idi asked before Rabbi Yoḥanan: If “a man,” why “a child”; if “a child,” why “a man”?12Lemekh protested that he, unlike Cain, did not kill a man and a child. Did Cain kill a man or a child? How could his victim be described with both terms? He said to him: He [Abel] was a man in terms of his limbs,13Abel was fully grown. but a child in terms of years.14Abel lived no more than fifty days (Bereshit Rabba 22:4). He [Lemekh] said to them: ‘Let us go to Adam.’ They went to Adam [for consultation]. He said to them: ‘You do yours and the Holy One blessed be He will do His.’15You must fulfill your duty to procreate, without regard to what God will do later. They said to him: ‘Doctor, heal your own lameness. Have you yourself not separated from Eve for a hundred and thirty years so that you should not produce a son from her?’ This was a rhetorical question. When he heard this, he consorted [with Eve] to produce offspring.
“Adam was further intimate with his wife and she gave birth to a son, and she called his name Seth: As God has provided me with another offspring in place of Abel, as Cain killed him” (Genesis 4:25). “Adam was further intimate with his wife,” extra desire was added for him to his desire. In the past, when he did not see her, he would not desire her. Now, whether he saw her or did not see her, he desired her. Rabbi Abba bar Yudan in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: This is an allusion for seafarers, that they will eventually remember their homes and come immediately. “She called his name Seth [Shet]: As God has provided [shat] me with another offspring.” Rabbi Tanḥuma said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel: She was looking ahead at that offspring who would come from a different place. Who is that? It is the messianic king.16The Messiah, like all mankind, will descend from Seth, and he will set up the foundations (mashtit) for a new world. The Messiah comes “from a different place” in that he is of non-Jewish descent, from David, who descended from Ruth the Moavite. “In place of Abel, as Cain killed him.” Due to the sin of [killing] Abel, Cain was killed.17The verse could also be translated, “as Abel killed Cain.” This is analogous to two trees that were adjacent to one another. The wind felled one of them, and it fell on its neighbor and felled it. So, “in place of Abel, as Cain killed him” – due to the sin of [killing] Abel, Cain was killed.
“To Seth, too, a son was born, and he called his name Enosh; then commenced [huḥal] the proclaiming of the name of the Lord” (Genesis 4:27). “To Seth, too, a son was born, and he called his name Enosh.” They asked before Abba Kohen Bardela: [Why does the Torah mention] Adam, Seth, Enosh, and then fall silent?18It lists Adam, Seth, Enosh, and stops there; afterwards it begins again from Adam, tracing the generations until Noah. He said: Until here [Enosh] they were in the image and in the likeness [of God]. From here on, the generations became corrupted and were created in a deformed state. Four matters changed during the days of Enosh son of Seth: The mountains became rocky ground; the dead began bringing forth worms; people’s faces became ape-like; and they became devalued [ḥullin] before malevolent spirits.19As long as people had their divine image intact, malevolent spirits would not antagonize them, but now that the divine image became diminshed they became susceptible to their malicious influence. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: It was they themselves who caused themselves to become devalued before the malevolent spirits, [as they declared:] ‘What is the difference between one who bows to an idol and one who bows to a person?’20Just as one may bow to a person greater than oneself, so, too, they concluded, one may bow to an idol in the image [tzelem] of a person.
“Then commenced [huḥal]” – Rabbi Simon said: In three places this term is stated as an expression of rebellion: “Then commenced the proclaiming of the name of the Lord”;21The generation of Enosh proclaimed the name of God in order to desecrate it, in rebellion against Him. “it was [heḥel] when man began” (Genesis 6:1);22“The children of the great men saw the daughters of man, that they were fair, and they took for themselves wives, from whomever they chose” (Genesis 6:2). “he began [heḥel] to be a mighty one in the earth” (Genesis 10:8).23Nimrod. They raised an objection: But is it not written [as well]: “This is what they began [haḥilam] to do”? (Genesis 11:6).24Building the Tower of Babel. He said to them: He struck upon the head of Nimrod and said of him: ‘This is the one who incited them to rebel against Me.’ 25The rebellion of the Tower of Babel and that of Nimrod are one and the same, so there are still only three cases. Rabbi Levi said: This26The Tower of Babel. is analogous to a woman who said to her husband: ‘I saw in a dream (ḥalom) that you are divorcing me.’ He said to her: ‘Why in a dream? Here it is for you in reality.’27That generation feared that they would be dispersed (Genesis 11:4), and so it came to be in fact. Rav Aḥa said: You made idolatrous objects of yourselves and called your own names [as divinities].28This is what is meant by “then commenced the proclaiming of the name of the Lord.” I, too, will call the seawater by My name29To act as my agent. and eradicate those people from the world. Rabbi Abahu expounded: The ocean is higher than the rest of the world. Rabbi Elazar ben Menaḥem said: Is this not an explicit verse? “He who calls forth the water of the sea and pours it upon the face of the earth”? (Amos 5:8). This30Rabbi Elazar ben Menaḥem’s question. was a rhetorical question. It is like something that is poured from above to below.31The description here of “pouring” water from the sea onto the land implies that the sea is higher. “Who calls forth the water of the sea” is written twice,32It also appears in Amos 9:6. corresponding to the two times that the sea rose and inundated the world.33Once in the generation of Enosh and again in the generation of the Dispersion (Jerusalem Talmud, Shekalim 6:2). Until where did it reach the first time and until where did it reach the second time? Rabbi Yudan, Rabbi Abahu, and Rabbi Elazar in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: The first time it rose until Akko and until Yafo,34Originally the Mediterranean Sea did not extend that far. and the second time it rose until the rocky peaks overlooking the Barbary Coast. Rabbi Ḥananya and Rabbi Aḥa in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: The first time until the rocky peaks overlooking the Barbary Coast, and the second time until Akko and until Yafo. That is what is written: “I said: You shall come this far and not continue, and here the foam of your waves will be set” (Job 38:11). “You shall come this far and not continue” – to Akko, “you shall come this far and not continue.” “And here (ufo) the foam of your waves will be set” – in Yafo, “the foam of your waves will be set.” Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: The first time it rose until Calabria, and the second time until the rocky peaks overlooking the Barbary Coast.

=== 24 | 24 ===
“This is the book of the descendants of Adam, on the day that God created man, in the likeness of God He made him” (Genesis 5:1). “This is the book of the descendants of Adam.” Rabbi Yehoshua Rabba began: “Woe, those who go deep from the Lord to conceal counsel, and their actions are in the dark, and they say: who sees us and who knows of us?” (Isaiah 29:15). This is analogous to an architect who designed a city – its chambers, sewers, and cisterns. Sometime later, he became a tax collector. The residents of the city would conceal themselves from him in the chambers and in the cisterns. He said to them: It is I who built the cisterns! How can you conceal yourselves in them? So, “Woe, those who go deep from the Lord to conceal counsel, and their actions are in the dark.” “In your contrariness you assert that the potter is just like the clay” (Isaiah 29:16) – they liken the product to the craftsman, the plant to the planter. “Can a product say of its maker: ‘He did not make me,’ or the craft say of its craftsman: ‘He does not understand’?” (Isaiah 29:16). “Behold, in just a short while Lebanon1A forest of mighty, but barren, cedars. will be transformed into farmland” (Isaiah 29:17) – into a royal palace;2God will aggrandize the meek. This will disprove the assertion of the wicked that they can conceal their deeds from God, that He is indifferent to man’s actions. “and the farmland will be considered a forest” (Isaiah 29:17) – into forests of men. “On that day, the deaf will hear the words of a book” (Isaiah 29:18) – “this is the book of the descendants of Adam.”3God is the Creator of Adam and all mankind, so he surely knows their thoughts and deeds.
Another matter, “this is the book of the descendants of Adam,” it is written: “Your eyes saw my unformed parts, and in Your book they were all written. Of the days that were created, each one is His” (Psalms 139:16). Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya and Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said in the name of Rabbi Elazar: When the Holy One blessed be He created Adam the first man, He created him [so large as to be] filling the whole world. From east to west, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “From back [aḥor] and front [kedem],4Aḥor and kedem can also mean “west” and “east.” You shaped me” (Psalms 139:5). From north to south, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “[From the day God made Adam on the earth,] and from one end of the heavens to the other end” (Deuteronomy 4:32). From where is it derived that he even filled the empty space of the world? It is as it is stated: “You placed Your palm upon me” (Psalms 139:5). Rabbi Tanḥuma in the name of Rabbi Benaya, and Rabbi Benaya and Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Elazar, said: He created him unformed and he was placed from the end of the world to its end. That is what is written: “Your eyes saw my unformed parts” (Psalms 139:16). Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: While Adam the first man was placed unformed before Him who spoke and the world came into being, He showed him each and every generation and its scholars, each and every generation and its wise men, each and every generation and its interpreters of the Torah, each and every generation and its leaders, as it is stated: “Your eyes saw my unformed parts, [and in Your book they were all written]” – the unformed ones whom Your eyes saw, they were already written in the book of Adam the first man. That is, “this is the book of the descendants of Adam.”
Bar Kappara began: [David said of the wicked:] “May they be expunged from the book of life; and not be inscribed with the righteous” (Psalms 69:29). “May they be expunged from the book of life” – from the book of descendants on earth; “and not be inscribed with the righteous” – from the book of descendants on High.5In the world to come. Bar Kappara taught: Everywhere that “lived” is stated, it is in reference to a righteous man: “Arpakhshad lived [ḥai]” (Genesis 11:12); “Shelaḥ lived [ḥai]” (Genesis 11:14). Another interpretation, “may they be expunged from the book of life” – from “the book of the descendants of Adam.”
Another matter, “this is the book of the descendants of Adam,” it is written: “For I [God] will not contend forever” (Isaiah 57:16) – with Adam the first man; “and I will not be eternally angry” (Isaiah 57:16) – with his descendants. “For the wind will be faint [yaatof] before Me” (Isaiah 57:16), Rabbi Huna said: This wind, when it goes out into the world it seeks to destroy the world, but the Holy One blessed be He weakens it on the mountains, breaks it on the hills, and says to it: ‘Take care that you do not harm My creations!’6This is alluded to in the concluding words of the Isaiah verse (57:16): “And the souls that I have created.” What is the source? “For the wind will be faint [yaatof] before Me.” What is yaatof? It means that He wears it down, as it says: “When my soul was worn down [behitatef] within me, I remembered the Lord” (Jonah 2:8). Rabbi Huna said: There were three winds that, because they emerged untamed, the world was almost destroyed by them. They were: one in the days of Jonah, one in the days of Job, and one in the days of Elijah. Rabbi Yudan ben Rabbi Yishmael said: Jonah’s [wind] was on that ship [alone], as it is stated: “But the Lord cast a great wind upon the sea” (Jonah 1:4). Job’s was on that house [alone], as it is stated: “And behold, a great wind came from across the wilderness, [and it struck the four corners of the house]” (Job 1:19). You have only Elijah’s that was worldwide, as it is stated: “And behold, the Lord was passing, and there was a great and powerful wind, smashing mountains and shattering rocks” (I Kings 19:11). Rabbi Tanḥum bar Ḥiyya, and some say it in the name of the Rabbis: The messianic king will not come7This is a new interpretation of ruaḥ not as “wind,” but as “the spirit [of the Messiah].” It will not go forth (yaatof) from before God until the depletion of “the souls that I have created.” until all the souls that entered God’s mind to be created are created, and those are the souls stated in the book of Adam.
Another matter, “this is the book of the descendants of Adam.” It is written: “Then He saw and assessed it” (Job 28:27). the Rabbis and Rabbi Aḥa, the Rabbis say: Each and every statement that the Holy One blessed be He would say to Moses, He would say it twice in His heart and then would say it to Moses. What is the source? “Then He saw and assessed it” – one; “prepared it, and also investigated it” (Job 28:27) – another one, and only then: “He said to the man” (Job 28:28) – this is Moses. Rabbi Aḥa said: Four times – “Then He saw” – one; “and assessed it” – another one; “prepared it” – another one; “and also investigated it” – another one, and only then: “He said to the man” – this is Moses. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: Adam the first man was worthy to have had the Torah given through him. What is the source? “This is the book of the descendants of Adam.”8The “book” referring to the Torah itself. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘He is My handiwork; shall I not give it to him?’ The Holy One blessed be He reconsidered and said of him: ‘If now I gave him six mitzvot and he was unable to fulfill them, how will I give him six hundred and thirteen mitzvot – two hundred and forty-eight positive mitzvot and three hundred and sixty-five prohibitions? I am not giving it to Adam, but rather to his descendants,’ as it is stated: “This is the book of the descendants of Adam.” Rabbi Yaakov of Kefar Ḥanin said: Adam the first man was worthy of having the twelve tribes emerge from him. What is the source? “This [zeh] is the book of the descendants of Adam.” The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘I gave him two sons and one arose and killed the other; how can I give him twelve sons?’ “He said to man [laAdam]” (Job 28:28) – not to Adam9LaAdam is an acronym for lo Adam – not Adam. will I give it, but rather to his descendants. The numerical value of Zeh is zayin, seven, and heh – five; that is twelve.
Another matter, “this is the book of the descendants of Adam,” the following are his descendants, but the previous ones10Those mentioned in the previous verses: Adam, Seth and Enosh. were not [ordinary] descendants. What were they? They were divine beings. They once asked Abba Kohen Bardela: [Why does the Torah list] Adam, Seth, Enosh, and then fall silent?11It lists Adam, Seth, Enosh, and stops there; afterwards it begins again from Adam, tracing the generations until Noah. He said: Until here [Enosh] they were in the image of God,12Divine beings. etc. as it is written above.13As related in full in Bereshit Rabba 23:6.  Another matter, the following are the descendants, but there were previous ones that were not [ordinary] descendants. What were they? They were [malevolent] spirits, as Rabbi Simon said: All one hundred and thirty years that Eve was estranged from Adam,14Before the birth of Seth (see Genesis 5:3). the male spirits would be aroused by her and she would bear offspring from them and the female spirits would be aroused by Adam and would bear offspring from him. That is what is written: “Who, when he commits iniquity, I will rebuke him with the staff of men and with the afflictions of the children of man [Adam]”15With punishments inflicted by malevolent spirits, described here as “children of Adam.” (II Samuel 7:14); the children of Adam the first man. There is one opinion that says that house spirits16Malevolent spirits that inhabit one’s house. are better [for the resident of the house], because they grow up with him. And there is an opinion that says that they are worse, because they are intimately familiar with his sinful thoughts. There is an opinion that says that spirits of the field are worse for a person because they did not grow up with him. And there is an opinion that they are better, because are not intimately familiar with his sinful thoughts. Another matter, these are the descendants, but there were previous ones who were not [viable] descendants.17Referring to Cain and his descendants, who were mentioned previously (Genesis 4:17–22). Why? It is because they were to be eradicated in the water [of the Flood], as Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said:18The following is related in full in Genesis Rabba 23:2. ‘All those names were expressions of rebellion. “Irad” (Genesis 4:18) – I will expel [ored] them from the world,’ etc., until, ‘what do I have to do with Lemekh and his offspring?’
Rabbi Tanḥuma in the name of Rabbi Elazar, and Rabbi Menaḥem in the name of Rav said: Adam the first man learned all the crafts [in the world]. What is the source? “And craftsmen, they are me’adam” (Isaiah 44:11) – from Adam the first man. He learned even how to score a parchment,19Even though this is not a skill that is crucial for survival. as it is stated: “This is the book” – it and its scoring. “[This is the book of the descendants of Adam,] on the day that God created man” – this supports what Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya said: Three miracles occurred on that day: On that day they [Adam and Eve] were created, on that day they cohabited, and on that day they produced offspring. Ben Azzai says: “This is the book of the descendants of Adam” – this verse represents the central tenet of the Torah.20As it teaches that all men are created in the likeness of God, and therefore they should treat each other with respect and consideration. This is the basic tenet upon which the rest of the Torah is based. Rabbi Akiva says: “You shall love your neighbor as yourself” (Leviticus 19:18) – that verse represents the central tenet of the Torah, [as it teaches] that you should not say: Since I have been disparaged, let someone else be disparaged along with me; since I was cursed, let someone else be cursed along with me. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: If you do act like that, know who it is that you are disgracing: “in the likeness of God He made him” (Genesis 5:1).

=== 25 | 25 ===
“Ḥanokh walked with God, and he was no longer, as God took him” (Genesis 5:24). “Ḥanokh walked with God, and he was no longer, as God took him,” Rabbi Ḥama bar Hoshaya said: He is not written in the ledger of the righteous, but rather, in the ledger of the wicked.1Rabbi Ḥama interprets the verse to be saying that initially, Ḥanokh walked with God, but did so no longer. Rabbi Aivu said: Ḥanokh was capricious; sometimes righteous, sometimes wicked. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘While he is still in his righteousness, I will take him away.’ Rabbi Aivu said: On Rosh Hashanah he judged him, when he judges all mankind. Heretics once asked Rabbi Abahu, saying to him: ‘We do not find death mentioned in regard to Ḥanokh.’ He said to them: ‘Why?’2Does not “God took him” mean that he died? They said: ‘Taking is stated here, and taking is stated elsewhere: “That today the Lord is taking your master3Elijah. from upon your head”’ (II Kings 2:5).4Just as Elijah did not die, so, too, Ḥanokh did not die. He said to them: ‘If it is [the word] taking that you are expounding, taking is stated here, and taking is stated elsewhere: “Behold, I am taking from you the delight of your eyes”’ (Ezekiel 24:16).5Referring to Ezekiel’s wife, who subsequently died. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: Rabbi Abahu answered them well. A noblewoman once asked Rabbi Yosei, saying to him: ‘We do not find death mentioned in regard to Ḥanokh.’ He said to her: ‘Had it said: “Ḥanokh walked with God” and then remained silent, I would have said as you said. When it says: “And he was no longer, as God took him,” he was no longer in this world, as God took him.’
“He called his name Noah, saying: This one will comfort us from our work and from the misery of our hands, from the ground, which the Lord cursed” (Genesis 5:29). “He called his name Noah, saying,” Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The interpretation does not correspond to the name and the name does not correspond to the interpretation. It should have said instead: ‘Noah, this one will give us rest [yaniḥenu],’ or ‘Naḥman, this one will comfort us [yenaḥamenu].’ However, when the Holy One blessed be He created Adam the first man, He gave him control over everything; the cow would heed the plowman and [even] the furrow would heed the plowman. When Adam sinned, they rebelled against him; the cow did not heed the plowman and the furrow did not heed the plowman. When Noah appeared, they abstained6From their rebellion. [naḥu]. From where is that derived? Rest [neyaḥa] is stated here and elsewhere it is stated: “So that your ox and your donkey will rest [yanuaḥ]” (Exodus 23:12). Just as neyaḥa that is stated there refers to the resting of an ox, so, too, neyaḥa that is stated here refers to the resting of an ox. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: The name does not correspond with the interpretation and interpretation does not correspond with the name. It should have said instead: ‘Noah, this one will give us rest [yaniḥenu],’ or ‘Naḥman, this one will comfort us [yenaḥamenu].’ However, until Noah appeared, the water would rise and inundate them in their graves. “Who calls the water of the sea” is written twice (Amos 5:8; 9:6) corresponding to the two times that the water would rise and inundate them in their graves, once in the morning and once in the evening. That is what is written: “Like corpses lying in the grave” (Psalms 88:6) – those of them who were lying were desecrated. When Noah appeared, they rested [in their graves]. Rest [neyaḥa] is stated here and elsewhere it is stated: “May he depart in peace…may they rest [yanuḥu] upon their resting places” (Isaiah 57:2). Just as neyaḥa that is stated there refers to the rest of the grave, so, too, neyaḥa that is stated here refers to the rest of the grave. Rabbi Eliezer said: He was called after the name of his offering, as it is stated: “The Lord smelled the pleasing [niḥoaḥ] aroma” (Genesis 8:21). Rabbi Yosei bar Rabbi Ḥanina said: He was called for the name of the resting of the ark, as it is written: “The ark rested [vatanaḥ]” (Genesis 8:4). Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The constellations did not function all those twelve months [of the Flood].7He was called Noah because the constellations ‘rested’ from their function in his day. Rabbi Yonatan said to him: They functioned, but their effect was imperceptible. “[All the days of the earth, seedtime and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, night and day] will not cease” (Genesis 8:22), Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua, Rabbi Eliezer said: “Will not cease” – from here we learn that they did not cease [during the Flood]. Rabbi Eliezer said: “Will not cease” – [on the contrary,] from here we learn that they did cease.
“From the ground, which the Lord cursed” – there were ten periods of famine that came to the world: One in the days of Adam the first man, as it is stated: “Cursed is the ground on your account” (Genesis 3:17); one in the days of Lemekh, as it is stated: “From the ground, which the Lord cursed”; one in the days of Abraham – “there was a famine in the land” (Genesis 12:10); one in the days of Isaac, as it is stated: “There was a famine in the land, besides the first famine” (Genesis 26:1); one in the days of Jacob, as it is stated: “For these two years, the famine” (Genesis 45:6); one in the days when the judges judged, as it is stated: “It was in the days when the judges judged; there was a famine in the land” (Ruth 1:1); one in the days of David, as it is stated: “There was a famine in the days of David for three years” (II Samuel 21:1); one in the days of Elijah, as it is stated: “As the Lord, God of Israel, before whom I stand, lives, there will be dew and rain during these years only by my word” (I Kings 17:1); one in the days of Elisha, as it is stated: “There was a great famine in Samaria” (II Kings 6:25); and there is one that circulates and comes periodically to the world. And [there will be] one more in the future, as it is stated: “Not a famine for bread, and not a thirst for water, but rather, to hear the words of the Lord” (Amos 8:11). Rabbi Huna and Rabbi Yirmeya in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Yitzḥak: In reality, it [David’s famine] should not have occurred in the days of David, but rather, in the days of Saul.8The reason underlying the famine was relevant to Saul, not David (II Samuel 21:1). However, because Saul was the shoot of a sycamore,9Easily broken, unable to withstand it, due to his lack of merit. the Holy One blessed be He postponed it and brought it about in the days of David. They say a parable: Shilo sinned, but Yoḥana pays?! That is astonishing! Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great said: This is analogous to a glazier who had in his hand a basket filled with goblets and cut glass. When he would wish to hang his basket, he would [first] bring a peg, affix it, and suspend himself from it, and only then would he hang his basket. That is why they did not come in the days of downtrodden people, but rather, in the days of powerful people, who are able to withstand them. Rabbi Berekhya would cite this verse in their regard: “He gives strength to the weary” (Isaiah 40:29). Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Ḥelbo: There were two [famines] that occurred in the days of Abraham. Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: One was in the days of Lemekh, and one in the days of Abraham. The famine that came in the days of Elijah was a famine of drought; one year produced [crops], and one year did not produce. The famine that came in the days of Elisha was a famine of panic, as it is stated: “Until the head of a donkey was sold for eighty silver pieces” (II Kings 6:25). The famine that was in the days that the judges judged, Rabbi Huna said in the name of Rabbi Dosa: For the price for which one used to purchase forty-two se’a, they could purchase [only] forty-one.10According to a different reading: the price for which one used to purchase two se’a, they could purchase [only] one. But is it not taught: A person should not depart and go outside the Land of Israel unless two se’a  of wheat sells for one sela?11Double the ordinary price of wheat, which was four se’a for a sela (Pe’a 8:7). Rabbi Shimon said: That is only when he does not find any [wheat] to buy, but if he can find to buy, even if it is one se’a for a sela, one should not depart and go outside the Land of Israel. But Elimelekh did depart, therefore, he was punished.

=== 26 | 26 ===
“Noah was five hundred years old and Noah begot Shem, Ham, and Yefet” (Genesis 5:32). “Noah was five hundred years old” – it is written: “Happy is the man who has not walked in the counsel of the wicked” (Psalms 1:1). “Happy is the man” – this is Noah. “Who has not walked in the counsel of the wicked, has not stood in the path of sinners [and has not sat in the company of scoffers]” (Psalms 1:1), Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: In three generations – in the generation of Enosh, the generation of the Flood, and the generation of the Dispersion.1Noah resisted the influence of those generations and remained righteous. This is alluded to in the three expressions of resistance to sin in the Psalms verse. Rabbi Neḥemya says: In the generation of the Flood and the generation of the Dispersion, but as for the generation of Enosh, he was still a minor.2Noah was eighty-four years old when Enosh died, and with life expectancy in those days approaching one thousand, people were not considered accountable until they were one hundred years old (see next section).  According to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda, who said: “Happy is the man who has not walked in the counsel of the wicked,” this is the generation of Enosh; “has not stood in the path of sinners,” this is the generation of the Flood; “and has not sat in the company of scoffers,” this is the generation of the Dispersion; “but whose desire is in the Torah of the Lord” (Psalms 1:2) – these are the seven mitzvot that he [Noah] was commanded; “and he meditates on His Torah day and night” (Psalms 1:2) – as he derived one matter from another. He said: ‘What is the reason that the Holy One blessed be He set the number of the pure animals more than the impure animals? Is it not because He wants me to sacrifice an offering from them?’ Immediately, “he took from every pure animal…[and offered up offerings]” (Genesis 8:20). “He will be like a tree planted by streams of water” (Psalms 1:3), as the Holy One blessed be He implanted him in the ark; “which gives its fruit in season” (Psalms 1:3), this is Shem; “whose leaf does not wither” (Psalms 1:3), this is Ḥam; “and whatever he does he will prosper” (Psalms 1:3), this is Yefet.
“Noah begot three sons, Shem, Ḥam, and Yefet” (Genesis 6:10).It is written: “Planted in the House of the Lord, they blossom in the courts of our God” (Psalms 92:14). “Planted in the House of the Lord,” this is Noah, whom the Holy One blessed be He implanted in the ark; “they blossom in the courts of our God,” – “Noah begot…Shem, Ḥam, and Yefet.” “They will continue to yield fruit even in old age; they will remain full and fresh” (Psalms 92:15). “They will continue to yield fruit [even in old age],” this is Noah;3Who begot children at age five hundred. “they will remain full and fresh” – “Noah begot.” Rabbi Yudan said: What is the reason that all the generations begot children at one hundred years or at two hundred years, but this one [Noah] begot at five hundred years? However, the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘If they will be wicked, I do not want them to be eradicated by the water;4He did not want to upset Noah. if they will be righteous, I would be imposing upon him [Noah] to make several arks for them. So the Holy One blessed be He suppressed his [Noah’s] fount,5His ability to procreate. and he begot only at five hundred years. Rabbi Neḥemya said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili: [It was so that] even Yefet, who was the eldest, would not yet be one hundred years old – when he became subject to punishment6In those days, as explained above. – when the Flood came. Rabbi Ḥanina said: In the future there will be no death except for idolaters. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Neither for Israel, nor for idolaters, as it is stated: “[He will destroy death forever, and] the Lord God will wipe tears from all faces” (Isaiah 25:8). What does Rabbi Ḥanina do with “from all faces”? It is from the faces of Israel. But is it not written: “As the youth will die when he is one hundred years old”? (Isaiah 65:20). This supports Rabbi Ḥanina. What does Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi do with it? [It means that at that age] he will be fit for punishment.  But is it not written: “Like sheep, they are destined for the grave; death will shepherd them. The upright will rule over them”? (Psalms 49:15). This supports Rabbi Ḥanina. What does Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi do with it? Because in this world, there was Pharaoh at his time, Sisera at his time, Sennacherib at his time,7They were all punished. but in the future, the Holy One blessed be He will appoint the angel of death as the permanent sentry.8To administer eternal punishment. They will not rise up from the dead in the future, but those who are alive at that time will not die. That is what is written: “The upright will rule over them in the morning; their form will be consumed in the grave,9Literally, their form will wear out the grave. an abode [zevul] for him” (Psalms 49:15) – this teaches that the grave may wear away, but their bodies will not wear away.10But will be subject to eternal torment. Why to that extent? [“An abode for him”] – because they extended their hands against the Temple, as it is written: “I have built You an abode [zevul]” (I Kings 8:13).
“Noah begot three sons, Shem, Ḥam, and Yefet” – but was Yefet not the eldest?, Initially, however, you should deal with the one who was righteous, born circumcised, the one whom the Holy One blessed be He associated His name with him,11“Blessed be the Lord, God of Shem” (Genesis 9:26). from whom Abraham was destined to descend, who served as High Priest,12See Genesis 14:18. Malkitzedek is identified with Shem (see Bereshit Rabbah 56:10). and in whose territory the Temple was built.13Malkitzedek was king of Salem, which is Jerusalem (see Bereshit Rabbah 56:10). Shimon bar Ḥuta said: [Shem takes precedence] because the Holy One blessed be He delayed the punishment [of the post-Flood generation], from the Flood until the Dispersion, the numerical value of his letters – three hundred and forty years.14This is according to the midrash (Bereshit Rabba 38:2) that states that they began building the Tower of Babel immediately after the Flood.
“It was when man began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born to them” (Genesis 6:1). “It was when man began [heḥel],” Rabbi Simon said: In three places this language is stated as an expression of rebellion: “then commenced [huḥal] proclaiming the name of the Lord” (Genesis 4:26);15In the generation of Enosh. “it was when man began [heḥel]”; “he began [heḥel] to be a mighty one in the earth” (Genesis 10:8).16Nimrod. They raised an objection to him: But is it not written [as well]: “And this is what they have begun [haḥilam] to do” (Genesis 11:6)?17At the Tower of Babel. He struck upon the head of Nimrod and said of him: ‘This is the one who incited them to rebel against Me.’18The rebellion of the Tower of Babel and that of Nimrod are one and the same, so there are still only three cases. “To multiply on the face of the earth,” [this teaches] that they would spill their seed on trees and stones.19“On the face of the earth.” Because they were steeped in sexual profligacy, that is the reason He increased the number of their females.20Expecting that the multitude of women would curb their unnatural sexual appetites.  That is what is written: “It was when man began…daughters were born to them.” The wife of Rabbi Shimon son of Rabbi (Ami),21This word was included in error and should be ignored. bore a female offspring. Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great saw him and said to him: ‘The Holy One blessed be He has begun to bless you!’ He said to him: ‘From where do you know this?’ He said to him: ‘As it is written: “It was when man began to multiply…and daughters were born to them.”’ He went to his father, [Rabbi], who said to him: ‘Did that Babylonian22Rabbi Ḥiyya. gladden you?’ He said to him: ‘Yes, and this is what he said to me.’ He said to him: ‘Nevertheless, even though there is a need for wine and a need for vinegar, there is more need for wine than for vinegar. There is a need for wheat and a need for barley, but there is more need for wheat than for barley.’23There is need for girls and boys, but more need for boys. When a man marries his daughter and pays out his [marriage] expenditures, he says to her: ‘May you never return here!’24See next paragraph. The reason boys are more desirable is that boys remain more connected to the family after marriage, whereas girls are gone from the house for good. Rabban Gamliel married off his daughter. She said to him: ‘Father, pray for me.’ He said to her: ‘May you never return here!’ She bore a male offspring and said to him: ‘Father, pray for me.’ He said to her: ‘May the word ‘Woe’ never cease from your mouth!’ She said to him: ‘Father, upon the two joyous occasions that I experienced you cursed me!’ He said to her: ‘Both of them are prayers. Because there will be peace in your house, you will never return here.25You will never be divorced and have to return home. And because your son will live long, the word ‘Woe’ will not cease from your mouth: Woe that my son did not drink yet, woe that my son did not eat yet, woe that my son did not go to the synagogue!’
“The children of the great men [benei haelohim] saw the daughters of man, that they were fair, and they took for themselves wives, from whomever they chose” (Genesis 6:2). “The children of the great men [benei haelohim] saw,” Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai called them [when translating this verse into Aramaic] “the children of judges.” Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai used to curse anyone who would call them [translating the words literally, as] “children of god.”26In Hebrew Elohim can mean either “God” or “judge” (Exodus 22:8), but in Aramaic Elohaya can only mean “God,” so translating the word in this manner would be blasphemous. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: Any breach [in morals] that is not [begun] by prominent men is not a breach.27The common people follow the example of their leaders. [The saying goes:] If the priests steal the idols, who will ever take an oath in their names, or who will ever sacrifice to them?28By stealing the idols, the priests, through their actions, prove the powerlessness of those gods, so naturally all its worshippers will no longer take it seriously.  Why are these [great men] referred to as benei haelohim? Rabbi Ḥanina and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, both of them say: It is because they lived long lives without pain and without suffering.29As if they were divine beings. [And why were they granted such extraordinarily long lives?] Rabbi Ḥana said in the name of Rabbi Yosei: In order to track astronomical phenomena and [make the relevant] calculations.30The cycles of some heavenly bodies are many years long. Only if someone lives a very long life can they note this and make astronomical calculations. The Rabbis say: So that they would receive theirs and that of the coming generations.31During their lengthy lives they had a chance to accumulate much liability for punishment, to the extent that God had to bring the Flood. The future generations would then look back on the Flood and learn not to be as sinful as their forebears. “That they were fair [tovot]” – Rabbi Yudan said: The word is written tovot [without vavs].32With this spelling, the word indicates “beautification.” When they would adorn a woman for her [marriage to her] husband, the prominent man would enter and consort with her first, [before her husband]. That is what is written: “That they were fair [tovot]” – these are the unmarried girls.33Who were violated just prior to their weddings. “They took for themselves wives from whomever they chose”34The words “from whomever they chose” should be omitted (Radal). – these are married women. “From whomever they chose” – these are males and animals.35They sinned also through homosexuality and bestiality. Rabbi Huna said in the name of Rabbi: The generation of the Flood was not obliterated from the world until they wrote marriage contracts for males and animals.36That is, they made such unions official and legal.  Rabbi Simlai said: Anywhere sexual immorality is found, a chaotic catastrophe comes to the world, which kills the righteous along with the wicked.37As with the Flood, which killed everyone on earth except Noah and his family. Rabbi Azarya and Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: The Holy One blessed be He is slow to anger regarding everything except for sexual immorality. What is the source? “The children of the great men [benei haelohim] saw….” What is written [immediately] thereafter? “The Lord said: I will obliterate man” (Genesis 6:7). Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said in the name of bar Pedaya [regarding Lot and the people of Sodom]: All night long, Lot was begging [the angels] for mercy for the people of Sodom, and they were receptive to him. [But] once they [the people of Sodom] said: “Bring them out to us, that we may know them” (Genesis 19:5), meaning, by sexual relations, they [the angels] said to him: “Whom else do you have [here] [po]” (Genesis 19:12), [meaning, what else can there possibly be in your mouth [peh]] to plea in their favor?’ From here on, it is impossible for you to plea in their favor.
“The Lord said: My spirit will not abide in man for eternity, for he too is flesh and his days will be one hundred and twenty years” (Genesis 6:3). “The Lord said: My spirit will not abide [yadon] in man,” Rabbi Yishmael ben Rabbi Yosei said: I will not place My spirit in them when I give the reward of the righteous in the future, about which it is stated: “I will place My spirit in them” (Ezekiel 36:27). Rabbi Yanai and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, both of them said: In the future, there will be no Gehenna; rather, there will be a day that [through its heat] will burn the wicked. What is the source? “For behold, the day is coming, burning like a furnace, and all the criminals and all the doers of wickedness will be as straw; the day that is coming will burn them” (Malachi 3:19). The Rabbis say: There will be Gehenna, as it is stated: “The utterance of the Lord, for whom there is a fire in Zion and a furnace for Him in Jerusalem” (Isaiah 31:9). Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Ilai said: There will be neither a [hot] day nor Gehenna, but rather there will be a fire that will emerge from the body of the wicked one himself and burn him, as it is stated: “Conceive stubble, give birth to straw, your spirit is a fire that will consume you” (Isaiah 33:11). Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Ilai said: What is, “My spirit will not abide [yadon]”? These spirits will never come before Me for judgment.38The members of the generation of the Flood will not even be resurrected to be sentenced. Rabbi Huna said in the name of Rav Aḥa: When I restore the spirit [of man] to its scabbard [nadan], I will not return their spirit to their scabbards.39The body is considered a “scabbard” that houses the soul within it (Daniel 7:15). The generation of the Flood will not come to life with the others at the final resurrection. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: I will not fill them up with My spirit when I fill mankind up with My spirit,40As a scabbard is completely filled with the sword it holds. because in this world the spirit is infused in only one limb [the heart], but in the future, it will be infused throughout the body. That is what is written: “I will place My spirit within you” (Ezekiel 36:27). Rabbi Yudan ben Beteira said: I [God] will never again judge man with this sentence.41Bringing a destructive flood upon mankind.  Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Yosef: “I will not continue [to curse the ground because of man … and I will not continue [to smite all life as I have done]” (Genesis 8:21)42The Midrash will explain the repetition of “I will not continue.” –it is powerful, it is powerful.43The repetition indicates the intensity of God’s commitment, as if He were declaring an oath (see Isaiah 54:9). The Rabbis say: “I will not continue” – for the [present] sons of Noah; “and I will not continue” – for [future] generations. [God said:] ‘I had said that My spirit would hold sway [dana] over them, but they did not want [this]; therefore, I will cause them to be entangled [meshagem] with suffering. I had said that My spirit would control them, but they did not disavow [their sinful ways]; therefore I will cause them to be entangled [meshagem] with one another,’44And they will enter into disputes and deadly feuds with one another, thus incurring the death penalty. as Rabbi Elazar said: The only one who incurs liability for harming a human is one who is a human like him. Rabbi Natan said: Wolves and dogs also.45They also incur the death penalty if they kill a human. Rabbi Huna bar Guryon said: Even a rod, even a strap.46If they bring about the death of a person they are destroyed. That is what is written: “For the yoke of its burden and the bar on its shoulder, the rod that oppresses it, You have broken as on the day of Midyan [keyom midyan]” (Isaiah 9:3) – on the day of judgment [beyom hadin]. Rabbi Aḥa said: Even non-fruit bearing trees are destined to give a reckoning.47If they cause the death of a person. The Rabbis say [this same concept] from here: “For man is like the tree of the field” (Deuteronomy 20:19) – just as man gives a reckoning, so, too, trees give a reckoning.  Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya said: [God said:] ‘I will not judge their spirit separately, as they are flesh and blood,48And they must experience physical suffering. but I will bring upon them a shortening of the years that I had allotted them in this world, and then I will cause them to be entangled [meshagem] with suffering.’ Rabbi Aivu said: [God said:] ‘Who caused them to rebel against Me, is it not because I did not cause them to be entangled [meshagem] with suffering?’49Therefore, from now on mankind will be subject to physical suffering for their sins. This door, what keeps it standing? It is its hinges [shegam].50Just as hinges support the door and allow it to function, so too physical suffering is good for man and induces him to grow spiritually. Rabbi Elazar said: Anyplace where there is no justice, there is justice.51Wherever justice is not practiced on earth, justice from God will be meted out. Rabbi Beivai son of Rabbi Ami, in accordance with the approach of Rabbi Elazar: “My spirit will not abide” [Lo yadon, ruḥi].”52This is expounded to mean: If they do not judge [lo yadon], My spirit [ruḥi] will judge. Rabbi Meir said: [God said:] ‘They did not exercise the attribute of justice below, so I will not exercise the attribute of justice On High.’53But rather, I will judge with wrath and fury. That is what is written: “Behold, their remnant has gone away from them, and they die without wisdom” (Job 4:21) – without the wisdom of the Torah. “From morning to evening they are broken; forever unnoticed [mibeli mesim], they perish” (Job 4:20) – mesim is nothing other than judgment, just as it says: “These are the ordinances that you shall place [tasim] before them” (Exodus 21:1). Rabbi Yosei HaGelili said: I will not judge them with the attribute of justice along with a corresponding attribute of mercy.54But with the attribute of justice alone. Rabbi says: “He said” – the generation of the Flood said to the Lord: ‘He shall not judge [us]!’55Here, the verse currently under discussion, “Vayomer Hashem lo yadon” is being interpreted as: “They said: Hashem, He shall not judge us!”  Rabbi Akiva said: “Why has the wicked man mocked God, saying to himself: You will not seek” (Psalms 10:13) – [by this that man means:] there is no justice and no Judge.56God does not judge man for his deeds. However, in fact there is justice and there is a Judge.57As the following verses in Psalms respond. Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa said: Even Noah, who survived from among them, it is not that he was worthy, but rather, the Holy One blessed be He foresaw that Moses was destined to descend from him, as it is stated: “For he too [Beshagam]” – this is an allusion to Moses, as the numerical value of this word [beshagam] is the same numerical value as that word [Moshe]. The Rabbis derive it from here: “His days will be one hundred and twenty years” – and Moses lives one hundred and twenty years.
“The giants were on the earth in those days, and also thereafter, when the children of the great ones consorted with the daughters of man, and they bore them children; they are the mighty who were from ancient times, the men of renown” (Genesis 6:4). “The giants were on the earth in those days.” They were called by seven names: Eimim, Refa’im, Giborim, Zamzumim, Anakim, Avim, Nefilim. Eimim – as anyone who saw them, fear of them [eimatan] would descend upon them. Refa’im – as anyone who saw them, his heart would become soft [rafeh] like wax. Giborim58Meaning, mighty men. – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said, in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: The marrow of the femur of one of them measured eighteen cubits. Zamzumim – Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: Intimidating military commanders.59Zamzumim is because they would be constantly ready [mezumanim] for battle. Anakim – the Rabbis and Rabbi Aḥa, the Rabbis say: They would wear numerous necklaces upon necklaces [anakim].60This is an indication of their wealth – anak is one of the words for necklace. Rabbi Aḥa said: It was as though they wore the sun as a necklace,61They lifted up their heads arrogantly towards the sun. and said: ‘[Go away and] let the rain fall upon us.’ Avim – as they brought annihilation upon the world and were themselves annihilated from the world, as they caused the world to be annihilated, just as it says: “A ruin, a ruin, a ruin [ava] I will render it” (Ezekiel 21:32). Rabbi Elazar ben Rabbi Shimon said: Because they were as expert in soil as snakes, as in the Galilee they call snakes avya. Nefilim – as they toppled [hipilu] the world, fell from the world, and filled the world with stillborns [nefalim] with their immorality.62It was common for immoral women to abort their illegitimate fetuses. “And also thereafter,” Yehuda bar Rav Ami said: The later [generations] did not learn from the earlier ones; the generation of the Flood did not learn from the generation of Enosh, and the generation of the Dispersion did not learn from the generation of the Flood. “And also thereafter, when the children of the great ones consorted with the daughters of man,” Rabbi Berekhya said: A woman would go out to the marketplace and would see a young man and desire him. She would go and engage in intercourse and would produce a young man like him. “The men of renown [shem]”63Literally, ‘name.’ – Rabbi Aḥa said: [Job said, of the wicked:] “They are loathsome people and also people without name ” (Job 30:8), and here you say, [of the generation of the Flood:] “The men of name”? However, it is because they brought desolation [hishimu] to the world, they were annihilated [hushamu] from the world, and they caused the world to become desolate [yishom]. Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Men whose names were articulated above. It is as Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said; all these names are expressions of rebellion: “Irad” (Genesis 4:18) – ‘I will expel [ored] them from the world’; “Meḥuyael” (Genesis 4:18) – ‘I will eradicate [moḥeh] them from the world’; “Metushael” (Genesis 4:18) – ‘I will uproot [matish] them from the world’; [“Lemekh” (Genesis 4:18)] – ‘What do I have to do with Lemekh64Lemekh is an acronym for ma li valakh – what need do I have of you? and his offspring?’ Rabbi Yoḥanan said: “They are the mighty who were from ancient times, the men of renown” – who detailed their actions? It was [Job’s friends,] Elifaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Tzofar the Naamatite. Rabbi says: Had the book of Job come to the world only to detail for us the deeds of the [generation of the] Flood, it would have been sufficient. Rabbi Ḥanin said: Had Elihu65Job’s fourth friend. come to the world only to explain to us the process of rainfall, it would have been sufficient, as Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Every time “ora” is mentioned by Elihu it refers only to rainfall.66See Job 36:30; 36:32; 37:3; 37:11. Rabbi Hoshaya Rabba said: It refers only to the giving of the Torah, just as it says: “For the commandment is a lamp and the Torah is light [or]” (Proverbs 6:23). Rabbi Aḥa said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: Contention is as troublesome as the generation of the Flood. Here “men of renown” is stated, and elsewhere [concerning Koraḥ’s rebellion]: “Distinguished of the convocation, men of renown” (Numbers 16:2) is stated. Just as “men of renown” stated there refers to contention, so, too, “men of renown” stated here refers to contention.

=== 27 | 27 ===
“The Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great on the earth, and every inclination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil all the day” (Genesis 6:5). “The Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great” – it is written: “For there is a man whose work is with wisdom, with knowledge, and with smoothness” (Ecclesiastes 2:21).1“There is a man” actually refers to God, as the Midrash goes on to elaborate. Rabbi Yudan said: How great is the power of prophets, in that they can liken the creation to its Creator,2This is phrased euphemistically, as they actually describe the Creator in human terms. as it is stated, [describing a vision of God]: “I heard the voice of a man by the Ulai” (Daniel 8:16). Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: You have another verse that is even clearer than this one, as it is stated [describing a vision of God]: “And upon the likeness of the throne was a likeness, like the appearance of a man” (Ezekiel 1:26). “Whose work is with wisdom” – as it is stated: “The Lord founded the earth with wisdom” (Proverbs 3:19). “With knowledge” – as it is stated: “With His knowledge the depths were breached” (Proverbs 3:20). “And with smoothness” – Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon: Neither with toil nor with exertion did the Holy One blessed be He create His world, but rather, “With the word of the Lord the heavens were made” (Psalms 33:6) – upon [utterance of] the word of the Lord, the heavens were already made. “But he will give it over to a man who did not toil for it to be his portion” (Ecclesiastes 2:21) – this is the generation of the Flood. “This too is futility and a great evil” (Ecclesiastes 2:21) – “the Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great.”
Another matter: “The Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great on the earth” – it is written: “For all his days are pains, and anger is his concern; even at night his heart does not rest. This too is futility” (Ecclesiastes 2:23). “For all his days are pains” – this is the generation of Enosh and the generation of the Flood, who would pain the Holy One blessed be He with their wicked deeds. “And anger is his concern” – as they would anger the Holy One blessed be He with their wicked deeds. “Even at night his heart does not rest” – from transgressions. And from where is it derived that [they sinned] during the day as well? The verse states: “And every inclination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil all the day.” Another matter: “Even at night his heart does not rest” – this is the Holy One blessed be He, [who did not rest] from bringing punishment upon them during the day and punishment during the night, as it is written: “He obliterated all existence” (Genesis 7:23).3The proof for this assertion is actually from another verse: “The rain was upon the land forty days and forty nights” (Genesis 7:12) (Matnot Kehunah). Another matter, “for all his days are pains” – these are the people of Sodom, who would pain the Holy One blessed be He with their wicked deeds. “And anger is his concern” – as they would anger the Holy One blessed be He with their wicked deeds. “Even at night his heart does not rest” – this is the Holy One blessed be He, [who did not rest] from bringing punishment upon them during the day and punishment during the night, that is what is written: “The Lord rained upon Sodom” (Genesis 19:24).4The punishment of Sodom took place at the end of night and the beginning of day (Bereshit Rabba 50:12). Another matter, “for all his days are pains” – these are the Egyptians, who would pain the Holy One blessed be He with their wicked deeds. “And anger is his concern” – as they would anger the Holy One blessed be He with their wicked deeds. “Even at night his heart does not rest” – when an Israelite would finish his labor [at the end of the day, his Egyptian master] would say to him: Hoe two furrows for me, chop two logs for me. Another matter: “Even at night his heart does not rest” – this is the Holy One blessed be He, [who did not rest] from bringing punishment upon them during the day and punishment during the night; that is what is written: “It was at midnight” (Exodus 12:29). “This too is futility” (Ecclesiastes 2:23).
“The Lord saw that [the wickedness of man] was great [raba]” (Genesis 6:5) – Rabbi Ḥanina said: It was constantly increasing [rava]. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: We are informed that the generation of the Flood was punished with water and that the people of Sodom were punished with fire. From where can we learn to apply what is stated here to there, and what is stated there to here? The verse states: Raba [here and] raba [there]5“Because the outcry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great [raba]” (Genesis 18:20). for a verbal analogy.6Indicating that both the people of the Flood and the people of Sodom were punished by both water and fire. “And every inclination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil all the day” – from when the sun would rise until it would set there was no hope for them. That is what is written: “The murderer rises in daylight, kills the poor and indigent, and at night is like a thief” (Job 24:14). But is it not written: “In the dark they burrow under houses; during the day they remain sealed at home”? (Job 24:16).7Indicating that they did not engage in theft at night. What would they do? They would bring balsam oil and smear it on a stone [of the house they wished to rob] and come at night, smell it, and break in.8They were thus involved in thievery both by day and by night. Rabbi Ḥanina once expounded this interpretation [at a lecture] in Tzippori. That night, three hundred break-ins occurred.9By some thieves that had heard the lecture and applied its “lesson,” marking stones on the houses they identified as targets during the day. Balsam was not available in Tzippori, however, so they used a different method of marking. Imagine if they had had balsam oil – what would the Tzipporians have done then!
“The Lord regretted that He had made man on the earth, and He was saddened in His heart” (Genesis 6:6). “The Lord regretted [vayinaḥem] that He had made man on the earth” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: [God said:] ‘There was regret before Me that I created him below [“on the earth”], for had I created him on High, he would never have rebelled against Me.’ Rabbi Neḥemya said: [God said:] ‘I take solace [mitnaḥem] in the fact that I created him below [“on the earth”], for had I created him on High, just as he incited the lower beings [on earth] to rebel against Me, so he would have incited the supernal beings [the angels] to rebel against Me.’  Rabbi Aivu said: [God said:] ‘There was regret before Me that I created an evil inclination in him, as had I not created an evil inclination in him, he would not have rebelled against Me.’ Rabbi Levi said: [God said:] ‘I take solace in the fact that I made him so that he would [ultimately] be placed in the earth.’10He is mortal and will ultimately die, so there is a time limit to his wickedness. “And He was saddened in His heart” – Rabbi Berekhya said: This is analogous to a king who built a palace by means of an architect. He saw it and it was not to his liking. At whom should he be angry? Is it not the architect? So, “He was saddened in his heart.”11His heart and His wisdom counseled Him to create man. Rabbi Asi said: This is analogous to a king who engaged in commerce by means of an intermediary and incurred a loss. Against whom should he have a grievance? Is it not against the intermediary? So, “He was saddened in his heart.” A certain heretic asked Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa, saying to him: ‘Do you not say that the Holy One blessed be He foresees the future?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ [The heretic continued:] ‘But is it not written: “He was saddened in his heart”?’ He said to him: ‘Has a male offspring ever been born to you in your lifetime?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ He said to him: ‘What did you do?’ He said to him: ‘I rejoiced and encouraged everyone else to rejoice.’ He said to him: ‘But did you not know that he would ultimately die?’ He said to him: ‘At a time of rejoicing there is rejoicing; at a time of mourning there is mourning.’ He said to him: ‘So was the situation before the Holy One blessed be He, as Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Seven days the Holy One blessed be He mourned His world before the Flood came to the world. What is the source? “He was saddened [vayitatzev] in his heart,” and atziva is nothing other than mourning, just as it says: “The king is grieving [ne’etzav] over his son”’ (II Samuel 19:3).

=== 28 | 28 ===
“The Lord said: I will obliterate man whom I have created from the face of the earth; from man to animal, to crawling creatures, to bird of the heavens, as I regret that I made them” (Genesis 6:7). “The Lord said: I will obliterate man.” “Therefore, He knows [yakir] their activities, and He turns it into night, and they are crushed” (Job 34:25) – Rabbi Ḥanina asked of Rabbi Yoḥanan, saying to him: What is it that is written: “Therefore, He knows their activities…”? He said to him: The Holy One blessed be He does not exact retribution from the wicked until He first reads out their indictment1Interpreting yakir as “He makes known,” rather than “He knows.” on High. Only then the Holy One blessed be He exacts retribution from them, as the Holy One blessed be He transforms [their] day into night, preparing them for punishment,2Determining the severity of the sin. and then He exacts retribution from them. So, initially, “the Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great” (Genesis 6:5),3This was His “reading out their indictment.” then, “the Lord regretted that He had made man on the earth” (Genesis 6:6), and then, “The Lord said: I will obliterate man whom I have created.”
Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rav Beivai: “Let the water…be gathered [yikavu]” (Genesis 1:9) – let a set measure be established for the water, just as it is stated: “A plumb line [kav]4A kav is a measure used in building. will be extended over Jerusalem” (Zechariah 1:16). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said in the name of Rabbi Levi: [It means,] let the water eagerly wait [yekavu] for Me, for what I am going to do with it in the future.5After confining it at first, when it is time to bring the Flood I will allow it to cover the entire earth once again. This is analogous to a king who built a palace and settled mute residents in it. They would rise early and greet the king with gestures with fingers and with kerchiefs. The king said: If they, who are mute, rise early and greet me with gestures with fingers, if they could speak, all the more so. The king then settled speaking residents in it. They rose up and seized the palace, and said: This palace is not the king’s; it is ours. The king said: Let the palace be restored to its previous state. So, in the beginning, the praises of the Holy One blessed be He would arise only from the water, as it is written: “It is from the sound of many waters…” (Psalms 93:4). What would they say? “The Lord is mighty on High” (Psalms 93:4). The Holy One blessed be He said: If these [waters] that have no ability to talk and speak and yet they laud Me, when man will be created, all the more so. [But] the generation of Enosh rose up and rebelled against Him, the generation of the Flood rebelled against him, the generation of the Dispersion rebelled against Him. The Holy One blessed be He said: Let these [mankind] be expelled and let these [waters] come back. That is what is written: “The Lord said: I will obliterate man whom I have created.” What do they think – that I need lions, or regiments of soldiers? Did I not create the world with [mere] speech? I will eradicate them from the world with speech. Rabbi Berekhya said: Did I not create them only from soil? What washes away soil? It is water.
“The Lord said: I will obliterate man [haadam]” – Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Even the lower millstone was obliterated. Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Even the dust of Adam the first man was obliterated. When Rabbi Yehuda expounded this in public in Tzippori, they did not accept it from him. Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yehotzadak said: Even the sacrum, from which the Holy One blessed be He will cause man to sprout in the future,6When the dead will be resurrected. was obliterated. Hadrian, may his bones be crushed, once asked Rabbi Yehoshua ben Ḥananya, saying to him: From where will the Holy One blessed be He cause man to sprout in the future? He said to him: From the sacrum. He said to him: From where do you know this? He said to him: Bring one to me and I will show you. He ground it in a mill, but it did not become ground up. He placed it in water but it did not dissolve. He placed in on an anvil and began striking it with a hammer; the anvil split and the hammer broke and it [the sacrum] lacked nothing.
“I will obliterate [emḥe]” – I impose My will [mamḥe] upon My creations, but My creations do not impose their will [mamḥim] upon Me. Rabbi Elazar said: This is analogous to a king who had storehouses of inferior grain. The residents of the province began slandering the king, saying that he had a bad disposition.7They said he was stingy, because he never opened the storehouses, which they assumed were full of good produce. What did the king do? He opened for them the best of them, and they filled the entire province with rotten produce. They [the residents] began gathering it up and discarding it into the river. So too, if these, the most notable among them, did so, the iniquitous among them all the more so.8If the generation of the Flood, which was composed of the best of all the possible men that God considered creating, were so corrupted, it was all the more so the case that the generations that were not created would have been corrupted.  “One man out of one thousand [elef] I have found” (Ecclesiastes 7:28) – this is like what we learned: The primary source [alfa] for wine.9This is from Menaḥot 86b, and the verse thus means: I have found one superior man, i.e., Noah.  “I will obliterate man whom I have created”10The implication is that there were also men whom God did not create, though He had intended to. – it was God’s original thought to create one thousand generations. How many of them were obliterated?11How many were not actually created? Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili: Nine hundred and seventy-four generations. What is his source? “He commanded the word for one thousand generations” (Psalms 105:8) – this is the Torah.12There were twenty-six generations from the creation of the world until the Torah was given, but it was originally intended to be given to the thousandth generation. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Nine hundred and eighty. What is his source? “He commanded the word for one thousand generations, [the covenant that He sealed with Abraham]” (Psalms 105:8–9) – this is circumcision.13Which was commanded to Abraham, who was the twentieth generation from Adam.
Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: What was not done [even] by the generation of the Flood was done by the ten tribes.14The ten tribes were even more sinful than the generation of the Flood. Regarding the generation of the Flood it is written: “And that every inclination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil all the day” (Genesis 6:5), while regarding the ten tribes it is written: “Woe, the devisers of iniquity and the evildoers on their beds” (Micah 2:1) – that is at night. From where is it derived during the day as well? The verse states: “They perform it at the morning light” (Micah 2:1).15The generation of the Flood sinned all day, but the ten tribes sinned both by day and by night. [Yet] from these [the generation of the Flood], no remnant remained, whereas from those [the ten tribes] there was a remnant. However, it is due to the merit of the righteous men and women that were destined to arise from them. That is what is written: “But behold, a remnant has remained in it who are being taken out, sons and daughters” (Ezekiel 14:22). It is not written here, “they are taking out [motziim] sons and daughters,” but rather: “who are being taken out [mutza’im],16Mutza’im can also mean: those who will emerge. sons and daughters” – due to the merit of the righteous men and women who were destined to descend from them. Rabbi Berekhya said: What was not done by the people of Sodom was done by the tribe of Judah and Benjamin. Regarding the people of Sodom it is written: “And their sin because it is very grave” (Genesis 18:20), but regarding the tribe of Judah it is written: “The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is very, very great” (Ezekiel 9:9). [Yet] from these [the people of Sodom], no remnant remained, whereas from those [Judah and Benjamin] there was a remnant. However, that one, “[Sodom], which was overthrown in a moment” (Lamentations 4:6) – because they did not extend their hands to do charitable deeds; “and no hands seized [ḥalu] it” (Lamentations 4:6) – Rabbi Tanḥum said: Hand did not reach out [ḥalat] to hand [to assist one another]. But these [Judah and Benjamin] did extend their hands to do charitable deeds: “The hands of merciful women cooked their children” (Lamentations 4:10). Why to that extent? “They were food [levarot] for them in the disaster of the daughter of my people” (Lamentations 4:10).17The verse is not to be understood literally, but means that these women kept food from their own children in order to provide first meals [havraa] for their mourning friends. Rabbi Ḥanin said: What is not stated regarding the generation of the Flood is stated regarding coastal cities: “Woe to the inhabitants of the seacoast, nation [goy] of the Keretites” (Zephaniah 2:5) – a nation that was worthy of total annihilation [karet].18Whereas the generation of the Flood had Noah, who survived. So by what merit did they in fact endure? It is by the merit of one gentile [goy], by the merit of one God-fearing man, whom they would produce each year. Rabbi Levi interpreted it favorably: A nation that established [karat] a covenant,19The subject of that verse is the Philistines, who had made a covenant with Abraham (Genesis 21:27) and Isaac (Genesis 26:28). just as it says: “And established [vekharot] a covenant with him” (Nehemiah 9:8).
Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Pinḥas:20They discussed why the animals were killed in the Flood along with mankind. Rabbi Yudan said: This is analogous to a king who entrusted his son to a teacher who caused him to stray onto an evil path. The king became angry at his son and killed him. The king said: Was it not this man who caused him to stray onto an evil path? My son is lost; should this man endure? That is why: “[And the Lord said, I will obliterate…] from man to animal, to crawling creatures, to bird of the heavens.”21So too, the animals were the instrument through which mankind was led astray, as people would gorge themselves on fattened animals and fowl.  Rabbi Pinḥas said: This is analogous to a king who was marrying off his son and prepared a wedding chamber for him. He whitewashed it, painted it, and decorated it. The king grew angry at his son and killed him. What did he do? He entered the wedding chamber and began shattering the wood strips, breaking the walls, and ripping the curtains. The king said: Did I not prepare this only for my son? My son is lost; should this [structure] endure? That is why God destroyed “from man to animal…to bird of the heavens.” That is what is written: “I will destroy everything from upon the face of the earth – the utterance of the Lord. I will destroy man and animal, I will destroy the bird of the heavens, and the fish of the sea, and the stumbling blocks of the wicked” (Zephaniah 1:2–3) – it was they [the animals] that caused the wicked to stumble. When one would hunt a bird, he would say to it: Go get fat and come back, and it would go and get fat and come back [to be eaten].22Their hedonism, which ultimately led to their forsaking God, was facilitated by the animals, the birds, etc.
Rabbi Elazar said: “Surely, their substance was eradicated” (Job 22:20) – initially, the Holy One blessed be He eliminated their wealth, so they would not say: He needs our wealth. “And their wealth was consumed by fire” (Job 22:20) – [meaning] that they would see chunks of gold melting in the fire. Rabbi Akiva said: Everyone reproached them [the Israelites] over the gold and silver that they took with them from Egypt, as it is stated: “Your silver has become dross” (Isaiah 1:22); “and I lavished upon her silver and the gold they used for the Baal” (Hosea 2:10); “With their silver and gold they crafted for themselves idols, so that it will be eliminated” (Hosea 8:4).23As discussed earlier, excessive wealth and decadence lead men astray.  Rav Huna and Rabbi Yirmeya in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Rav Yitzḥak: It is not written here, “so that they would be eliminated,” but rather, “so that it will be eliminated”24Referring to their great wealth of gold and silver. – like a person who says: May the name of so-and-so be obliterated because he caused my son to stray onto an evil path.25May the gold and silver be eliminated because they caused sin.
Rabbi Azarya said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon:26Returning to the question of why the animals were destroyed by the Flood along with mankind. They all corrupted their actions in the generation of the Flood – the dog would consort with the wolf, and the chicken would consort with the peacock. That is what is written: “As all flesh has corrupted [its path upon the earth]” (Genesis 6:12). It is not written, “all of mankind had corrupted,” but rather, “as all flesh had corrupted.” Rabbi Luleyani bar Tavrin said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: The earth itself also strayed; people would sow wheat and it would produce darnel.27Which is unfit for consumption. This darnel that grows [today], its origins are with the generation of the Flood.
Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The sentence of the generation of the Flood lasted over the course of twelve months28Eduyot 2:10. – they received their [full] punishment, and they will have a share in the World to Come.29Some commentators emend the text to reflect the Mishna’s unambiguous assertion (Sanhedrin 107b) that the generation of the Flood will not have a share in the World to Come. It is as Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Each and every drop that the Holy One blessed be He rained down upon them, He would boil it in Gehenna and take it out and rain it down upon them. That is what is written: “When scorched, they disappear [nitzmatu]” (Job 6:17). Their scorching was absolute [laḥlutanit].30In Leviticus 25:23, Onkelos translates the word litzmitut, in perpetuity, as laḥalutin. “Even their love” (Ecclesiastes 9:6)31This verse is seen as alluding to the generation of the Flood. – as they loved their idol worship; “even their hatred” (Ecclesiastes (9:6) – as they hated the Holy One blessed be He; “even their fury” (Ecclesiastes (9:6) – as they would infuriate the Holy One blessed be He with their idol worship; “they have already perished” (Ecclesiastes (9:6) – and they have no share in the world,32This apparently refers to the World to Come.  referring to “anything that takes place under the sun” (Ecclesiastes 9:6). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: “As I regret that I made them, but Noah found favor [in God’s eyes]” (Genesis 6:7–8) – this is bewildering.33Interpreting venoaḥ as “and Noah,” rather than “but Noah.” Why is Noah included among the wicked?. However, even Noah, who [alone] remained from them, it is not that he was worthy, but rather that he found favor [in God’s eyes].

=== 29 | 29 ===
“But Noah found favor in the eyes of the Lord” (Genesis 6:8).  “But Noah found favor in the eyes of the Lord.” It is written: “He will rescue the unclean [i-naki], and he will escape by the pureness of Your hands” (Job 22:30). Rabbi Ḥanina of Anatot said: Noah had [only] one ounce [onkia] of virtue to his credit.1The meaning of the beginning of the Job verse, then, is: “He will rescue the one with only a minuscule amount of merit.” If so, why was he spared? It was “by the pureness of Your hands.”2Noah was saved only by God’s grace (the “pureness of His hands”), not by his own merit. This is in accordance with what Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: “For I regret that I made them, and Noah…”3Interpreting ve-Noaḥ as “and Noah,” rather than “but Noah.” God regretted creating even Noah. (Genesis 6:7–8) – even Noah, who [alone] remained from them, it is not that he was worthy, but rather that he found favor in the eyes of the Lord, as it is stated: “But Noah found favor in the eyes of the Lord.”
Rabbi Simon began: “So said the Lord: As when wine is found in a cluster4When a single wine-producing grape is found in an inferior cluster. and one says: Do not destroy it, as a blessing is in it” (Isaiah 65:8). There was an incident involving a certain pious man, who went out to his vineyard on Shabbat and saw a lone grape and recited a blessing over it. He said: This lone grape is worthy to recite a blessing over it! So too, “So said the Lord: As when wine is found in a cluster…”5So too, Noah was like a single fine grape on a vine full of inferior ones.
Rabbi Simon said: The Holy One blessed be He found three [precious] finds: Abraham, as it is written: “You found his heart faithful before You” (Nehemiah 9:8); David, as it is written: “I found David, My servant” (Psalms 89:21); Israel, as it is written: “Like grapes in the wilderness I found Israel” (Hosea 9:10).6In each case, God rejoiced, as when one finds a treasure. The students raised an objection to Rabbi Simon: But is it not written [also]: “But Noah found favor”? He said to them: He [Noah] found [favor], the Holy One blessed be He did not find [him].7God did not rejoice over “finding” Noah as with the others. It is Noah who found something precious – favor before God. But is it not written: “[Israel] found favor in the wilderness”? (Jeremiah 31:2).8And here it cannot be said that God did not "find” Israel, as Israel is among the three “finds.” It is due to the merit of the generation of the Wilderness.9Do not render it as “in the wilderness,” but “in the merit of the [generation of the] wilderness.” The people of Jeremiah’s time were not worthy, and were not considered “finds” by God; it is they who found favor before Him in the merit of their righteous ancestors. (“You found his heart faithful before You.”)10These words are not relevant here, and should be deleted (Yefe Toar).
Rabbi Huna, Rabbi Pinḥas, Rabbi Ḥanin, and Rabbi Hoshaya do not disagree.11With the previous explanations. Rabbi Yoḥanan, Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, and the Rabbis do disagree. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: This is analogous to one who was walking on the road and he met someone and attached himself to him. To what extent? To the extent that he entered into a friendly relationship with him.12So too, God befriended Noah, as it were. So, “favor” is stated here, and it is stated elsewhere: “Joseph found favor in his eyes” (Genesis 39:4).13Joseph found favor in the eyes of Potiphar, in the sense that Potiphar befriended him. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: This is analogous to one who was walking on the road and he met someone and attached himself to him. To what extent? To the extent that he put him in charge. So, “favor” is stated here, and it is stated elsewhere: “Esther found favor in the eyes [of all who saw her]” (Esther 2:15).14And this favor resulted in her becoming queen, a position of authority. So too, Noah was given mastery over all living things (Genesis 9:2). The Rabbis say: This is analogous to one who was walking on the road and he met someone and attached himself to him. To what extent? To the extent that he gave him his daughter [in marriage]. So, “favor” is stated here, and it is stated elsewhere: “I will pour a spirit of grace and supplication upon the house of David and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem” (Zechariah 12:10).15The verse is referring to a spirit of divine wisdom, which is often personified as one’s “daughter” (Maharzu). Noah, too, was granted this wisdom, as the Midrash goes on to explain. To what extent? To the extent that he had the knowledge to ascertain which animal is fed in the second hour of the day and which is fed at the third hour of the night.
Rabbi Simon said: We find that the Holy One blessed be He performs kindness for the descendants due to the merit of their progenitor.16This is a common theme throughout the Bible. From where is it derived that the Holy One blessed be He performs [kindness] with the progenitor due to the merit of his descendants? “But Noah found favor in the eyes of the Lord” – by what merit? It is due to the merit of his descendants.17As the next verse states, "These are the offspring of Noah.” It was in the merit of his future generations that Noah was saved.

=== 30 | 30 ===
“These are the offspring of Noah; Noah was a righteous man, faultless in his generations; Noah walked with God” (Genesis 6:9). “These are the offspring of Noah; Noah was a righteous man, faultless,” that is what is written: “When a storm passes through, the wicked are no more, but a righteous man is the foundation of the world” (Proverbs 10:25). “When a storm passes through, the wicked are no more” – this is the generation of the Flood; “but the righteous man is the foundation of the world” – this is Noah. “The wicked are overturned and they are no more, but the house of the righteous will stand” (Proverbs 12:7). “The wicked are overturned and they are no more” – this is the generation of the Flood; “but the house of the righteous will stand” – this is Noah. That is what is written: “These are the offspring of Noah.” Another matter: “These are the offspring of Noah.” It is written: “The house of the wicked will be destroyed, but the tent of the upright will flourish” (Proverbs 14:11). “The house of the wicked will be destroyed” – this is the generation of the Flood; “but the tent of the upright will flourish” – this is Noah.
Another matter: “These are the offspring of Noah.” It is written: “He will be light upon the surface of the water; their portion in the land is cursed; no one turns aside from the vineyards” (Job 24:18). “He will be light upon the surface of the water” – [this refers to Noah, who was saved from] the decree that was decreed upon them that they be eliminated by water; “their portion in the land is cursed” – that is to say, [the curse of] ‘He who exacted retribution from the generation of the Flood.’1When someone reneges on a purchase after money was paid for the object, he is cursed by the court: “He who exacted retribution from the generation of the Flood, He will exact retribution from one does not stand by his word” (Bava Metzia 44a). And why [are they cursed] to that extent? “No one turns aside from the vineyards” – meaning that their intent in life was solely [monetary,] to plant vineyards. But Noah, his intent in life was only to be fruitful and multiply in the world and produce children, as it is stated: “These are the offspring of Noah.”
“These are.” Rabbi Abahu said: Everywhere that “these are” is stated, it implies: to the exclusion of what preceded it. Here, where “these are” is stated, it implies: to the exclusion of what preceded it2The preceding verses, which described the people of that generation and their degenerate ways. – the generation of the Flood.
“These are the offspring of Noah; Noah” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Anyone whose name is written twice in succession has a [double] share – in this world and in the World to Come. They raised an objection to him: But is it not written: “Teraḥ Teraḥ”? (Genesis 11:27). If so, he has a share in this world and in the World to Come! He said to them: This, too, is not a contradiction, as Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Rabbi Abba bar Kahana: [When God told Abraham,] “You shall go to your fathers in peace” (Genesis 15:15), he was giving him the good tidings that his father had a share in the World to Come. [And when He told him,] “You will be buried at a good old age” (Genesis 15:15) – he was giving him the good tidings that Ishmael would repent [in his lifetime].
“These are the offspring of Noah; Noah” – this is bewildering. Should it not have said: “These are the offspring of Noah: Shem”? It is, rather, [alluding to the idea that Noah brought] a relief [neyaḥa]3“Noah, Noah” is interpreted as “neyaḥa, neyaḥa” – double relief. for himself, a relief for the whole world; a relief for the ancestors,4For until his time the remains of the dead ancestors would constantly be disturbed in their graves (see Bereshit Rabba 25:2). a relief for their descendants; a relief for the heavenly, a relief for the earthly;5For he saved the entire universe from destruction. a relief [for himself] in this world, a relief in the World to Come.
“These are the offspring of Noah” – that is what is written: “The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life” (Proverbs 11:30). What are the fruits of the righteous? They are mitzvot and good deeds.6And this is why it states, “These are the offspring of Noah; Noah was a righteous man.” “And he who gathers souls is wise” (Proverbs 11:30) – as, [in his wisdom,] he fed and sustained7The animals that he had gathered. all twelve months in the ark. [Yet] after all this praise, “behold, retribution is made to the righteous on the earth” (Proverbs 11:31) – when he came to exit [the ark], retribution was exacted from him. This is an astonishing statement! It is as Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili: As Noah was emerging from the ark, a lion bit him and maimed him. He was thus rendered unfit to sacrifice, and his son Shem sacrificed in his stead. [The verse continues with] an a fortiori conclusion: “all the more so, the wicked and the sinner” (Proverbs 11:31) – this is the generation of the Flood.
“[Noah was a righteous] man [ish]” – everywhere that ish is stated, it is a righteous man who rebukes. As all one hundred and twenty years,8Before the Flood, when God first decreed that He was going to destroy the world (see Genesis 6:3). Noah would plant cedars and chop them down [for timber]. They said to him: ‘Why are you doing this?’ He said to them: ‘So said the Master of the world, that He is bringing a flood upon the world.’ They said to him: ‘If He brings a flood, it will come only upon the house of that man!’9Noah. When Methuselah died10At the conclusion of the 120 years. they said to him: ‘Indeed, it [tragedy] came only upon the house of that man.’11Methuselah was Noah’s grandfather, therefore his death was a tragedy for Noah. That is what is written: “A flame [lapid] of contempt for those of complacent thoughts [ashtut], destined to cause slippings of the foot” (Job 12:5). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: [God declared:] I had a single herald who arose for me in the generation of the Flood – this is Noah;12Noah was a herald in that he announced to his generation the impending Flood, as above. there,13In some unspecified location. when they [mean to] say: ‘He has an announcement,’ [they say] he has a lapid.14And this is the basis of Rabbi Abba’s interpretation of lapid as “herald.” Of contempt – as they would disparage him, calling him ‘contemptible old man.’ “For those of complacent thoughts [ashtut]” – as they were as hard15In their obstinacy. as blocks of metal [ashatot]. “Destined to cause slippings of the foot” – as they were destined for two disasters16Hence the plural, “slippings.” – a disaster from above and a disaster from below.17“And the windows of the heavens were opened and all the wellsprings of the great depth were breached” (Genesis 7:11).
“Faultless [tamim] in his generations” – bar Ḥatya said: Everyone in whose regard tamim is stated, he completed his years to a multiple of seven.18Tamim also means “complete,” and numbers that are multiples of seven are considered “complete.” Noah lived for three hundred and fifty years after the Flood. Abraham (also called tamim, in Genesis 17:1) lived for seventy-seven years after that reference.  “Was [haya]” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Anyone in whose regard haya is stated, he was righteous from beginning to end. They raised an objection against him: But is it not written: “Abraham was (haya) one, and he inherited the land” (Ezekiel 33:24); was he the same from beginning to end?19Was he not an idolater in his youth? He said to them: This, too, is not a contradiction, as Rabbi Levi said in the name of Reish Lakish: At the age of three years, Abraham recognized his Creator.20So he was indeed righteous from beginning (early childhood) to end.  Rabbi Ḥanina and Rabbi Yoḥanan, both of them say: At the age of forty-eight years, Abraham recognized his Creator. How, then, do I explain “haya”? It means that he was destined to guide the entire world to repent.21Rabbi Yoḥanan disagrees with the interpretation of haya given above, and explains that it indicates that a person had a particular destiny from birth. [Similarly,] “Behold, man [Adam] has become [haya]” (Genesis 3:22) – he was destined for death. “The serpent was [haya]” (Genesis 3:1) – he was destined for calamity. “Cain was [haya]” (Genesis 4:2) – he was destined for exile. “Job was [haya]” (Job 1:1) – he was destined for suffering. “Noah was [haya]” – he was destined for a miracle. “Moses was [haya]” (Exodus 3:1) – he was destined to be a redeemer. “Mordekhai was [haya]” (Esther 2:5) – he was destined for redemption.  Rabbi Levi and the other Rabbis [discussed this]. Rabbi Levi said: Everyone in whose regard haya is stated saw [the emergence of] a new world. Rabbi Shmuel said: They are five: Noah – yesterday [during the Flood], “stones were worn away by water” (Job 14:19), as Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Even the lower millstone was obliterated in the water. Then you read: “The sons of Noah who emerged from the ark”? (Genesis 9:18). This [change] is bewildering! However, it indicates that he saw [the emergence of] a new world. Joseph – “they tortured his legs with chains” (Psalms 105:18), but now, “Joseph was the ruler”! (Genesis 42:6). However, it indicates that he saw a new world. Moses – yesterday, he was fleeing from Pharaoh, and now he was drowning him in the sea! However, it indicates that he saw a new world. Job – yesterday, “He spills my bile onto the ground” (Job 16:13), and now, “the Lord added to Job double of all that he had before”! (Job 42:10). However, it indicates that he saw a new world. Mordekhai – yesterday he was destined for hanging, and now he is hanging his hangers! However, it indicates that he saw a new world. The other Rabbis say: Everyone in whose regard haya is stated, he fed others and sustained them. Noah fed and sustained [the animals] all twelve months, as it is stated: “And you, take for you [from all food that is eaten…and it shall be for you and for them for food]” (Genesis 6:21). Joseph – “Joseph provided for his father and his brothers” (Genesis 47:12). Moses fed and sustained Israel for forty years in the wilderness. Job – “I ate my bread alone, and an orphan did not partake of it?” (Job 31:17). This was meant as a rhetorical question. Mordekhai fed and sustained others. Rabbi Yudan said: One time he went around to all the wet nurses, but did not immediately find a wet nurse for Esther, and he nursed her himself. Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Abahu said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer: Milk came into him [his breasts] and he nursed her. When Rabbi Abahu expounded this in public, the audience laughed as he spoke [of a man producing milk]. He said to them: But is it not [stated in] a mishna: Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: The milk of a male is not subject to ritual impurity.22Mishna Makhshirin 6:7.
“In his generations” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: [Only] in his generations he was considered righteous, but had he been in Moses’ generation or in Samuel’s generation, he would not have been considered righteous. In a marketplace of completely blind people, they call those who are blind in one eye, ‘the one of abundant light.’ This is analogous to one who had a wine cellar. He opened one barrel and found that it was [spoiled and turned to] vinegar. A second was the same; a third, he found it turning sour. They said to him, ‘[Do not drink it;] it is turning sour.’ He said to them, ‘Is there any better than it?’ They said to him, ‘No.’ So too, in his generation he was considered righteous, but had he been in Moses’ generation or in Samuel’s generation, he would not have been considered righteous. Rabbi Neḥemya said: If in his generation he was righteous; had he been in Moses’s generation or in Samuel’s generation all the more so. This is analogous to a bowl of balsam oil that was sealed with a tight-fitting lid. It was situated in a graveyard and its fragrance wafted through the air. Had it been outside the graveyard, how much more so! This is analogous to a virgin who was in a marketplace full of immoral women and she did not get a bad reputation; had she been in a marketplace of upright women, all the more so! So too, had he been in Moses’ generation or in Samuel’s generation all the more so.
“Noah walked with God.” Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: This is analogous to a prince who had two sons, one older and one younger. He said to the younger, ‘Walk with me,’ and he said to the elder, ‘Come and walk before me.’ So too, of Abraham, whose strength was great, [God said,] “Walk before Me and be faultless” (Genesis 17:1). But Noah, whose strength was lesser, “Noah walked with God.” Rabbi Neḥemya said: This is analogous to a friend of the king who was sinking in thick mud. The king looked and saw him. He said to him: ‘Rather than sink in the mud, walk along with me.’ That is what is written: “Noah walked with God.” To what is Abraham comparable? To a friend of the king who saw23Through the window. the king walking in dark alleys. His friend peered and began illuminating for him through the window. The king peered and saw him. He said to him: ‘Rather than illuminating for me through the window, come and illuminate before me.’ So too, the Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham: ‘Rather than illuminating for Me from Mesopotamia and its environs, come and illuminate before Me in the Land of Israel!’  That is what is written: “He blessed Joseph, and said: The God before whom my fathers, [Abraham and Isaac], walked…” (Genesis 48:15). Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It is analogous to a shepherd who is standing and looking at his flock. Reish Lakish said: It is analogous to a prince who is walking with the elders going before him. According to the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan, we are in need of His glory. According to the opinion of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, He is in need of our glory.24So that we will publicize His name throughout the world.

=== 31 | 31 ===
“God said to Noah: The end of all flesh has come before Me, as the earth is filled with injustice because of them and, behold, I am destroying them with the earth” (Genesis 6:13). “God said to Noah: The end of all flesh [has come before Me, as the earth is filled with injustice…]” – “Injustice rises up into a rod of wickedness” (Ezekiel 7:11). Does injustice indeed rise up?1“Rise up” implies success and triumph. But in fact, evil never triumphs in the end. That is a rhetorical question. God forbid; it does not rise up. But if it does rise up, it will be to act as a rod of wickedness, to bring culpability against the wicked.2Injustice does not “rise up” in the sense of success, but in the sense of serving as a tool of punishment. That is what is meant by “into a rod of wickedness.” “Not among them3None will be spared from among them. and not among their multitudes [mehamonam] and not among anything of theirs [mehemehem]” (Ezekiel 7:11) – not from them, nor from their wealth [mamonam], nor from their offspring [timhatehon]. “And there is no mourning [noa] among them” (Ezekiel 7:11) – no person experienced any satisfaction [naḥat]4Noa, ending in heh, is interpreted as if it were written noaḥ, ending in ḥet, meaning relief or satisfaction. from them, and neither did the Holy One blessed be He experience any satisfaction [naḥat] from them.  “And there is no noa among them” – this is as Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: “As I regret that I made them. And Noah…” (Genesis 6:7–8)5This is interpreted to mean that God included Noah among those who deserved punishment. The Midrash is expounding noa as if it were a reference to Noah. –even Noah, who remained from among them,6“Noa among them” means: Noah, who was the only survivor among them.  it is not that he was worthy, but rather that he found favor [before God, as it is written:] “But Noah found favor in the eyes of the Lord” (Genesis 6:8). And because they were steeped in licentiousness, they were obliterated from the world.
“God said to Noah: The end of all flesh has come before Me” – “They would make oil between their rows; they have trodden winepresses and are thirsty” (Job 24:11).7This passage in Job is often interpreted as referring to the generation of the Flood. “They would make oil between their rows” – they would make small oil presses. “They have trodden winepresses and are thirsty” – even though they trod winepresses, they were thirsty. Why have they “trodden winepresses and are thirsty”?8If they pressed the grape harvest into wine, why would they be thirsty? It is because there was a curse on whatever the wicked produced. And because they were steeped in licentiousness and robbery, they were obliterated from the world.
“God said” – “They hated the admonisher at the gate, and they despised the speaker of uprightness” (Amos 5:10). He [Noah] would say to them: ‘Worthless people, do you forsake the one whose voice “shatters cedars” (Psalms 29:5), and bow down to a shriveled tree?’ And because they were steeped in robbery, they were obliterated from the world, as it is stated: “God said to Noah: The end of all flesh has come…”
Another interpretation, “the end of all flesh” – it is written: “They cause people to cry out from their great oppression; they shout out from the strong arm of the multitudes” (Job 35:9). “They cause people to cry out from their great oppression” – this refers to the oppressed ones; “they shout out from the strong arm of the multitudes” – this refers to the oppressors. These surpassed those and those surpassed these. These surpassed those – in terms of their monetary wickedness; and those surpassed these – in terms of wickedness of speech,9They spoke words of blasphemy because of their plight. until sentence was passed against them.10Oppressor and oppressed alike. And because they were steeped in robbery, they were obliterated from the world.
“The end [ketz] of all flesh has come [ba] before Me” – their time has come, to be cut off [lehikatzetz]; their time has come to become desolate [bata]; their indictment “has come before Me.” Why to such an extent? It is “as the earth is filled with injustice because of them.” What is injustice and what is stealing?11Injustice [ḥamas] refers to monetary wrongdoing, so what is the difference between that and stealing? Rabbi Ḥanina said: Injustice involves less than a peruta12A peruta is a small coin of trifling value. Anything worth less than a peruta is considered of negligible value, and there is no legal recourse to retrieve it, as the Midrash goes on to explain. and robbery involves a peruta.  This is what the members of the generation of the Flood would do: One of them would take out a basket filled with lupin beans [to the marketplace]. One person would come and take less than a peruta worth [of beans] and another one would come and take less than a peruta worth; less than the amount for which one would be able to collect compensation in court. The Holy One blessed be He said to them: ‘You acted improperly; I, too, will act improperly with you.’ That is what is written: “Behold, their remnant has gone away from them, and they die without wisdom (Job 4:21) – without the wisdom of the Torah. “From morning to evening they are broken; forever unnoticed [mibli mesim], forever they will perish” (Job 4:20). Mesim is nothing other than a judge,13So mibli mesim means without a judge. They made sure their crimes could never be brought before a judge. as it says: “These are the monetary ordinances that you shall place [tasim] before them” (Exodus 21:1).
Another interpretation, “as the earth is filled with injustice [ḥamas].” Rabbi Levi said: Ḥamas refers to idolatry; ḥamas refers to sexual immorality; ḥamas refers to bloodshed. Ḥamas refers to idolatry, as it is stated: “As they filled the earth with ḥamas” (Ezekiel 8:17).14The context there is a condemnation of idolatry. Ḥamas refers to sexual immorality, as it is stated: “The ḥamas done to me and my flesh is upon Babylon” (Jeremiah 51:35). Ḥamas refers to bloodshed, as it is stated: “[Egypt shall be a desolation and Edom a desolate waste] due to the ḥamas against the children of Judah, that they shed innocent blood” (Joel 4:19). Ḥamas [is also to be understood] in its usual sense, [injustice].
“Behold, I am destroying them with the earth” – Rabbi Huna and Rabbi Yirmeya in the name of Rav Kahana bar Malkiya: Even the three handbreadths [of soil] in which the plow operates were obliterated. This is analogous to a prince who had a tutor. Anytime he would misbehave, his tutor would be punished. Or to a prince who had a nursemaid. Anytime he would misbehave, his nursemaid would be punished. So, the Holy One blessed be He said: “Behold, I am destroying them with the earth” – I will destroy them and destroy the earth with them.15The earth was made to serve man; therefore it was punished due to the misdeeds of man.
“Craft for you an ark of cypress wood; you shall craft the ark with compartments, and you shall coat it within and without with pitch” (Genesis 6:14). “Craft for you an ark of cypress wood” – Rabbi Isi said: In four places, this expression, “craft,” is stated; in three it [the material] is specified, and in one it is not specified. “Craft for you an ark of [cypress [gofer] wood]…” – Rabbi Natan said: An ark of the wood of kardinon.16Rabbi Natan translates the Hebrew gofer into a more commonly known word, kardinon. “Craft for you flint knives” (Joshua 5:2) – it was specified, knives of flint. “Craft for you silver trumpets” (Numbers 10:2), it was specified. “Craft for you a serpent” (Numbers 21:8) – it [its material] was not specified. Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Rabbi Aivu: “Let the wise man hear and gain a lesson” (Proverbs 1:5) – this is Moses, as the Holy One blessed be He said to him: “Craft for you a serpent” (Numbers 21:8), but did not specify [the material]. He said: ‘If I craft it of gold, this word is not related to that word; if of silver, this word is not related to that word.17Serpent [naḥash] does not correspond to gold [zahav] or silver [kesef]. But rather, I will craft it of bronze [neḥoshet], as the words are related,’ as it is stated: “Moses crafted a bronze serpent [neḥash] (Numbers 21:9).  From here we learn the Torah was given in the sacred tongue [Hebrew].18The similarity between the words for “serpent” and “bronze” occurs only in Hebrew. Rabbi Pinḥas and Rabbi Ḥizkiya in the name of Rabbi Simon: Just as the Torah was given in the sacred tongue, so, the world was created in the sacred tongue. Have you ever heard anyone saying: Gyne,19“Woman” in Greek. gynea;20This would be the masculine form of gyne, but it is not the Greek word for “man,” which is anthropos.  anthropos,21Man in Greek. anthropa;22This would be the feminine form of anthropos, but it is not the Greek word for “woman,” which is gyne. gavra,23Man in Aramaic. gavreta?24This would be the feminine form of gavra, but it is not the Aramaic word for “woman,” which is itta. There are completely different, unrelated words for man and woman in Greek and Aramaic. But ish and isha [makes sense]. Why, because one form corresponds to the other.25Hebrew is the only language in which it makes sense to say, “This one shall be called Woman [isha], because this was taken from Man [ish]” (Genesis 2:23), as isha is the feminine form of ish.
“You shall craft the ark with compartments [kinim]” – rooms and dwelling quarters. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Just as a nest of birds [ken]26The term ken refers to a pair of birds, in this case the two birds used in the purification of the leper (see Leviticus 14:22). purifies the leper, so, too, your ark purifies you.27All the toil that you invest in its construction will purify you of any sins you may have. “You shall coat it within and without with pitch” – here it says: “You shall coat it [within and without with pitch]…” and elsewhere it says: “She coated it with clay and with pitch” (Exodus 2:3).28Regarding the basket Moses’ mother prepared for him when she placed him in the river. It is because in that case the water current was weak,29So it didn’t require a double layer of pitch. so “she coated it with clay and with pitch” – with clay to block the odor,30The inside layer, of clay, was to block the foul odor of the pitch, of the outer layer. and with pitch to block [penetration of] water.
“And this is how you shall craft it: Three hundred cubits is the length of the ark, fifty cubits its breadth, and thirty cubits its height” (Genesis 6:15). “And this is how you shall craft it” – Rabbi Yudan said: “This” [is not written, instead we read:] “And this”31The “and” is there to allude to another, additional incident. – someone else is destined to measure in accordance with your cubit.32There are various measurements that are called cubit.  That is what is written [regarding Solomon’s Temple]: “Its length, according to the original measurement,33This is seen as a reference to Noah’s cubits. was sixty cubits, and the breadth was twenty cubits” (II Chronicles 3:3). Why does one call it a cubit of tavikin?34This was a name used for the official royal cubit. Rabbi Huna said: It is because it is based on a comparison [matbiot].35Its length was determined from the ancient cubit used by Noah. The Rabbis say: It is named after Noah’s ark [teiva]. “Three hundred cubits is the length of the ark, fifty cubits its breadth, and thirty cubits its height” – bar Ḥatya said: “I speak about Your edicts” (Psalms 119:15), “I delight in Your statutes” (Psalms 119:16) – the Torah gives you instruction about practical matters. If a person wants to build a ship capable of standing sturdily in port, he should make its width one-sixth of its length and its height one-tenth of its length.
“You shall make a bright item for the ark, and to a cubit you shall complete it at the top, and the entrance of the ark you shall place at its side; with lower, second-level, and third stories you shall craft it” (Genesis 6:15). “You shall make a bright item [tzohar] for the ark” – Rabbi Ḥunya, Rabbi Pinḥas, Rabbi Ḥanin, and Rabbi Hoshaya did not disagree about this. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana and Rabbi Levi did disagree. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: It was a window. Rabbi Levi said: It was a [luminous] precious stone. Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Levi: All twelve months that Noah was in the ark, he needed neither the light of the sun during the day nor the light of the moon at night; rather, he had a precious stone that he had suspended. When it was dim he knew that it was day, and when it shined brightly he knew that it was night. Rabbi Huna said: We were once fleeing from enemy troops in a cave in Tiberias, and we had lamps with us. When they were dim, we knew that it was day, and when they shined brightly, we knew that it was night. “And to a cubit you shall complete it at the top” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: There were three hundred and sixty compartments in it [the ark], each one ten cubits by ten cubits,36They were arranged in rows of thirty compartments. Since each compartment was a square of ten by ten cubits, the length of each row was three hundred cubits (the entire length of the ark), and its width was ten. There were four such rows, side by side, taking up a width of forty cubits. The remaining ten cubits of the ark’s width was taken up by aisles alongside the rows, as the Midrash goes on to describe. Altogether there were one hundred and twenty compartments in these four rows. The same arrangement was followed for each of the three levels of the ark, for a total of three hundred and sixty. and two four-cubit aisles with chambers on one side and the other side, and again chambers on one side and the other side, and two cubits [for two additional aisles] on either side.  Rabbi Neḥemya said: There were nine hundred compartments in it, each compartment being six cubits by six cubits,37According to Rabbi Neḥemya, each row consisted of fifty compartments, running along the entire length of the ark. There were therefore six rows, taking up a total width of thirty-six cubits, with the remaining fourteen cubits of the ark’s width accounted for by aisles. Six rows of fifty compartments adds up to three hundred compartments, for each of the three levels. and three aisles, each four cubits, with chambers on one side and on the other side, and two cubits [for two additional aisles] on each of the sides. According to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda it is difficult38The phrase “and to a cubit you shall complete it at the top” implies that the roof was slanted, narrowing at the top, until it reached a width of one cubit. and according to the opinion of Rabbi Neḥemya it is difficult.39According to both opinions, there were equal numbers of compartments on each of the three levels. But if the roof of the ark narrowed towards the top, there would have to be fewer compartments on the top level. Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: Like the cubit below, so was the cubit above – “and by the cubit you shall complete it at the top.”40The verse does not mean that the roof was slanted until it became just a cubit wide; rather, it means that the same cubit used for measuring the bottom of the ark should be used at its top. Rabbi Neḥemya said: It was [built] like a kind of vault41The roof’s incline was not angular, but arched, beginning near the top of the ark, so it did not diminish from the floor space on the top level. continuously inclining as it ascended, until it reached its single cubit, as it is stated: “and to a cubit…”  “And the entrance of the ark you shall place at its side” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: The Torah gives you instruction about practical matters: If a person builds a large room that is ten by ten cubits [or more], one should place its doorway entrance off to the side.42Not in the middle of the wall, so as not to diminish from the usable area of the room. “Lower, second-level, and third stories you shall craft it” – the lower ones [compartments] were for refuse, the second-level ones were for him, his sons and the pure animals, and the upper ones were for the impure animals. Some exchange this: The lower ones were for the impure animals, the second-level ones for him, his sons and the pure animals, and the upper ones for the refuse. How would he do this?43Dispose of the refuse into the uppermost level. There was a partitioned opening and he would sweep it to the side.44So it should not fall down to the level below. “You shall craft it [taaseha]” – it [the ark], too, assisted [in building] itself.45Taaseha is expounded as though it was written as te’aseh, it shall become made. The construction of the ark was too much for any person to accomplish, so there was a miraculous element in its building, as if the ark itself assisted in its own construction. 
“And behold, I am bringing the flood, water upon the earth, to destroy all flesh in which there is the breath of life, from under the heavens; everything that is on the earth will perish” (Genesis 6:17). “And behold, I am” – I am concurring with the words of the angels, who were saying: “What is man that You remember him?” (Psalms 8:5).46See Bereshit Rabba 8:6. The Midrash is expounding on the superfluous “and” in “and behold, I,” which suggests that God was in agreement with someone else regarding man’s destruction. “The flood, water” – it was water at first, but after it continued to fall, it became a flood. “To destroy all flesh… everything that is on the earth will perish [yigva]” – will waste away.47Vayigva can also mean to expire peacefully. That is not its meaning here. “But I will keep My covenant with you; and you shall enter the ark: You, and your sons, and your wife, and your sons' wives with you” (Genesis 6:18). “But I will keep My covenant with you” – you require a covenant [from Me] so that the produce that you gather [into the ark] will not rot, will not become moldy and will not go bad. You require a covenant because of the mighty ones.48See Genesis 6:4: “There were giants on the earth in those days…those were the mighty men of old.” [They were so mighty that] one of them could place his foot on the [opening to the] depths and stop it up, or place his hand on the window [to the heavens] and block it up. But if one would attempt to enter the ark, his legs would teeter. That is what is written: “The giants will tremble under the water and its dwellers” (Job 26:5). If an [unauthorized] lion would attempt to enter the ark, its teeth would become dulled.49And it would retreat. That is what is written: “The roar of the lion and the voice of the great cat, and the teeth of the lion cubs are broken” (Job 4:10). Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: You were a carpenter,50You succeeded in building the ark. but if it not for My covenant that was with you, you would be unable to enter the ark.51Because of the violent weather conditions, and because of men who threatened to kill him (see Bereshit Rabba 32:8). That is what is written: “But I will keep My covenant with you” – when? When you enter the ark.52This is the implication of the verse: “But I will keep My covenant with you; and you shall enter the ark.” “You, and your sons” – Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon and Rabbi Ḥanin said in the name of Rav Shmuel bar Rabbi Yitzḥak: When Noah entered the ark, it was prohibited to him to engage in procreation. That is what is written: “You shall come to the ark: You, and your sons” by yourself, “and your wife, and your sons' wives,” by themselves. When he emerged, He permitted it for him. That is what is written: “Go out of the ark: You and your wife, and your sons and your sons’ wives” (Genesis 8:16). Rabbi Avun said: It is written: “They are in want and in famine, they are solitary [galmuda]” (Job 30:3) – if you see want come to the world, and famine come to the world, they are solitary [galmuda] – look upon your wife as though she is galmuda, as in the coastal cities, they call a menstruating woman galmuda.53Do not engage in marital relations as long as a catastrophic situation is taking place. Rabbi Huna said: It is written: “Two sons were born to Joseph before the advent of the year of the famine” (Genesis 41:50).54Showing that during times of catastrophe, marital relations should be avoided.
“And of every living being, of all flesh, two of each you shall bring to the ark, to keep alive with you; they shall be male and female” (Genesis 6:19). “And of every living being, of all flesh, two…” – Rabbi Hoshaya said: Even [malevolent] disembodied spirits entered the ark with Noah, as it is stated: “…of every living being” – of those for whom souls were created, but bodies were not created for them. Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: The re’em55A creature of incredible size. did not enter [the ark] with him,56Because it was too large. but its young did enter. Rabbi Neḥemya said: Neither it nor its offspring [could enter], but Noah tied it to the ark and it would dig furrows [in the ground]57As the ark travelled. like the one from Tiberias to Susita.58This is a reference to the Sea of Galilee. That is what is written: “Can you bind the re’em with his rope to a furrow? Will he loosen the soil of valleys after you?” (Job 39:10). In the days of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba, one of its [a re’em’s] young ascended to the Land of Israel and it did not leave a single tree that it did not uproot. They declared a fast and Rabbi Ḥiyya prayed, whereupon its mother bellowed from the wilderness, and it went back down following her voice.  “They shall be male and female” – if you see a male pursuing a female59In courtship. accept it; a female pursuing a male, do not accept it.60The fact that male is mentioned here before female teaches that it is proper that the male, not the female, should play the dominant role in courtship.
“And you, take for you from all food that is eaten, and gather it to you, and it shall be for you and for them for food” (Genesis 6:21). “And you, take for you…” Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: He took in cakes of pressed figs with him.61Such fig cakes are nourishing for both man and animal. It is taught in the name of Rabbi Neḥemya: Most of what he took in was cakes of pressed figs. Rabbi Levi62The Hebrew text has “Rabbi Abba bar Kahana.” The translation follows the emendation put forward by Rashash and others. said: He took in with him branches for [feeding the] elephants, wild onions for the gazelles, glass for the ostriches.63Rabbi Levi maintains that Noah did not take in fig cakes as the main food for all, but rather, human food for the humans, and animal food for the animals. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: He took in with him vine branches for planting vines [after the Flood], fig branches for planting fig trees, olive branches for planting olive trees. According to the opinion of Rabbi Abba bar Kahana: “It shall be for you and for them [for food]” – an item that is [food] for both you and them.64That is why he said that Noah took cakes of pressed figs. According to the opinion of Rabbi Levi: “It shall be for you and for them” – you are primary and they are secondary to you.65“You and them” does not mean that the same food should be eaten by both you and them; rather, it means that your food takes precedence over theirs.  “[Take for you from all food that is eaten] and gather it to you” – a person should not store up what he does not need.66The Torah here is teaching a practical lesson for everyday life. “And Noah did; according to everything that God commanded him, so he did” (Genesis 6:22). “And Noah did; according to everything that God commanded him, so he did” – this pertains to the construction of the ark.

=== 32 | 32 ===
“The Lord said to Noah: Come, you and your entire household, into the ark, as I have seen you to be righteous before Me in this generation” (Genesis 7:1). “The Lord said to Noah: Come, you and your entire household, into the ark.” It is written: ]David said:] “Destroy those who speak falsehood; the Lord abhors a man of bloodshed and deceit” (Psalms 5:7) – this is speaking of Do’eg and Aḥitofel. “Those who speak [doverei] falsehood” – they and their speech.1Doverei, “those who speak [falsehood]” is spelled in a manner that it can also be read as divrei, the words of [falsehood]. It is both the speakers and the speech that the Lord abhors. Rabbi Pinḥas said: They and their conduct [midaberoteihen]. “A man of bloodshed and deceit” – this one permitted sexual immorality and bloodshed, and that one permitted sexual immorality and bloodshed, as it is stated in Aḥitofel’s regard: “Go consort with your father’s concubine” (II Samuel 16:21). And as for bloodshed, it is written: “I will come upon him while he is weary and dispirited” (II Samuel 17:2), and it is written: “And I will smite the king alone” (II Samuel 17:2). And that one [Do’eg] permitted sexual immorality and bloodshed – Naḥman son of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani: He said to Saul: ‘Is David’s marriage valid? Is he not a traitor against the throne,2A capital offense. and hence considered [as if already] dead? So now release his wife and declare him a condemned man, so it is as if he is already dead, his life forfeited, and his wife is permissible [to marry].’ Saul arose, and in accordance with his [Do’eg’s] arguments, gave Mikhal, David’s wife, to Palti son of Layish.3I Samuel 25:44. As for bloodshed, it is as it is written: “And the king's servants were unwilling to extend their hand against the priests of the Lord” (I Samuel 22:17), but Do’eg did kill them, as it is stated: “Do’eg the Edomite turned, and he smote the priests” (I Samuel 22:18). “The Lord abhors” (Psalms 5:7) – as they will neither come to life nor will they be judged [at the resurrection]. [David continued:] “And I, [in Your great mercy, come to Your House]” (Psalms 5:8) – just as they did, so did I.4I too permitted sexual immorality and bloodshed at one point (II Samuel 11). This is what is meant by “and I.” What is the difference between me and them? It is that You dealt kindly with me5Because I repented for my sins. and said to me: “The Lord has also expunged your sin…” (II Samuel 12:13). Another interpretation, “Destroy those who speak falsehood” (Psalms 5:7) – this is speaking of the generation of the Flood.6And the speaker in the Psalm is Noah. They and their false speech. Rabbi Pinḥas said: They and their conduct. “A man of bloodshed” (Psalms 5:7) – as it is stated: “The murderer would rise up in broad daylight, he would kill the poor and indigent, and at night he would be like a thief” (Job 24:14).7This passage is often interpreted as referring to the generation of the Flood. “And deceit” (Psalms 5:7) – as it is stated: “As the earth was filled with injustice because of them” (Genesis 6:13). “The Lord abhors” – as they neither come to life nor will they be judged [at the resurrection]. [Noah continued:] “And I [in Your great mercy, come to Your House]” (Psalms 5:8) – just as they did, so did I.8By not protesting against the actions of his generation, Noah considered himself complicit in their sins. What is the difference between me and them? It is that You dealt kindly with me and said to me: “Come, you and your entire household, into the ark.”9The ark is referred to as “Your house” because it was made by God’s command.
Another interpretation, “Come, you…” – it is written: “For the Lord is righteous and He loves righteousness. Their faces will behold the upright One” (Psalms 11:7). Rabbi Tanḥuma in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon and Rabbi Menaḥama in the name of Rabbi Eliezer bar Yosei said: There is no person who likes his competitor craftsman, but a Torah scholar loves his competitor craftsman, as illustrated [by the friendship of] Rabbi Ḥiyya towards Rabbi Hoshaya, and Rabbi Hoshaya towards Rabbi Ḥiyya. And the Holy One blessed be He [also] likes His competitor craftsman, as it is stated: “For the Lord is righteous and He loves righteousness” (Psalms 11:7)10God’s “craft” is righteousness, yet he loves others who act with righteousness. – this refers to Noah, as it is stated: “The Lord said to Noah: Come, you […into the ark, as I have seen you to be righteous before Me…]” (Genesis 7:1).
It is written: “The Lord tests the righteous, but He hates the wicked and the one who loves injustice” (Psalms 11:5) – Rabbi Yonatan said: A potter does not test flimsy jugs, as he would not be able to knock on them even once without breaking them. What does he test? Sturdy jugs, as even if he knocks on them several times, they do not break. So, too, the Holy One blessed be He does not test the wicked, but only the righteous, as it is stated: “The Lord tests the righteous,” and it is written: “God tested Abraham” (Genesis 22:1). Rabbi Yosei ben Ḥanina said: A linen producer, when he knows that his flax is high quality, the more he crushes it, the better it becomes, the more he beats it the more it improves. But when he knows that the flax is low quality, he would not be able to beat it even once without it breaking. So, too, the Holy One blessed be He does not test the wicked, but only the righteous, as it is stated: “The Lord tests the righteous.” Rabbi Elazar said: This is analogous to a proprietor [of a farm] who had two cows, one strong and one feeble. Upon which does he place the yoke? Is it not upon the strong one? So, too, the Holy One blessed be He tests the righteous, as it is stated: “The Lord tests the righteous.” “The Lord tests the righteous” – this refers to Noah,11Noah was commanded to enter the ark several days before the rain started (see Genesis 7:4). This was to test whether he would follow God’s commands. as it is stated: “The Lord said to Noah…as I have seen you to be righteous before Me in this generation.” Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya said: We find that one speaks some of a person’s praises in his presence, and all of it [his praises] when not in his presence, as it says in Noah’s regard: “Noah was a righteous man, faultless [in his generation]” (Genesis 6:9) – when not in his presence; and it is written: “As I have seen you to be righteous12Omitting “faultless.” before Me in this generation” – when in his presence. Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili said: We have found that one speaks some of the praises of the One who spoke and made the world come into being when in His presence,13When speaking to Him directly. as it is stated: “Say to God: How awesome are Your deeds…” (Psalms 66:3). And when not in His presence, it says: “Give thanks to the Lord, for He is good, for His kindness is forever” (Psalms 136:1).14Stressing that God’s goodness is forever, which goes beyond what the first verse says.
“From every pure animal, you shall take to you seven pairs, a male and his mate, and of the animals that are not pure, two, a male and his mate” (Genesis 7:2). “From every pure animal…” – Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan, Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Eliezer, and Rabbi Yaakov of Kefar Ḥanin in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: We find that the Holy One blessed be He went out of His way to add two or three words in the Torah so as to avoid uttering an expression of impurity. That is what is written: “From every pure animal, you shall take to you seven pairs, a male and his mate,”; “and of the unclean animals” is not written here, but rather, “and of the animals that are not pure.”  Rabbi Yudan ben Rabbi Menashe said: Also, when He came to tell them [the people of Israel] the signs of an unclean animal, He began only with the signs of the pure animal:15The Torah mentions four animals that possess one of the two signs of pureness, but are missing the second. In each case the Torah first states the sign that the animal does possess, and afterwards the sign that is lacking. “The camel, because its hoof is not split” is not written [first] here, but rather, “because it brings up the cud” (Leviticus 11:4). “And the hyrax, because its hoof is not split” is not written [first] here, but rather, “because it brings up the cud” (Leviticus 11:5). “And the pig, because it does not bring up its cud” is not written [first] here, but rather, “because its hoof is split” (Leviticus 11:7). “Also from the birds of the heavens, seven each, male and female, to sustain offspring on the face of all the earth” (Genesis 7:3).  “Also from the bird of the heavens, seven each” – if you say that this means [just seven birds] from each species, would there not be one [bird] that remains without a mate? It means, rather, seven males and seven females.  It is not that I [God] need them, but rather, it is “to sustain offspring on the face of all the earth.”
“For in seven more days, I will make it rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights, and I will obliterate all existence that I made from on the face of the earth” (Genesis 7:4). “For in seven more days, [I will make it rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights]” – Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: They violated the Torah that was given in forty days; therefore, [the Flood lasted] “forty days and forty nights.” Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Zakai said: They corrupted the human form that comes into being at forty days,16A fetus is considered to possess human form after forty days of gestation. therefore [the Flood lasted] “forty days and forty nights.”  “I will obliterate all existence [hayekum]” – Rabbi Berekhya said: The living beings [kiyum]. Rabbi Avun said : Its sustainers [yekuminei].17Mankind. Rabbi Levi said in the name of Reish Lakish: This refers to Cain,18Who “rose up” [kam] against Abel to kill him (Genesis 4:8). who had been suspended in abeyance until the Flood came and swept him away, as it is stated: “He obliterated all existence [yekum]” (Genesis 7:23). “Noah did; according to everything that God commanded him, so he did” (Genesis 6:22) – this pertains to the gathering of the animals, beasts, and birds.
“And Noah was six hundred years old, and the flood was water upon the earth” (Genesis 7:6). “And Noah was six hundred years old, and the flood was water…” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: The year of the Flood is not included in the tally [of Noah’s years].19The Flood began when Noah was six hundred years old, he lived for three hundred and fifty years after the Flood (Genesis 9:28), and the Flood lasted an entire year. Yet the total tally of Noah’s years is given as nine hundred and fifty (Genesis 9:29). Rabbi Neḥemya said to him: Even though it is not included in the tally [of Noah’s years] it is included in the calendrical solar and lunar calculations.20Calendrical calculations are based on the number of years after Creation. For these calculations, the year of the Flood is not omitted. “Noah, and his sons, and his wife and his sons’ wives with him, came into the ark, because of the water of the flood” (Genesis 7:7). “Noah, and his sons, and his wife [… came into the ark, because of the water of the flood]” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Noah was lacking in faith; if the water had not reached up to his ankles, he would not have entered the ark.
“It was after the passage of seven days, and the water of the Flood was upon the earth” (Genesis 7:10). “It was after the passage of seven days, and the water of the Flood” – this teaches that the Holy One blessed be He gave them a reprieve during the seven days of mourning over the righteous Methuselah,21A calculation of the various chronologies found in the first few chapters of Genesis will show that Methuselah died the very year when the Flood started. so that they might repent [in the interim], but they did not do so. Another matter, “it was after the passage of seven days” – Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: The Holy One blessed be He observed mourning over [the destruction of] His world for seven days before the Flood came upon the world. What is the source? “He was saddened in His heart” (Genesis 6:6), and sadness denotes nothing other than mourning, as it is stated: “The king is saddened over his son” (II Samuel 19:3). Rabbi Yosei ben Durmaskit said: They sinned with the orb of the eye,22They used their eyes to covet other people’s property and ultimately steal it. that is like water; the Holy One blessed be He, too, exacted retribution against them only with water. “In the six hundredth year of the life of Noah, during the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month, on that day all the wellsprings of the great depth were breached, and the windows of the heavens were opened” (Genesis 7:11). Rabbi Levi said: They acted corruptly with their conduits;23They inseminated other people’s wives, and engaged in other sorts of sexual perversion. the Omnipresent, too, changed the natural order for them. The natural way of the world is that rain falls and then the depths rise, as it is written: “Depths call to depths to the sound of your conduits” (Psalms 42:8).24When the rain falls it calls out to the underground water to rise towards it. See Bereshit Rabba 13:13. However, here, “the wellsprings of the great depths were breached,” and after that, “the windows of the heavens were opened.”
“On that very day, Noah, and Shem and Ham and Yefet, the sons of Noah, and Noah’s wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, entered into the ark” (Genesis 7:13). “On that very day, Noah…entered” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The Holy One blessed be He said: If Noah enters the ark at night, his entire generation would then say this: We did not know about him [entering the ark]. Had we known about him, we would not have allowed him to enter. Rather, it was “on that very day”25In broad daylight. – let anyone who is bothered by this speak up. “They, and every beast according to its kind, and every animal according to its kind, and every crawling creature that crawls upon the earth according to its kind, and every flying thing according to its kind, every bird, every winged creature” (Genesis 7:14). “They, and every beast” – they26Noah and his family. are primary, and the rest are secondary to them. “Every bird, every winged creature”27This could also be translated: “Entire birds with entire wings.” – Rabbi Eliezer said to the group, in the name of Rabbi Asi: To the exclusion of those with clipped wings and severed legs, which are not valid for offerings for Noahides. “And they that came, male and female from all flesh came, as God commanded him, and the Lord shut it for him” (Genesis 7:16). “And they that came, male and female” – Rabbi Asi said: To the exclusion of those with extra limbs and those with severed limbs, which are not valid for offerings for Noahides. “And they that came, male and female” – Noah said to Him:28When God first told him “And of every living being, of all flesh, two of each you shall bring to the ark…” (Genesis 6:19). ‘Am I a hunter?’ He [God] said to him: ‘Why are you concerned? “They that will be brought” is not written here, but rather, “they that came” – they came of their own accord.’ Rabbi Yoḥanan said: “Examine the book of the Lord and read it” (Isaiah 34:16)29The prophet tells us that if we look closely in the Torah we will corroborate what he has just said, which is that all the wild animals and birds will come to the site of God’s destruction of Basra. – if to be shut up in the ark for twelve months they came on their own, to be fattened from the flesh of the mighty men, all the more so. That is what is written: “You, Son of man, so said the Lord God: Say to every winged bird and to every beast of the field: Gather and come, assemble yourselves from all around to My feast that I am slaughtering for you, a great feast upon the mountains of Israel, and you will eat flesh and drink blood. The flesh of the mighty men you will eat, and the blood of the princes of the earth you will drink: rams, lambs and goats, bulls, fattened bulls of Bashan, all of them” (Ezekiel 39:17–18). “And the Lord shut it for him” – Rabbi Levi said: This is analogous to a prince who issued a decree of annihilation against a province, and he took his friend and placed him in prison and placed his seal upon it.30By keeping him imprisoned, he was actually saving him.  So, “and the Lord shut it for him.” People sought to overturn the ark, and He surrounded it with lions so they would not touch it.
“The flood was forty days upon the earth, and the water increased, and lifted the ark, and it was raised above the earth” (Genesis 7:17). “The flood was forty days upon the earth” – Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Levi: So Noah’s ark was submerged in the water, like a ship that is submerged while standing in the port.31That is, its hull is partially submerged at the port, until it touches the ground. [Only after that:] “The water increased [and lifted the ark]…” – Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Levi: So Noah’s ark floated on the water’s surface as if on two planks,32Like a light boat that is placed on two wooden planks, which, not being submerged in the water at all, travels lightly across the water. like from Tiberias to Susita.33A short distance, travelled easily.
“And the water accumulated exceedingly upon the earth, and all the high mountains under the entire heavens were covered” (Genesis 7:19). “And the water accumulated exceedingly upon the earth” – Rabbi Yonatan was once going up to pray in Jerusalem. He was passing near Palatinos34The sacred precincts of the Samaritans on Mount Gerizim. when he saw a certain Samaritan. He [the Samaritan] said to him: ‘Where are you going?’ He said to him: ‘I am going up to Jerusalem to pray.’ He said to him: ‘But is it not preferable for you to pray on this blessed mountain, and not on that mountain of ruins?’ He said to him: ‘In what way is it [Gerizim] blessed?’ [Replied the Samaritan:] ‘In that it was not inundated in the Flood.’ It [a response] escaped Rabbi Yonatan, and he did not answer him at that moment. His donkey driver35Who was leading the donkey that Rabbi Yonatan was riding. said to him: ‘Rabbi, allow me and I will answer him.’ He said to him: ‘All right.’ He said to him [the Samaritan]: ‘If it [Gerizim] is one of the highest mountains, is it not written: “All the high mountains…were covered”? And if it is one of the lower ones, the verse does not pay any attention to it and gave it no consideration at all.’36The Torah did not even bother to mention that the lower mountains were submerged, having already stated that the highest mountains were. Immediately, Rabbi Yonatan dismounted the donkey and led him on it37Rabbi Yonatan had the driver ride on the donkey in his place. for three miles [to honor him]. He applied three verses to him: “There will not be an infertile male or a barren female among you, or among your animals [behema]” (Deuteronomy 7:14) – even among the animal drivers [bahamot] among you.38Even the lowly animal drivers will not be “barren” of wisdom. “Your temple [rakatekh] is like a pomegranate slice behind your braid” (Song of Songs 4:3) – even the empty ones [reikanin] among you are as full of responses as a pomegranate [is full of seeds]. That is what is written:39This is the third verse. “Any weapon crafted against you will not succeed, and any tongue that will rise against you in judgment will be condemned. This is the inheritance of the servants of the Lord…” (Isaiah 54:17).
“Fifteen cubits upward the water accumulated, and the mountains were covered” (Genesis 7:20). “Fifteen cubits…” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: Fifteen cubits in the mountain, and fifteen cubits in the valley.40The water level miraculously followed the contour of the land it covered. Rabbi Neḥemya said: Fifteen cubits in the mountain, but in the valley an indeterminate amount.41The water was level all over, reaching fifteen cubits over the mountains and as many cubits as necessary over the valleys. “And all flesh that crawls upon the earth, of the birds, and of the animals, and of the beasts, and of all the swarming creatures that swarm upon the earth, and all mankind, perished” (Genesis 7:21). “All in whose nostrils was the breath of the spirit of life, from all that was on the dry land, died” (Genesis 7:22). “All flesh that crawls…perished…all in whose nostrils was the breath [nishmat] of the spirit [ruaḥ] of life [ḥayim]…” – Rabbi Shmuel, son in law of Rabbi Ḥanina, colleague of the Rabbis, said: Here it calls neshama ruaḥ, and elsewhere it calls neshama nefesh.42“He breathed into his nostrils the breath [nishmat] of life, and man became a living soul [nefesh]” (Genesis 2:7). From where is it derived that we should apply what is stated here, there, and what is stated there, here?43That is, all of these terms are referring to a single soul, and man does not have multiple souls. The verse states: Ḥayim, ḥayim44The word ḥayim appears in both verses. as a verbal analogy. “From all that was on the dry land, died” – to the exclusion of fish. Some say that they were included in [the decree] to be annihilated, but they fled to the Great Sea, to the Atlantic Ocean, [where they survived]. “He obliterated all existence that was on the face of the earth, from man, to animal, to crawling creature, to birds of the heavens, they were obliterated from the earth; only Noah remained, and they that were with him in the ark” (Genesis 7:23). “He obliterated all existence…only [akh] Noah remained” – Rabbi Huna in the name of Rabbi Yosei: Akh is an exclusionary term. This was because he, too, was groaning and spitting blood due to the cold.45Akh indicates that although Noah “remained,” he was diminished in his health.

=== 33 | 33 ===
“God remembered Noah, and all the beasts, and all the animals that were with him in the ark; God caused a wind to pass over the earth, and the water subsided” (Genesis 8:1). “God remembered Noah, and all the beasts…” – and it is written: “Your righteousness is like mighty mountains [keharerei el]; Your judgments are great depths. Lord, You save man and animal” (Psalms 36:7). Rabbi Yishmael and Rabbi Akiva: Rabbi Yishmael says: The righteous, who accepted the Torah that was given from the mountains of God [meharerei el], You perform righteousness with them [to the greatest extent,] up to the mighty mountains. But the wicked, who did not accept the Torah that was given from the mountains of God, You are exacting with them [to the greatest extent,] down to great depths. Rabbi Akiva says: With both these and those He is exacting down to great depths. He is exacting with the righteous by collecting His due from them for the few bad deeds that they performed in this world, in order to shower them with tranquility and give them a better reward in the World to Come. And He showers the wicked with tranquility and gives them reward for the few good deeds that they performed in this world in order to exact [a fuller] retribution from them in the World to Come. Rabbi Levi said: The verse metaphorically compares [the reward of] the righteous to their abode and [the reward of] the wicked to their abode. The [reward of the] righteous to their abode, as it is stated: “In a good grazing land I will herd them, and on the mountains of the height of Israel will be their pasture” (Ezekiel 34:14). And the [reward of the] wicked to their abode: “So said the Lord God: On the day that he descended to the netherworld I caused mourning [he’evalti]; I covered him in the depths” (Ezekiel 31:15). Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi said: Hovalti is written.1With a vav instead of an alef, meaning “I led him [to the netherworld].” (In our text of the Bible it is in fact written with an alef.) One does not craft a cover for a vat out of silver or gold, but rather out of earthenware, which is of the same material [as the vat itself]. So too, the wicked themselves are darkness, Gehenna is darkness, the depths of the earth are darkness. I led [hovalti] the wicked to Gehenna and covered them over with the depths of the earth, darkness covering darkness. Rabbi Yonatan in the name of Rabbi Yoshiya transposes the [words of the] verse: “Your righteousness is upon Your judgments”; “like mighty mountains are upon the great depths.”2See Psalms 36:7. Just as the mountains weigh down the water of the deep so it should not rise and inundate the world, so do the righteous suppress [God’s strict judgments and] punishments so they should not emerge and incinerate the world. Just as the mountains are endless, so is the reward of the righteous endless.3This is an exposition on the straightforward reading of the verse: “Your righteousness is like mighty mountains.” We have transposed the order of sentences in our translation, in accordance with the commentators. Just as the mountains are sown and produce fruit, so, the actions of the righteous produce fruit. That is what is written: “Say of the righteous man that it shall be well with him, [for they will eat the fruit of their actions]” (Isaiah 3:10). And just as the depths of the earth are unmeasurable, so is the punishment of the wicked unmeasurable. That is what is written: “Woe to the wicked one who does evil” (Isaiah 3:11). Just as the depths of the earth are not sown and do not produce fruit, so, the actions of the wicked do not produce fruit, as, were they to produce fruit, they would destroy the world. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi once went up to Rome. There he saw pillars covered over with tapestries, so they would not freeze in the cold or split apart in the heat. But when he would walk in the marketplace, he saw a poor man wrapped in a mat, and some say in half a donkey’s saddlecloth. Regarding those pillars, he recited the verse: “Your righteousness is like mighty mountains” (Psalms 36:7) – to the one to whom You give, You give abundantly. Regarding that poor man, he recited the verse: “Your judgments are great depths” (Psalms 36:7) – to the one whom You hit, You hit powerfully.  Alexander of Macedonia once went to the king of Katzia, beyond the Mountains of Darkness. He [Alexander] sent for him [to come see him]. He came out and he was carrying a golden loaf on a platter of gold. He said to him: Do I need your money? He said to him: Did you not have what to eat in your land that you came here? He said to him: I came only because I wish to know how you people administer justice. He sat with him. One day, someone came to him with a claim against another person. He said: This man sold me a ruin and I found a hidden treasure in it. The buyer said: I bought [only] a ruin; I did not buy a hidden treasure, [so it belongs to the seller]. The seller said: I sold the ruin and whatever was in it, [so it belongs to the buyer]. He said to one of them: Do you have a son? He said to him: Yes. He said to the other: Do you have a daughter? He said to him: Yes. He said to them: Go marry them off to each other, and the money will belong to both of them. He [the king] saw that he [Alexander] was sitting there in astonishment. He said to him: What, did I not judge well? He said to him: Yes, [you judged well]. He said to him: Had this case come before you, how would you have ruled? He said to him: I would have killed them both, and the royal treasury would have taken the money from both of them. He said to him: Do you have rainfall [in your land]? He said to him: Yes. He said to him: Do you have sunshine? He said to him: Yes. He said to him: Do you have flocks of sheep and goats? He said to him: Yes. He said to him; May the spirit of that man [you, Alexander] depart from his body. It is not for your sake that rain falls on you, and it is not for your sake that the sun shines for you. It is, rather, for the sake of the animals, as it is written: “Lord, You save man and animal” (Psalms 36:7) – the Lord saves man for the sake of the animals.  Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon interpreted the verse regarding Noah. The Holy One blessed be He said: The righteousness that I performed with Noah in the ark, I performed specifically through the “mighty mountains” (Psalms 36:7) – “The ark rested during the seventh month…[upon the mountains of Ararat]” (Genesis 8:4). “Your judgments are great depths” (Psalms 36:7) – the suffering that I imposed on his generation, I imposed on them specifically through the great depths, as it is stated: “[All the wellsprings of the great depth] were breached” (Genesis 7:11). [“Lord, You save man and animal”] (Psalms 36:7) – when I remembered him, it was not him alone that I remembered, but rather, him and everything that was in the ark with him. That is what is written: “God remembered Noah and all the beasts…”
Another interpretation: That is what is written: “There was a small city, with few men in it, and a great king came against it [and surrounded it]” (Ecclesiastes 9:14). “A small city” – that is the world. “With few men in it” – that is the generation of the Flood. “And a great king came against it and surrounded it” – that is the Holy One blessed be He. “And built great siege works against it” (Ecclesiastes 9:14) – He surrounded it and set ambushes [all around].4He inundated the entire world. “A poor and wise man was found in it” (Ecclesiastes 9:15) – that is Noah. “And he saved the city in his wisdom” (Ecclesiastes 9:15) – “he offered up burnt offerings on the altar” (Genesis 8:20). “But no person remembered that poor man” (Ecclesiastes 9:15) – the Holy One blessed be He said [to those people]: It is you who do not remember him, but I do remember him: “God remembered Noah.”
“The Lord is good to all, and His mercy is upon all His works [maasav]” (Psalms 145:9) – Rabbi Levi said: “The Lord is good to all, [and His mercy is] upon” everything, because they are “His works.”5God is beneficent and good to everyone, because they are all His creations. Rabbi Shmuel said: “The Lord is good to all, and His mercy is upon” everyone, because that is His attribute, that He is merciful.6He interprets maasav to mean: This is His attribute. Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: “The Lord is good to all” and imparts some of His mercy to His creations [maasav].7Mercy is a divine attribute, but God imparts some of this trait to mankind, to practice among themselves. Rabbi Tanḥuma and Rabbi Abba bar Avin in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: Tomorrow a year of drought may come and [you will see that] people have compassion for one another, and the Holy One blessed be He [in turn] becomes filled with mercy upon them [and grants rain].  In the days of Rabbi Tanḥuma, the people of Israel needed to declare a fast [due to a drought]. They came to him and said to him: ‘Rabbi, decree a fast.’ He decreed a fast one day, a second day and a third day,8As prescribed in the Mishna (Taanit 1:5). but rain did not fall. He came in [to the synagogue] and preached to them, saying to them: My children, fill yourselves with mercy for one another, and the Holy One blessed be He will then become filled with mercy for you. While they were distributing charity to their poor, they saw someone who was giving money to his divorcée. They came to him [Rabbi Tanḥuma] and said to him: Rabbi, why are we sitting by while there is a transgression taking place here among us?9A man and his divorcée are not permitted to engage together in commercial transactions. He said to them: What is it that you saw? They said to him: We saw so-and-so giving money to his divorcée. He sent for them and brought them into the congregation. He said to him: What is this woman to you? He said to him: She is my divorcée. He said to him: Why were you giving her money? He said to him: Rabbi, I saw that she was in distress, and I became filled with compassion for her.10So I gave her charity. At that moment, Rabbi Tanḥuma lifted his face heavenward and said: Master of the universe, if this man, who has no obligation to support her [his divorcée], saw her in distress and became filled with compassion for her, then regarding You, of whom it is written: “Gracious and merciful” (Psalms 145:8), and us, who are the descendants of Your beloved ones, the sons of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob – all the more so that You should become filled with compassion for us. Thereupon rain fell, and the thirst of the world was quenched. Our Rabbi11Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, often referred to as simply “Rabbi.” was once occupied in Torah study in front of the synagogue of the Babylonians in Tzippori. A certain calf passed by him. It was going off to be slaughtered, and began lowing, as if to say: Save me. He said to it: ‘What can I do for you? It was for this purpose that you were created.’ Rabbi suffered from toothaches for thirteen years. Rabbi Yosei bar Avin said: All those thirteen years that Rabbi suffered from toothaches, no woman in the land of Israel miscarried, and women in childbirth suffered no pain.12Rabbi Yehuda’s suffering served as an atonement for all of them. Sometime later, a small creeping animal passed in front of his daughter, and she was going to kill it. He said to her: ‘My daughter, leave it, as it is written: “His mercy is upon all His works”’ (Psalms 145:9).13Rabbi Yehuda felt that his suffering was due to his having been callous towards that calf instead of feeling pity for it. Our Rabbi was exceedingly humble, and he would say: Anything a person might ask me to do [to show him deference] I would do, except for what the sons of Beteira did to my ancestor,14Hillel the Elder (see Pesaḥim 66a). when they stepped down from their prominent positions and promoted him [in their stead]. But if Rav Huna the Exilarch15The supreme leader of Babylonian Jewry. were to come up to here,16From Babylon. I would stand up before him.17Even though my position is more eminent than his. Why? Because he is from [the tribe of] Judah,18And dominion over Israel rightly belongs to Judah (Genesis 49:10). The exilarch was a descendant of the House of David. and I am from Benjamin; he is from the males of Judah, and I am from the females.19Hillel’s mother was of Davidic ancestry.  Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great said to him: ‘Why, he is standing right outside.’ Rabbi’s face became ashen. When he [Ḥiyya] saw that his face had become ashen, he said to him: ‘It is his coffin.’20Rav Huna had died, and his body had been sent for burial in the land of Israel. He [Rabbi] said to him [Rabbi Ḥiyya]: ‘Someone wants you outside, go out and see who it is.’ He went outside and did not find anyone there. He realized that he had been placed under admonishment [by Rabbi],21For having discomfited him. and admonishment lasts for no fewer than thirty days.  Rabbi Yosei bar Rabbi Avin said: All those thirty days during which Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great was under admonishment from our Rabbi, he taught his nephew Rav22The founder of Talmudic scholarship in Babylon. all the principles of the Torah, and those are the Torah principles that comprise Babylonian halakha. At the conclusion of thirty days, Elijah of blessed memory came to our Rabbi in the guise of Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great, placed his hand on his tooth and it was cured. When Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great came before Our Rabbi, he [Rabbi Ḥiyya] said to him: ‘What did you do to your tooth?’23He noticed that Rabbi was no longer suffering from toothaches. He said to him: ‘From the time that you placed your hand on it, it was cured.’ He said to him: ‘I do not know anything about that.’ When he [Rabbi] heard this,24He realized that Elijah had presented himself as Rabbi Ḥiyya. he began treating him with respect, and when he would gather students, he would position him in the inner circle. Rabbi Yishmael ben Rabbi Yosei said: ‘[Will he be placed] even closer [to you] than I?’ He said to him: ‘God forbid, such a thing shall not be done in Israel.’25An expression from II Samuel 13:12. Our Rabbi used to relate the praises of Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great before Rabbi Yishmael ben Rabbi Yosei. He said to him: ‘He is a great man, a holy man.’ One time, he saw him in the bathhouse, and he [Rabbi Ḥiyya] did not show him deference. He [Rabbi Yishmael] said to him [Rabbi]: ‘That student of yours whom you praise, I saw him in the bathhouse and he did not show deference to me.’ He said to him [to Rabbi Ḥiyya]: ‘Why did you not show deference to him?’ Rabbi Ḥiyya said to him: ‘I was deep in thought about the aggada of Psalms [and did not notice him].’ When he [Rabbi] heard this, he appointed for him two students who would enter with him to the caldarium, so that he would not tarry there26Since he was given to becoming distracted in his studies. and have his life compromised. Another interpretation: “The Lord is good to all…” (Psalms 145:9); “God remembered Noah….” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said: Woe unto the wicked, as they transform [God’s] attribute of mercy into the attribute of strict justice. Everywhere that “the Lord” is stated, it refers to the attribute of mercy – “the Lord, the Lord, merciful and gracious God” (Exodus 34:6); yet it is written: “The Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great on the earth” (Genesis 6:5); “the Lord regretted that He had made man” (Genesis 6:6); “the Lord said: I will obliterate…” (Genesis 6:7).27Even God’s attribute of mercy (indicated by the name “the Lord”) became hardened as a result of these evildoers. Fortunate are the righteous, as they transform the attribute of strict justice into the attribute of mercy. Everywhere that God [Elohim] is stated, it refers to the attribute of justice. “You shall not curse judges [elohim]” (Exodus 22:27); “the please of both of them shall come to the judges [elohim]” (Exodus 22:8); yet it is written: “God [Elohim] heard their groan, and God [Elohim] remembered His covenant…” (Exodus 2:24); “God [Elohim] remembered Rachel…” (Genesis 30:22); “God [Elohim] remembered Noah.”28Even God’s attribute of strict justice (indicated by “Elohim”) is softened on behalf of the righteous.  What [favorable] memory did [God] remember to his credit? It was that he fed and sustained them [the animals] all twelve months in the ark.29That is what is meant by “God remembered Noah, and all the beasts, etc.” “God remembered Noah” – and it is only reasonable that it was [also] due to the merit of the kosher animals that he took with him.30Noah took seven of each kosher animal, rather than two, in order to offer them as sacrifices, and it was this merit that was remembered to his credit. This is derived from “God remembered Noah…and all the animals that were with him in the ark.” Rabbi Eliezer says: He [Noah] got his name from the offering [he made to God], as it is stated: “The Lord smelled the pleasing [niḥoaḥ] aroma” (Genesis 8:21). Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: He got his name from the resting of the ark, as it is stated: “The ark rested [vatanaḥ] in the seventh month…” (Genesis 8:4). Rabbi Yehoshua says: “[Planting and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night] shall not cease” (Genesis 8:22) – the implication is that they had ceased [during the Flood]. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The constellations did not function all twelve months [of the Flood]. Rabbi Yonatan said to him: They functioned, but their effect was not noticeable.
“The wellsprings of the depth and the windows of the heavens were dammed, and the rain from the heavens was terminated” (Genesis 8:2). “The wellsprings of the depth…were dammed” – Rabbi Elazar said: In a bad context [it states]: “On that day all the wellsprings of the great depth were breached” (Genesis 7:11), but in a good context [it states]: “The wellsprings31Omitting the word “all.” of the depth…were dammed” – but not all the wellsprings, to exclude the [hot] spring of Tiberias, Ḥamat Gader, and the Banyas Cave. “The ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat” (Genesis 8:4). “The ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth [day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat]” – on the Corduene mountains.
“It was at the end of forty days, and Noah opened the window of the ark that he made” (Genesis 8:6). “It was at the end of forty days, and Noah opened [the window of the ark]” – this supports what Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said [earlier], that [the ark’s tzohar] was a window.32This is his interpretation of tzohar (Genesis 6:15) in Bereshit Rabba 31:11. “He sent the raven, and it went back and forth, until the drying of the water from upon the earth” (Genesis 8:7). “He sent the raven” – that is what is written: “He sent darkness and made it dark” (Psalms 105:28).33This is a poetic reference to the raven that Noah sent off. It is dark in color, and brought darkness as its reply, in that it did not perform its task but returned immediately to the ark. “And it went back and forth [vashov]” – Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon: It began presenting arguments [meshivo] to him [Noah]. He said to him, [as it were]:34By returning immediately and thereby refusing to carry out its task, it was as if it was protesting Noah’s choice of messenger. Of all the animals, beasts, and birds that are here, you are sending only me?35Why not send one of the species of which there are seven individuals? There are only two ravens, and by sending me off, you will effectively eradicate my species. He said to him: What need does the world have for you – [you are fit] neither for food nor for an offering.36Unlike the other animals, which are useful in some way. Noah did not want to allow the raven back into the ark. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Abba bar Kahana: The Holy One blessed be He said to him [Noah]: Accept it [back into the ark], as the world will have a need for it in the future. He said to Him: When? He said to him: “Until the drying of the water from upon the earth” – a certain righteous man37Elijah the prophet (see I Kings 17:1). is destined to arise and dry out the world, and I will bring it about that he will have a need for it [the raven]. That is what is written: “The ravens [orevim] would bring him bread and meat in the morning, and bread and meat in the evening” (I Kings 17:6). Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya: Rabbi Yehuda says: There is a city in the environs of Beit She’an whose name is Aravi.38People from there were called Orevim, and it was they who brought food to Elijah. Rabbi Neḥemya said: They were actual ravens. From where did they bring it [the food]? From the table of Yehoshafat. Rabbi Akiva delivered a homily in Ginzak regarding the generation of the Flood, and they did not weep,39Although an entire generation was annihilated. but when he mentioned to them the story of Job, they immediately wept. He applied this verse to them [to the generation of the Flood]: “The womb will forget him; he will be sweet for the maggots; he will no longer be remembered, and injustice will be broken like a tree” (Job 24:20).40This passage in Job is often interpreted as a reference to the generation of the Flood. “The womb [reḥem] will forget him” – they caused mercy [raḥamim] to be forgotten among mankind;41By acting with cruel injustice towards one another. the Holy One blessed be He, too, caused His mercy to be forgotten from them. “He will be sweet for the maggots” – their flesh will be sweet for the maggots. “He will no longer be remembered, and injustice will be broken like a tree” – Rabbi Abbahu said: It is not written, “will be uprooted,” but rather, “will be broken” – like something that is broken and does not produce a replacement.42When a tree is uprooted it can be replanted elsewhere, but if it is broken it cannot regenerate.  What is it?43Which group of people is the verse referring to here? It is the generation of the Dispersion.44After the Dispersion, mankind never returned to being united with “one language and one speech” (Genesis 11:1).
“He sent the dove from him, to see if the water abated from upon the surface of the ground” (Genesis 8:8). “But the dove did not find rest for its foot, and it returned to him to the ark, as water was upon the surface of the entire earth; and he extended his hand and took it, and brought it to him to the ark” (Genesis 8:9). “He sent the dove…but the dove did not find rest…” – Yehuda bar Naḥman said in the name of Rabbi Shimon: Had it found rest, it would not have returned. Similarly, “it45The people of Israel. dwells among the nations, finding no rest” (Lamentations 1:3) – had it found rest, it would never have returned [from exile]. Similarly, “and among these nations you will not be calm, and there will be no rest…” (Deuteronomy 28:65) – but had it46The people of Israel. found rest they would never have returned. “He waited yet another seven days and again sent the dove from the ark. The dove came to him at evening time, and behold, it had a plucked olive leaf in its mouth; and Noah knew that the water had abated from upon the earth” (Genesis 8:10–11). “He waited yet another seven days” – Rabbi Yosei said: There were three sets of seven days.47There was a seven-day period between the sending of the raven and the first sending of the dove, though that is not mentioned in the verses, in addition to the two seven-day periods between the three times the dove was sent. And again sent the dove from the ark…the dove came to him…plucked [taraf]…in its mouth” – what is taraf? “Killed,”48The plucking of the leaf led to the tree’s death. just as you say: “Joseph had been mauled [tarof toraf]” (Genesis 37:33). He said to it: Had you left it, it would have become a great tree. From where did it [the dove] bring it [the leaf]?49Given that the entire surface of the earth had been destroyed. It was from the branches in the Land of Israel that it brought it. Rabbi Levi said: It brought it from the Mount of Olives, as the Land of Israel was not inundated in the Flood. That is what the Holy One blessed be He said to Ezekiel: “It is a land that has not been purified, that was not rained upon on the day of fury” (Ezekiel 22:24). Rav Beivai said: The gates of the Garden of Eden opened up before it, and it brought it [from there]. Rabbi Abbahu said: Had it brought it from the Garden of Eden, would it not have brought an item of greater excellence, either cinnamon or balsam? It is, rather, that it was alluding to a lesson for him. It was saying to Noah: Better this bitter item, and not something sweet dependent upon your hand.50Through the allusion of the dove with the olive leaf, God implied that it is better for a person to work for his own sustenance, even if he can afford only bitter food, than to receive sweet food as a handout.  “He waited yet another seven days and sent the dove, and it did not return again to him anymore” (Genesis 8:12). “He waited yet another seven days” – this supports what Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: There were three sets of seven days; “He…sent the dove, and it did not return again to him anymore.”
“It was in the six hundred and first year, in the first month, on the first of the month, the water began to dry from upon the earth; Noah removed the cover of the ark, and he saw, and behold, the surface of the ground had begun to dry” (Genesis 8:13). “It was in the six hundred and first year, in the first month, on the first of the month” – we learned: The judgment of the generation of the Flood lasted twelve months.51It began on the seventeenth day of the second month (Genesis 7:11), and ended on the twenty-seventh of the second month the following year (Genesis 8:14). How [did it progress]? “In the six hundredth year of the life of Noah, in the second month,52That being Marḥeshvan. on the seventeenth day of the month” (Genesis 7:11); and it is written: “The rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights” (Genesis 7:12) – that is [the remainder of] Marḥeshvan and [nearly all of] Kislev. “The water accumulated upon the earth for one hundred and fifty days” (Genesis 7:24) – that accounts for Tevet, Shevat, Adar, Nisan, and Iyar.53And the following day, at the beginning of Sivan, the water began to recede. “The ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat” (Genesis 8:4) – this refers to Sivan, which was the seventh [month counting] from the cessation of the rain.54It cannot be referring to Nisan, which is the actual seventh month counting from Rosh HaShana, because the accumulation continued into Iyar, as explained previously. For sixteen days the water receded, one cubit every four days,55The water began to recede on the first of Sivan, as explained previously, and reached ground level on the first of Av, as the Midrash mentions later, for a total of sixty days of recession. The water was fifteen cubits deep (Genesis 7:20). The recession of the water, then, took place at the rate of one cubit per four days. being one and a half handbreadths per day.56There are six handbreadths in a cubit. You thus come to the conclusion that the ark was submerged eleven cubits into the water.57Since the water began receding on the first of Sivan, and the bottom of the ark touched ground sixteen days later, when the water had gone down to a height of eleven cubits. And it [the water] receded completely over the course of sixty days. That is what is written: “The water gradually receded until the tenth month” (Genesis 8:5) – this is Av, which is the tenth [month counting] from the falling of the rain. Another interpretation:58The midrash is addressing the fact that Scripture states twice that the wetness dried up (8:13–14). “It was in the six hundred and first year, in the first month, on the first of the month, the water began to dry from upon the earth” – it [the earth] became like a soaking wet object. “And in the second month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, the earth dried” (Genesis 8:14) – it became like completely dry land. They sowed it, but it did not grow anything. Why? Because it59The moisture in the ground. represented a curse,60The water in the soil, which was leftover from the Flood, was cursed water. and that which represents a curse cannot bring about blessing. So they waited until rain fell, and they sowed [again]. The verse should have rather said: “And on the sixteenth day of the second month, the earth dried.”61That would have made the duration of the Flood exactly one year long, as it began on the seventeenth of the second month in the previous year. Why, then, does the verse state: And on the twenty-seventh day of the second month, the earth dried” (Genesis 8:14)? These [extra days] were the eleven days that the solar year is longer than the lunar year.62A solar year is 365 days, whereas twelve lunar months add up to 354 days. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: Anyone who wishes to ascertain that the solar cycle is eleven days longer than the lunar cycle, let him make a scratch on the wall [where the sun reaches at a given time of day] during the season of Tamuz.63Summer The next year at the same time, the sun will not reach that point until eleven days later. From this you can ascertain that the solar cycle is eleven days longer than the lunar cycle.

=== 34 | 34 ===
“God spoke to Noah, saying:” (Genesis 8:15). “Go out of the ark, you and your wife and your sons and your sons’ wives with you” (Genesis 8:16). “God spoke to Noah, saying: Go out of the ark” – “release me from confinement to thank Your name. The righteous, through me, will give glory when You perform kindness with me” (Psalms 142:8). “Release me from confinement [masger]” – this refers to Noah, who had been confined to the ark1Of which it is said: “The Lord shut it [vayisgor] for him” (Genesis 7:16). for twelve months. “To thank Your name” – to give thanks to Your name. “The righteous, through me, will give glory [yakhtiru]” – the righteous will crown You2Yakhtiru is related to keter, crown. through me.3Noah is mentioned in the Rosh Hashana liturgy: “You also lovingly remembered Noah and granted him salvation and mercy.” “When You perform kindness with me” – You performed kindness with me and said to me: “Go out of the ark.”
“The Lord tests the righteous, but He hates the wicked and the lover of injustice” (Psalms 11:5) – Rabbi Yonatan said: A potter does not test flimsy jugs, as he would not be able to knock on them even once without breaking them. What does he test? Sturdy jugs, as even if he knocks on them several times, they do not break. So, too, the Holy One blessed be He tests only the righteous, as it is stated: “The Lord tests the righteous." Rabbi Yosei ben Ḥanina said: A linen producer, when he knows that his flax is high quality, the more he crushes it the better it becomes; the more he beats it the more it improves. But when he knows that the flax is low quality, he would not be able to beat it even once without it breaking. So, too, the Holy One blessed be He tests only the righteous, as it is stated: “The Lord tests the righteous.” Rabbi Eliezer said: This is analogous to a proprietor [of a farm] who had two cows, one strong and one feeble. Upon which one does he place the yoke? Is it not upon the strong one? So, too, the Holy One blessed be He tests only the righteous, as it is stated: “The Lord tests the righteous.” “The Lord tests the righteous” – this refers to Noah,4The test was to see if he would leave the ark as soon as the ground conditions allowed it, or if he would wait for God’s permission. He passed this test, and did not leave until God said: “Go out of the ark.” as it is stated: “Go out of the ark.”
Rabbi Yudan began in the name of Rabbi Aivu: “In the transgression of the lips there is an evil snare, but the righteous one emerges from trouble” (Proverbs 12:13) – because of the rebellion that the generation of the Flood5They rebelled against God with their blasphemous statements – the transgression of the lips (see Tanḥuma Noaḥ 14). rebelled against the Holy One blessed be He, catastrophe befell them. “But the righteous one emerges from trouble” – this refers to Noah, as it is stated: “Go out of the ark.”
Another interpretation, “go out of the ark.” It is written: “If the spirit of the ruler will depart from you, do not abandon your place” (Ecclesiastes 10:4) – this is speaking of Noah.6“The spirit of the ruler” refers to God’s command to enter the ark to be saved from the Flood. With the end of the Flood, the essence of this command had expired; nevertheless, he followed the verse: “do not abandon your place” until he was told to do so. Noah said: ‘Just as I entered the ark only with permission, so will I leave only with permission.’ [God had commanded:] “Come…into the ark” (Genesis 7:1), [and Noah followed:] “Noah came” (Genesis 7:7). [Now He commanded] “Go out of the ark” (Genesis 8:16), [and only then,] “Noah went out” (Genesis 8:18).
Another matter, “go out of the ark.” – it is written: “Wisdom fortifies the wise more than ten rulers who were in a city” (Ecclesiastes 7:19). “Wisdom fortifies the wise” – this refers to Noah. “More than ten rulers” – more than the ten generations from Adam until Noah; out of all of them, I did not speak to any one of them, but only with you: “God spoke to Noah.”
Another interpretation, it is written: “For everything there is a season, and a time for every purpose beneath the heavens” (Ecclesiastes 3:1) – there was a time for Noah to enter the ark, as it is stated: “Come, you and your entire household, into the ark” (Genesis 7:1), and there was a time for him to go out of it, as it is stated: “Go out of the ark” (Genesis 8:16). This is analogous to a leader who left his locale and installed another to take his place [while he was gone].7God ceded to Noah the care of all living beings for the duration of the Flood. Now his time was up, and God came to take back control. When he returned, he said to him: ‘Get out of the place where you are now.’8Now that I am back, you must leave the leader’s seat.  This is analogous to a scribe who went to another place and installed another in his stead. When he returned, he said to him: ‘Get out of the place where you are now.’ So it was with Noah. [God told him:] “Go out of the ark,” but he did not accept upon himself [the command] to go out. He said: ‘Shall I go out [and resume normal life,] and procreate, [only to bring my children] into a curse?’9Noah thought that eventually mankind would be destroyed in another flood. [He maintained this attitude] until the Omnipresent swore to him that He will never again bring a flood, as it is stated: “For, this is for Me like the waters of Noah; as I took an oath that the waters of Noah would no longer pass [over the earth]” (Isaiah 54:9).
“You and your wife and your sons and your sons’ wives” – Rabbi Yudan ben Rabbi Simon and Rabbi Yoḥanan in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Yitzḥak: When Noah entered the ark, it was prohibited to him to engage in procreation. That is what is written: “You shall come to the ark: You and your sons” (Genesis 6:18) – by yourselves; “and your wife and your sons' wives” (Genesis 6:18) – by themselves.10Men and women separately. When he emerged, He permitted it for him. That is what is written: “Go out of the ark: You and your wife, [and your sons and your sons’ wives].”11Man and wife together.  Rabbi Aivu said: “They are in want and in famine, they are solitary” (Job 30:3) – if you see want come to the world, and famine come to the world, “they are solitary [galmud]” – consider your wife as though she is galmuda [a menstruating woman].12There are places where they call a menstruating woman galmuda (see Bereshit Rabba 31:12). The verse is teaching: Do not engage in marital relations as long as a catastrophic situation is taking place. Rabbi Huna said: It is written: “Two sons were born to Joseph” (Genesis 41:50). When? “Before the advent of the year of the famine” (Genesis 41:50).13Showing that during times of catastrophe, marital relations should be avoided.
“Every living being that is with you, from all flesh, of the bird, and of the animal, and of every crawling creature that crawls on the earth, take out [haitze] with you, and they will teem on the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth” (Genesis 8:17). “Every living being that is with you…[take out [haitze] with you]” – hotze is written, but it is read haitze.14Hotze means “take [them] out peacefully,” while “haitze” implies a degree of coercion. “They will teem on the earth” – but not in the ark;15The animals, too, were not allowed to procreate while in the ark. “and be fruitful…upon the earth” – but not in the ark. “Every beast, every crawling creature and every bird, every creature that crawls on the earth, by their families, emerged from the ark” (Genesis 8:19). “Every beast, every crawling creature…every creature that crawls” [romess]” – Rabbi Aivu said: Romess is written with a vav – to exclude hybrids.16The Midrash interprets this verse as a commandment to Noah and his sons as to how they should act regarding animals. Romess is written with a full spelling to emphasize that the animals must be completely of their species and not bred with another species. The verse is intimating that it is forbidden for Noahides to cross-breed animals. “By their families” – to the exclusion of castration.17Noahides are forbidden to castrate animals, which would prevent them from producing “families.”  The descendants of Noah were commanded regarding seven matters: Regarding idol worship; regarding sexual immorality; regarding bloodshed; regarding the blessing of the Name;18This is a euphemism for blasphemy. regarding implementing justice; regarding robbery; and regarding [eating] a limb [taken] from a living animal. Rabbi Ḥanina ben Gamliel says: Regarding [drinking] blood from a living animal, as well. Rabbi Eliezer says: Regarding [producing] hybrids, as well. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says: Regarding sorcery, as well. Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka says: Regarding castration, as well. Rabbi Assi said: The descendants of Noah were commanded regarding everything that is written in the passage of: “There shall not be found among you any one who passes his son or his daughter [through the fire, or who practices divination, or interprets omens, or an enchanter or a sorcerer]…” (Deuteronomy 18:10–11), as it is written thereafter: “For anyone who performs these matters is an abomination to the Lord [and it is because of these abominations that the Lord your God is driving them [the Canaanites] out from before you]” (Deuteronomy 18:12).19Since the Canaanites were banished for performing these acts, it must be that these acts were forbidden to them.
“Noah built an altar to the Lord, and he took from every pure animal and from every pure bird, and offered up burnt offerings on the altar” (Genesis 8:20). “Noah built [vayiven] an altar to the Lord” – vayaven is written;20Meaning, “he reasoned.” he contemplated [nitbonen] and He said: ‘Why did the Holy One blessed be He command me to increase the number of the pure animals beyond that of the impure ones,21Seven pairs of each kosher species were taken onto the ark, as opposed to only two each for the non-kosher species (Genesis 7:2). if not to sacrifice an offerings from them?’ Thereupon, “he took from every pure animal…” Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov says: It was on the great altar in Jerusalem,22The verse says “on the altar,” using the definite article. It is therefore referring to the future site of the Temple’s altar in Jerusalem. where Adam the first man sacrificed, as it is stated: “And may it please the Lord more than a bull with horns and hooves” (Psalms 69:32).23This verse is often interpreted to be referring to a sacrifice offered up by Adam. “The Lord smelled the pleasing aroma, and the Lord said to His heart: I will not continue to curse the ground anymore on account of man, as the inclination of man's heart is evil from his youth, and I will not continue to smite every living being anymore as I did” (Genesis 8:21). “The Lord smelled the pleasing aroma” – Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina, Rabbi Eliezer says: The descendants of Noah24A term denoting all people before the giving of the Torah, and all non-Jews thereafter. sacrificed [even] peace offerings. Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina says: They sacrificed only burnt offerings. Rabbi Eliezer raised an objection to Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina: But is it not written: “And Abel, too, brought from the firstborn of his flock and their fats” (Genesis 4:4) – referring to something whose fats are sacrificed?25Namely, a peace offering. What does Rabbi Yosei do about this? [He explains it:] From the fattest among them. Rabbi Eliezer raised an objection to Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina: But is it not written: “He sent the young men of the children of Israel, and they offered up burnt offerings and they slaughtered feast peace-offerings [shelamim]…”? (Exodus 24:5). What does Rabbi Yosei do about this? They26The burnt offerings. were whole, with their hides intact, as they did not undergo flaying and cutting.27They were burnt offerings; however, unlike ordinary burnt offerings, they were not flayed or cut. Only burnt offerings sacrificed after the Torah was given required flaying and cutting. Rabbi Eliezer raised an objection to Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina: But is it not written: “Yitro, father in law of Moses, took a burnt offering and feast offerings”? (Exodus 18:12). What does Rabbi Yosei do about this? It is according with the one who said: Yitro came after the giving of the Torah. Rabbi Huna said: Rabbi Yanai and Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great disagreed. Rabbi Yanai said: He [Yitro] came before the giving of the Torah. Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great said: He came after the giving of the Torah. Rabbi Ḥanina said: They do not disagree;28Their dispute was not based on interpretation of that passage, but is a consequence of a dispute about a different matter. the one who said that Yitro came before the giving of the Torah holds that the descendants of Noah sacrificed peace offerings. The one who said that Yitro came after the giving of the Torah holds that they sacrificed [only] burnt offerings. This supports Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina, as it is written: “Awake, north, and come, south” (Song of Songs 4:16).29This verse alludes to the time of the beginning of the sacrificial service in the Tabernacle. “Awake, north” – this refers to the burnt offering that was slaughtered in the north.30Leviticus 1:11. What is meant by “awake”? It is something that was dormant and was now re-awakened. “And come, south” – this refers to the peace offering that could be slaughtered in the south. What is meant by “come”? Something that was a new concept.31When the Tabernacle was built, burnt offerings that had been sacrificed in the past were resumed. Peace offerings, that had not been sacrificed in the past, were introduced. Rabbi Yehoshua said in the name of Rabbi Levi: This verse supports Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina: “This is the law of the burnt offering, that is the burnt offering…” (Leviticus 6:2) – [“that is”] what the descendants of Noah used to sacrifice. But when it comes to the peace offering it is written: “This is the law of the peace offering” (Leviticus 7:11) – “that they sacrificed” is not written here, but rather, “that one will sacrifice” (Leviticus 7:11); from here on.  “The Lord smelled the pleasing aroma”32The extra words “the pleasing aroma” intimate that another aroma, at a different time, is being alluded to. – He smelled the [future] aroma of Abraham our forefather emerging from the fiery furnace.33See Bereshit Rabba 38:13. He smelled the aroma of Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya rising from the fiery furnace.34Daniel chapter 3. This is analogous to a devotee of the king who sent him a tribute, a fine gift on a fine tray. His son succeeded him, but did not send him a tribute. His grandson succeeded him and did send him a tribute. He [the king] said to him: ‘How similar your offering is to your grandfather’s offering.’35God told Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya, as it were, that their willingness to sacrifice themselves for His sake recalled the same devotion shown by Abraham. “The Lord smelled” – he smelled the aroma of the generation of [the Hadrianic] persecutions.36Who were burned for not renouncing their belief in God. Rav Shalom said in the name of Rabbi Menaḥma bar Ze’ira: This is analogous to a king who sought to build himself a palace on the seacoast, but he did not know where to build it.37Where it would not be washed away by tides. He found a flask of balsam oil.38He smelled it from afar. He went over to it and smelled it, and built it [the palace] over it.39Since the flask had not been washed away, he knew that this was a safe place to build his palace. So, too, God rebuilt the world on the basis of these future aromas, that showed that the world would become a worthy and holy place. That is what is written: “For He founded it upon the seas and established it upon the rivers” (Psalms 24:2). By what merit? It is by the merit of: “The generation of those who seek Him, who seek Your countenance, Jacob, Selah” (Psalms 24:6).
“The Lord said to His heart” – the wicked are under the control of their hearts:40They cannot control their base instincts. “The scoundrel says in his heart” (Psalms 14:1); “Esau said in his heart” (Genesis 27:41); “Yerovam said in his heart” (I Kings 12:26); “Haman said in his heart” (Esther 6:6). But the righteous, their hearts are subject to them:41They are able to overcome their evil inclinations. “Hannah was speaking to her heart” (I Samuel 1:13); “David said to his heart” (I Samuel 27:1); “Daniel placed in his heart” (Daniel 1:8); “the Lord said to His heart.”42The righteous are always portrayed as speaking “to their hearts,” meaning that they dictate to the heart what to do, and not vice versa.  “I will not continue…and I will not continue”43The Midrash will explain the repetition. – it is powerful, it is powerful.44The repetition indicates the intensity of God’s commitment, as if He were declaring an oath (see Isaiah 54:9). The Rabbis say: “I will not continue” for the [present] children of Noah, “and I will not continue” for [future] generations. Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great said: Wretched is the dough whose baker attests in its regard that it is inferior – “[and the Lord said to His heart…] as the inclination of man’s heart is evil from his youth.” Abba Yosei HaTorati says: Wretched is the leaven whose maker attests that it is inferior, as it is stated: “For He knows our inclination; mindful that we are dust” (Psalms 103:14). The Rabbis say: Wretched is the sapling whose planter attests that it is inferior, as it is stated: “The Lord of hosts, who planted you, spoke evil of you” (Jeremiah 11:17). Antoninos asked our Rabbi,45Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, the patriarch, also known simply as “Rabbi.” Antoninos was a senior Roman official who was friendly with him. saying to him: ‘From what point is the evil inclination implanted in a person? From the moment he emerges from his mother’s womb, or even before he emerges from his mother’s womb?’ He said to him:’ Before he emerges from his mother’s womb.’ He said to him: ‘No. Were it implanted in him while still in his mother’s womb, he [the fetus] would dig through her innards and emerge [by force].’ Rabbi conceded to him, as he was in agreement with the opinion of the Biblical verse: “As the inclination of man's heart is evil from his youth [neurav]” (Genesis 8:21). Rabbi Yudan said: “ne’erav” is written; from the moment that he pushes out [ninar] to emerge from his mother’s womb.  Antoninos also asked our Rabbi, saying to him: ‘From when is a spirit46The spirit of life. embedded in a person? From the moment he emerges from his mother’s womb, or even before he emerges from his mother’s womb?’ He said to him: ‘After he emerges from his mother’s womb.’ He said to him: ‘No. This is analogous to a piece of meat, if one were to leave it without salting it for three days, it putrefies.’47So, too, a fetus must possess the spirit of life, or it would rot away. Rabbi conceded to him, as he was in agreement with the opinion of the Biblical verse, as it is stated: ”You granted me life and kindness, and Your command [ufkudatekha] preserved my spirit” (Job 10:12) – from when did you place the soul in me? It is from when You deposited me48It is from when You deposited me in my mother’s womb. [hifkadetani].
“As long as the earth endures, sowing and reaping, cold and heat, summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease” (Genesis 8:22). “As long as the earth endures, sowing and reaping, cold and heat…” – Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Shmuel: What do the descendants of Noah believe? That the covenant made with them will last forever? The truth is, rather, that as long as the heavens and the earth endure, their covenant is in effect. When that day comes regarding which it is written: “For the heavens will be eroded like smoke and the earth will wear away like a garment” (Isaiah 51:6), at that time: “It will be annulled on that day…” (Zechariah 11:11). Rabbi Aḥa said: [God said:] ‘What caused them [the generation of the Flood] to rebel against Me? Is it not because they would sow, but would not reap,49A metaphor, which the Midrash now goes on to spell out. bearing children and never burying them?50Their children outlived them. From now forward: “sowing and reaping” – they will [sometimes] bear children and bury them; “cold and heat” – there will be fever and chills; “summer and winter” – I will bring birds to prey upon them in the summer, just as it says: “The bird of prey will prey on them in the summer, and all the beasts of the earth will prey on them in the winter” (Isaiah 18:6). There was an incident involving one of the prominent leaders of the generation who suffered from a headache. Some say it was Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman. He would say: Look at what the generation of the Flood brought upon us. Another interpretation, “as long as the earth endures” – Rav Huna in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: What do the descendants of Noah believe? That the covenant made with them will last forever? This is what I said to them: “As long as the earth endures” – the truth is, rather, that as long as day and night endure, their covenant is in effect, but when that day comes regarding which it is written: “There will be one day, it will be known to the Lord, that is not day and not night” (Zechariah 14:7), at that moment: “It will be annulled on that day…” (Zechariah 11:11). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: [God said:] ‘What caused them to rebel against Me? Is it not because they would sow, but would not reap,51In this interpretation, the expression “sow but not reap” is not used as a metaphor. as Rabbi Yitzḥak said: ‘Once in forty years they would need to sow’?52And this one crop would produce enough grain to last forty years. And they were able to walk from one end of the earth to the other end in a short time,53So mighty and gigantic were they. uprooting cedars of Lebanon with their feet [as they walked]. [Bites of] lions and leopards seemed to them like [tearing out] a hair from one’s flesh. And how pleasant was the weather for them? It was [eternally pleasant,] as it is between Passover and Shavuot.54All this power and comfort caused them to become haughty and sin. To prevent this from reoccurring, from now on “sowing and reaping…shall not cease.” Life would become much less comfortable. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says in the name of Rabbi Meir, and, likewise, Rabbi Dosa used to say in accordance with his opinion: Half of Tishrei, Marḥeshvan and Kislev – that is “sowing”; half of Kislev, Tevet, and half of Shevat – “winter”; half of Shevat, Adar, and half of Nisan – “cold”; half of Nisan, Iyar, and half of Sivan – “reaping”; half of Sivan, Tamuz, and half of Av – summer; half of Av, Elul, and half of Tishrei – “heat.” Rabbi Yehuda counts [these six seasons] from [the beginning of] Marḥeshvan. Rabbi Shimon begins [the count] with [the beginning of] Tishrei. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The constellations did not function all twelve months [of the Flood]. Rabbi Yonatan said to him: They functioned, but their effect was not palpable. Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua, Rabbi Eliezer says: “Shall not cease” means that they did not cease [during the Flood either]. Rabbi Yehoshua says: “Shall not cease” implies that they did cease [during the Flood].
“God blessed Noah and his sons, and He said to them: Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth” (Genesis 9:1). “God blessed Noah and his sons, and He said to them: Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth” – this pertains to the merit of the offerings.55It was due to the merit of Noah’s sacrifices that God blessed mankind to be fruitful. “And fear of you and dread of you will be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every bird of the heavens, and upon all that crawls on the ground, and upon all fish of the sea: into your hand they are given” (Genesis 9:2). “And fear of you and dread of you will be” – fear and dread were restored, but dominion was not restored.56When Adam was created, He had “dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle” (Genesis 1:26). When the decree of destruction was sealed against the generation of the Flood, the animals ceased to show any submissiveness to man. Now God restored the animals’ “fear and dread” of man, but stopped short of restoring man’s dominion over them. When was it restored? It was in the days of Solomon, as it is stated: “For he had dominion57Including dominion over the animals. over the entire region beyond the river, from Tifsaḥ to Gaza” (I Kings 5:4). It is taught: Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: One may desecrate Shabbat on behalf of a day-old baby [to save its life], but one may not desecrate Shabbat on behalf of the dead David king of Israel.58Moving a dead body is forbidden on Shabbat, even that of King David himself. As long as a person is alive, one may desecrate Shabbat on his behalf, but if he is dead, one may not desecrate Shabbat on his behalf. Likewise, Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: One need not guard a one-day-old baby from moles or snakes, that they not gouge out his eyes; [even] a lion sees him and flees, a serpent sees him and flees. But when [the giant] Og king of Bashan dies, one needs to guard him from moles and mice, that they not gouge out his eyes. As long as a person his alive, fear of him is upon all the creatures. When he dies, fear of him is removed. That is what is written: “And fear of you and dread [ḥitekhen]59The Midrash interprets this word to be related to ḥayutkhem, during your life. of you will be [upon every beast].”
“Every crawling creature that lives shall be yours to eat; like green vegetation, I have given you everything” (Genesis 9:3). “But flesh with its life, its blood, you shall not eat” (Genesis 9:4). “Every crawling creature that lives…but flesh with its life, its blood [you shall not eat]”60This is a prohibition against eating a limb or piece of meat taken from a living animal. – Rabbi Yosei bar Aivu in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Adam the first man, for whom the consumption of meat for pleasure was not permitted, was not warned regarding a limb taken from a living animal,61As it was not relevant for him. but the descendants of Noah, for whom the consumption of meat for pleasure was permitted,62Genesis 9:3. were warned regarding a limb taken from a living animal. “But I will demand your blood of your lives; from every beast I will demand it, and from man; from every man for his brother, I will demand the life of man” (Genesis 9:5). “But [akh] [I will demand your blood of your lives]”63This is a prohibition against suicide. – to include one who strangles himself.64Even though there is no shed “blood” to be “demanded.” One might think that this applies [even] to cases like Saul?65Who took his own life to avoid torture and desecration by the Philistines (I Samuel 31:4). The verse states akh.66Akh is an exclusionary term, which teaches that there are circumstances when it is permitted for one to take his life. One might think that this applies [even] to cases like Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya?67Who consented to surrender their own lives in order to avoid committing idolatry (Daniel 3:17). The verse states akh.  “From every beast” – this refers to one who makes his fellow man available to a wild beast to kill him.68Although murder was not technically committed, one who does this is still culpable. “From every man for his brother” – this refers to one who hires others to kill his fellow man. Another interpretation, “from every beast I will demand it”69God will exact justice against any man or beast that kills a human. – these are the four kingdoms.70The four kingdoms that would subjugate Israel until the advent of the Messiah (Daniel chapter 2). “From man [adam], from every man for his brother” – this is Esau,71Also known as Edom, the forebears of the Romans. as it is written: “Deliver me, please, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau” (Genesis 32:12). “I will demand the life of man” – these are Israel,72Who are constantly being killed by the Romans. as it is stated: “You are My flock” (Ezekiel 34:17); “Flock of My pasture, you are man” (Ezekiel 34:31).
“One who sheds the blood of man, by man his blood shall be shed, as He made man in the image of God” (Genesis 9:6). “One who sheds the blood of man, by man [baadam] his blood shall be shed” – Rabbi Ḥanina said: All of these words are in accordance with the laws of the descendants of Noah, [who are executed for murder] by the word of one witness, by one judge, without [two] witnesses,73According to many commentators, these words should be omitted. without forewarning, [for killing] through an agent, for [killing] fetuses. With one witness and one judge – “one who sheds the blood of man, by man” – one [man]74One witness and one judge. – “his blood shall be shed.” Without witnesses and without forewarning – “one who sheds the blood of man…his blood shall be shed.” [One who kills] through an agent –“one who sheds the blood of man, [by man],” by means of [sending] another man – “his blood shall be shed.” For [killing] fetuses –“One who sheds the blood of man, by man [baadam],75Ba’adam can also mean “in a person,” so the phrase would mean “One who sheds the blood of a person inside a person,” that is, a fetus. his blood shall be shed.” Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: Also one who strangles a person – “One who sheds the blood of man by man [baadam].”76This is interpreted as meaning even if the blood remained inside the person. Rabbi Levi said: If a person murdered someone and was not killed [as punishment], when will he be killed? It will be when "the man” [the Messiah] will come – “one who sheds the blood of man, by the man [baadam] his blood shall be shed.” Rabbi Akiva expounded: Anyone who sheds blood, it is considered for him as though he has diminished God’s image. What is the source? “One who sheds the blood of man, by man his blood shall be shed.” Why? “As He made man in the image of God.” “And you, be fruitful, and multiply; teem on the earth, and multiply upon it” (Genesis 9:7). Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya expounded: If someone refrains from procreation, the verse considers him as though he has diminished God’s image. What is the source? “As He made man in the image of God,” and it is written thereafter: “And you, be fruitful, and multiply; teem on the earth, and multiply.”  Ben Azai expounded: If someone refrains from procreation, the verse considers him as though he has spilt blood and diminished the divine image. What is the source? “One who sheds the blood of man…” Why? “As [He made man] in the image of God.” What is written thereafter? “And you, be fruitful and multiply.” Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya said to him: It is appropriate when thoughts are expressed by those who carry them out.77Ben Azai was a life-long bachelor. Ben Azai expounds appropriately but does not act appropriately. He said to him: ‘I [refrain] because my soul yearns for Torah [study], but the world can be sustained by others [who do procreate].’
“And you, be fruitful, and multiply; [teem on the earth, and multiply upon it]” – Reish Lakish said: A covenant was granted to all the different climates.78That those who dwell in any part of the world will enjoy living there. This is derived from the juxtaposition of this verse with the verse “Behold, I am making a covenant” (Genesis 9:9). Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish was once sitting and toiling in Torah study in a certain street in Tiberias. Two women were leaving there [Tiberias]. One said to the other: ‘Blessed be He who allowed us to leave this foul climate.’ He called to them and said to them: ‘From where are you?’ They said: ‘From Mezaga.’ He said: ‘I know Mezaga, and there is nothing there but two pillars.’79The habitable land area there is no larger than the distance between two pillars of a building – as opposed to Tiberias, which is a sprawling city. He said: ‘Blessed be He who has implanted the favor of each place in the eyes of its residents.’ A student of Rabbi Yosei was once sitting before him [studying under him]. He kept explaining something to him, but he could not grasp it. He said to him: ‘Why are you having trouble grasping this?’ He said to him: ‘Because I am away from my native place.’ He said to him: ‘From what place do you come?’ He said to him: ‘From Govat Shammai.’ He said to him: ‘What is the climate like there?’ He said to him: ‘When a baby is born, we have to knead a paste of unripe grapes and smear it on his head so the mosquitoes should not consume him.’ He [Rabbi Yosei] said: ‘Blessed be He who has the implanted the favor of each place in the eyes of its residents.’ In the future, too, it will be so, as it is stated: “I will remove the heart of stone from your flesh, [and I will give you] a heart of flesh [lev basar]” (Ezekiel 36:26) – a heart that does not desire [lev boser] the tract of another.80Each person will be enamored of his native land and not desire the land of others.

=== 35 | 35 ===
“God spoke to Noah, and to his sons with him, saying:” (Genesis 9:8). “And I hereby establish My covenant with you, and with your descendants after you” (Genesis 9:9). “God spoke to Noah, and to his sons…and I hereby establish” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: Because he violated the command,1He did not engage in procreation immediately (see Bereshit Rabba 34:6). that is why he was degraded.2God did not speak to him alone, but rather, included his sons with him. Rabbi Neḥemya said: He went beyond the command, and conducted himself with holiness,3On the contrary, Noah’s abstinence in the immediate aftermath of the Flood was an indication of his holiness. and that is why he and his sons merited [to hear God’s] communication: “God spoke to Noah and to his sons.”
“God said: This is the sign of the covenant that I place between Me and you, and every living soul that is with you, for eternal generations” (Genesis 9:12). “God said: This is the sign of the covenant that I place between Me and you…for eternal generations [ledorot]” – ledorot is written [missing two vavs], to exclude two generations;4The abbreviated spelling intimates that not all generations required this sign. the generation of Hezekiah, and the generation of the members of the Great Assembly.5During these two generations a rainbow was never seen, as it was unnecessary. Rabbi Ḥizkiya omits the generation of the members of the Great Assembly and substitutes the generation of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai.  Elijah of blessed memory and Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi were sitting and studying Mishna together. They came across a teaching of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai.6And they had a disagreement regarding some detail of the teaching. They said: ‘The author of the teaching is right here,7They referred to the grave of Rabbi Shimon, which was located in a cave nearby. let us go in and ask him.’ Elijah of blessed memory went in to him. He [Rabbi Shimon’s spirit] said to him: ‘Who is with you?’ He said: ‘It is the foremost figure of the generation, Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi.’ He said to him: ‘Has a rainbow ever been sighted in his days?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ He said: ‘If a rainbow has been sighted in his days, he is not worthy to see my countenance.’ Rabbi Ḥizkiya said in the name of Rabbi Yirmeya: Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai once said as follows: ‘Valley, valley be filled with gold dinars.’ And it became filled. Rabbi Ḥizkiya said in the name of Rabbi Yirmeya: Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai once said as follows: ‘If Abraham would wish to do so, he could draw near everyone8If he would want to, he could draw all of them closer to God and grant them a share in the World to Come, on the basis of his own merit. from his contemporaries through to my contemporaries, and I would draw near everyone from my contemporaries until the advent of the messianic king. And if he does not wish to do so, Aḥiya the Shilonite could join me and together we could draw near everyone from Abraham to the advent of the messianic king.’ Rabbi Ḥizkiya said in the name of Rabbi Yirmeya: Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said the following: ‘The world cannot endure if there are fewer than thirty men living who are as righteous as Abraham our patriarch. If there are thirty [in the world at present], I and my son are two of them. If there are twenty,9Twenty righteous people of a higher caliber. I and my son are among them. If there are ten, I and my son are among them. If there are five, I and my son are among them. If there are two, I and my son are they. If there is only one, it is I.’
“My rainbow I have set in the cloud, and it shall be as a sign of a covenant between Me and the earth” (Genesis 9:13). “My rainbow [kashti] I have set” – My likeness [kishuti]; something that is likened to Me.10The rainbow is a representation of God’s likeness (see Ezekiel 1:28). Is that possible?11Is it possible to speak of God as having a visual representation? It is, rather, like the straw [kashin] of the grain.12The straw is connected to the grain, but is not similar to it. The rainbow is reminiscent of God’s presence, but is not similar in any way to Him. “It will be, when I bring a cloud over the earth, and the rainbow will be seen in the cloud” (Genesis 9:14). “It will be, when I bring a cloud over the earth” – Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Yudan bar Simon: This is analogous to someone who had a hot metal tool in his hand. He was going to bring it down onto his son,13Because he had angered him. but instead brought it down upon his servant.14When God fills the sky with clouds, intending to punish mankind, He instead deflects it onto uninhabited areas, where it will not cause destruction. The context for this remark appears later in this section. “The rainbow shall be in the cloud, and I will see it, to remember the eternal covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth” (Genesis (9:16). “The rainbow shall be in the cloud and I will see it, to remember the eternal covenant between God…” – this is the supernal attribute of justice, “and every living creature”…15The conclusion of this statement is found later in this section.  Rabbi Yitzḥak, Rabbi Yoḥanan, and Rabbi Yudan the proselyte went to hear words of Torah from Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai. Some say it was about the passage concerning vows, and some say it was about the passage concerning libations. [Afterwards,] they took their leave of him, but they stayed over for another day. They said: ‘We must go take leave of him a second time.’ One of them expounded and said to the others: ‘It was already written: “Joshua blessed them and sent them off, and they went to their tents” (Joshua 22:6). Why, then, does the verse state [further]: “Also when Joshua sent them off to their tents, he blessed them”? (Joshua 22:7). The explanation is that while Israel was conquering and dividing the land, the tribes of Reuben and Gad were together with them, and spent fourteen years in this manner. They took their leave of Joshua to go back to their tents. But they stayed over there a few more days, and went back to take leave of him a second time. That is why it is stated: “Also when [Joshua] sent them off…”’ Rabbi Yudan said: ‘The tribes of Reuben and Gad were members of Joshua’s entourage, so he accompanied them to the Jordan. When they saw that his entourage had diminished,16Because all the Reubenites and Gadites were about to cross the Jordan. they accompanied him back to his house.17And there, when they finally parted ways, Joshua blessed them again. The latter blessing was greater than the former. That is what is written: “He said to them, saying: Return to your tents with much wealth, with very much livestock, with silver, with gold, with bronze, with iron, and with very many garments. Divide the spoils of your enemies with your brethren”’ (Joshua 22:8). Another one expounded: It was already written [concerning Solomon]: “On the eighth day he sent the people away, and they blessed the king” (I Kings 8:66). Why, then, is it stated [further]: “On the twenty-third day of the seventh month he sent the people away”? (II Chronicles 7:10). The explanation is that they took their leave of him, but then they stayed there several additional days, so they went back to take their leave of him a second time. That is why it is stated: “On the twenty-third day of the seventh month he sent the people away.” Rabbi Levi said: It is written: “For they engaged in the dedication of the altar for seven days, and then the festival was seven days” (II Chronicles 7:9) – and you cannot have seven days before the festival [Sukkot] that do not include a Shabbat and Yom Kippur. During those seven days the people of Israel were eating, drinking, rejoicing, and kindling lamps. Afterwards they then regretted the matter. They said: ‘Perhaps we have a sin on our hands for having desecrated Shabbat and for not fasting on Yom Kippur.’ In order to reassure them that the Holy One blessed be He approved of their actions, a Divine Voice emerged and said to them: ‘All of you are among the participants in the World to Come.’18And this was the second blessing mentioned in the verse. And the latter blessing was greater than the former, as it is stated: “And they went to their tents joyful and good-hearted” (I Kings 8:66). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: “Joyful” – that they found their wives ritually pure; “and good-hearted” – that they [their wives] became pregnant with males. Rabbi Levi said: [The joy was because] a Divine Voice emerged and said to them: ‘All of you are among the participants in the World to Come.’ Another one of them expounded: It was already written [regarding Elisha]: “She departed from him” (II Kings 4:5). Why, then, does the verse state [afterwards]: “She came and told the man of God”? (II Kings 4:7).19She had already spoken to Elisha and left him. Why did she return to him, and what did she tell him? The explanation is that: “the oil had stopped [vayaamod]”20Vayaamod literally means “it stood.” It is usually understood here to mean that it stood still, ceasing to flow. (II Kings 4:6) – [what happened was] that the price of oil had [miraculously] risen21And it was in this sense that the oil had “stood.” and she came to ask whether she should sell it or not sell it.22She wanted to know if the miraculous price rise would continue. The latter blessing was greater than the former. “You and your sons will live on the remainder” (II Kings 4:7) – until the dead will come to life.23When he said “will live” he meant that it would suffice until the time when all men will return to life. When he [Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai] saw that they were men of refinement, he sent a pair of Torah scholars to accompany them, to find out what they would expound on the way. One of them expounded: It was already written: “The angel of God that was going before the camp of Israel traveled and went behind them” (Exodus 14:19). Why, then, does the verse state [further]: “And the pillar of cloud traveled from before them and stood behind them”? (Exodus 14:19). The explanation is that the same attribute of strict justice that had been extended against Israel,24Represented by the pillar of cloud. the Holy One blessed be He redirected it against the Egyptians.25It is here that the parable of the father with the hot metal tool applies. Another expounded: It is written: “The rainbow shall be in the cloud, and I will see it, to remember the eternal covenant between God and every living creature…” – “between God” – this is the supernal attribute of strict justice; “and every living creature” – this is the attribute of justice below. The supernal attribute of justice is severe; the attribute of justice below is lenient.  One of them expounded: One verse says: “All objects cannot equal it [Torah wisdom]” (Proverbs 8:11), and one verse says: “All of your objects cannot equal it” (Proverbs 3:15). “[All] objects” – these are mitzvot and good deeds. “Your objects” – these are precious stones and pearls. Rabbi Aḥa in the name of Rabbi Tanḥum bar Rabbi Ḥiyya: [God said:] ‘My objects and your objects cannot equal it; “Rather, let the one who glories, glory in this: perceiving and knowing Me, for I am the Lord who performs kindness, justice…”’ (Jeremiah 9:23). Artevan sent a priceless jewel to our Rabbi.26Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, the patriarch. He said to him: ‘Send me a valuable object that is as valuable as this.’ He sent him a mezuza. He sent a message to him, saying: ‘I sent you an item that is priceless and you sent me an item that is worth one polar.’27A small coin. He said to him: ‘My objects and your objects cannot equal it.28The Torah is more valuable than jewels, and a mezuza has words of Torah written on its parchment. Moreover, you sent me an item that I must guard, and I sent you an item that guards you while you sleep, as it is stated: “It [the Torah] will guide you when you walk” (Proverbs 6:22) – in this world. “When you lie down, it will protect you” (Proverbs 6:22) – at the moment of death. “And when you awaken, it will be your conversation” (Proverbs 6:22) – in the future [resurrection].’

=== 36 | 36 ===
“The sons of Noah, who emerged from the ark, were Shem, Ham, and Yefet, and Ham was the father of Canaan” (Genesis 9:18). “The sons of Noah, who emerged from the ark” – “He is silent [yashkit], and who can condemn? He conceals His face; who can see Him [yeshurenu]? To a nation and to a person alike” (Job 34:29). Rabbi Meir expounded: [The generation of the Flood said:] “He is silent” concerning His world;1He allows injustice to proceed without saying anything about it. “He conceals His face” from His world, like a judge before whom a curtain is spread before his face and he does not know what is transpiring outside. So said the generation of the Flood: “Clouds obscure for Him and He does not see” (Job 22:14).  They [the other Sages] said to him: ‘That is enough for you, Meir.’2You are not interpreting this verse correctly. He said to them: ‘What, then, is the meaning of what is written: “He is silent [yashkit], and who can condemn…”?’ They said: ‘He granted tranquility3This is the meaning of yashkit. They were granted an exceedingly convenient way of life. to the generation of the Flood, and who came to condemn them?4There was no one who reprimanded them, so they carried on in their evil ways, until their destruction. What tranquility did He afford them? “Their offspring are well placed [nakhon] before them, with them, and their descendants are before their eyes” (Job 21:8); “They send out their youngsters like a flock....” (Job 21:11). Rabbi Levi and the Rabbis, Rabbi Levi said: One’s wife would be pregnant for [just] three days [before giving birth], as nakhon is stated here, and elsewhere, it is stated: “Be prepared [nekhonim] [for three days]” (Exodus 19:15) – just as nakhon stated there refers to three days, so, too, nakhon that is stated here refers to three days. The Rabbis say: One’s wife would be pregnant for [just] one day and give birth, as nakhon is stated here, and nakhon is stated elsewhere: “Be prepared [nakhon] for the morrow” (Exodus 34:2) – just as nakhon there refers to one day, so, too, here it refers to one day. “And their descendants are before their eyes” – as they would [live to] see their children and their children’s children.  “They send out their youngsters [avileihem] like a flock” – Rabbi Levi said: In Arabia they call a baby avila.5And this is how we know that avileihem means “youngsters.” “And their children dance” (Job 21:11) – in the manner of demons, as it says: “And demons will dance there” (Isaiah 13:21).6They were able to dance with extraordinary robustness and intensity, as demons dance. When one of them would give birth during the day, she would say to her [newborn] son: ;Go out and get me a flint rock to sever your umbilical cord.’7Newborns were able to walk and fully function as soon as they were born, “like flock.” [If she gave birth] at night, she would say to her son: ‘Go out and kindle a lamp for me with which to sever your umbilical cord.’ There was an incident involving a certain woman who gave birth at night. She said to her son: ‘Go and kindle me a lamp so I can sever your umbilical cord.’ He went out and encountered the demon Shemadon. He [the demon] said to him: ‘Go announce to your mother that the rooster has crowed.8Demons can do no harm during the day. Had it not been that the rooster crowed, I would have smitten you and killed you.’ He [the baby] said to him: ‘You go announce to your mother that my mother has not yet severed my umbilical cord,9And I have not reached my full strength. as had she severed it, I would have smitten you and killed you.’ That is what is written: “Their houses are peaceful without fear” (Job 21:9) – [without fear] of demons; “and the rod of God is not upon them” (Job 21:9) – [they were spared] from suffering. When He concealed his face from them [and finally punished them], who could say to Him: ‘Your conduct is not appropriate [kashura]?’10Who can question or criticize God’s actions? This is the meaning of “He conceals His face; who can see Him [yeshurenu]?” In what way did He conceal his face from them? In that He brought the Flood upon them. That is what is written: “He obliterated all existence…” (Genesis 7:23). “To a nation and to a person alike” – “to a nation” – this refers to the generation of the Flood; and to a person” – this refers to Noah. “Alike” – as the world was founded from him. He was [equally] able to establish His world from a whole nation or from a single person,11This is the meaning of “to a nation and to a person alike.” as it is stated: “The sons of Noah, who emerged from the ark.”12And they went on to repopulate the entire world.
“He shatters [yaroa] the powerful without number…” (Job 34:24) – the [powerful] men of the generation of the Flood performed evil [here’u] with their evil deeds. “Without number” – their evil deeds were innumerable. “And sets others in their place” (Job 34:24) – these are the descendants of Noah: “The sons of Noah…were Shem, Ham, and Yefet.” “Indeed, from when there was day, I am He, and there is no savior from My hand” (Isaiah 43:13) – from among the nations of the world. “I will act, and who can reverse it?” (Isaiah 43:13) – all the actions and thoughts that I implemented with the generation of the Flood, who could say to Me: ‘You did not act appropriately?’ But Noah entered in peace and emerged in peace – “The sons of Noah, who emerged…were…” “And Ham was the father of Canaan” – the father of the debased one. “These three were the sons of Noah, and from these the whole earth was dispersed” (Genesis 9:19). “These three were the sons of Noah, and from these the whole earth was dispersed”  – to what is the matter comparable? It is comparable to a great fish that disperses its eggs and fills the world.
“Noah, man of the soil, began, and he planted a vineyard” (Genesis 9:20). “Noah, man of the soil, began [vayaḥel]” – he became profaned and unholy [ḥulin]. Why? “And he planted a vineyard.” Should he not have planted something else, that was constructive, a fig tree branch or an olive tree branch? Instead, “he planted a vineyard.” From where did he have it [the grapevine shoot]? Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: He brought in [to the ark] vine branches and saplings, fig branches, and olive branches. That is what is written: “Gather it for you” (Genesis 6:21) – a person gathers an item only if he needs it. “Man of the soil” – there were three people who were enthusiastic about the soil, but ultimately nothing constructive came from them. They are: Cain, Noah, and Uziyahu. Cain – “Cain was a tiller of the soil” (Genesis 4:2); Noah – “a man of the soil”; Uziyahu – “he had farmers and vine growers in the mountains and on the fertile lands, as he was a lover of the soil” (II Chronicles 26:10). “Man of the soil”13The underlying question is: In what sense was Noah a “man of the soil”? – he remade the surface of the soil;14He began to re-cultivate the soil after it had been devastated by the Flood. because of him the soil was watered;15It was on his behalf that rain fell upon the parched soil after the Flood (see Bereshit Rabba 33:7). he filled the entire surface of the soil.16His descendants populated the world. “Man of the soil” – he was a farmer, [called “man of the soil”] after his farming activities. Rabbi Berekhya said: Moses was more beloved that Noah. Noah, after he was called “a righteous man” (Genesis 6:9), was called “a man of the soil.”17He was diminished in stature when he became older. But Moses, after he was called “an Egyptian man” (Exodus 2:19) was called “the man of God” (Deuteronomy 33:1). “He planted a vineyard” – when he was about to plant a vineyard, the demon Shemadon encountered him. He said to him: ‘I have a partnership with you.18Wine in moderation can be a positive factor, but too much brings one into the demon’s domain. However, be careful that you do not enter into my domain, and if you enter my domain, I will harm you.’
“He drank of the wine and became drunk, and he was exposed inside his tent” (Genesis 9:21). “He drank of the wine.” “He drank” – he drank immoderately19“He drank of the wine” implies that he drank without measure. and became disgraced.  Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: On that same day he planted [the vineyard], on that same day he drank, on that same day he was disgraced.20This is derived from the immediate succession of terms “Noah planted…and he drank and he was exposed.” “He was exposed [vayitgal] inside his tent” – vayigal21That would be a simpler way to say: He was exposed. is not written, but rather, vayitgal – he brought about exile [galut] for himself22Through his overindulgence in wine. and for subsequent generations. The ten tribes were exiled only due to wine. That is what is written [regarding them]: “Those who drink wine from bowls” (Amos 6:6), “Woe to those who rise early in the morning and pursue intoxicating drink; [who stay up late at night, wine will inflame]” (Isaiah 5:11). The [other two] tribes, of Judah and Benjamin, were also exiled only due to wine, as it is stated: “These too erred with wine and strayed with intoxicating drink” (Isaiah 28:7). “Inside his tent [oholo]” – oholah is written23With a heh, which is a feminine suffix, rather than vav, which is the usual masculine suffix. – it was inside his wife’s tent.24He had gone there to engage in marital relations. Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili: When Noah emerged from the ark, a lion struck him and mutilated him. When he came to engage in relations his seed scattered25Due to his injury. and he was humiliated. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Never be eager for wine, as in this entire passage about wine, the word vay26Meaning woe. All the verbs that follow begin with the letters vav yod, spelling vay. appears fourteen times: “Noah began [vayaḥel],” “he planted [vayita] a vineyard,” “he drank [vayesht] of the wine,” [“and became drunk [vayishkar]”]27This does not appear in the text of the midrash but is one of the fourteen instances of vav. “he was exposed [vayitgal],” Ḥam saw [vayar]” (Genesis 9:22), “he told [vayaged] his two brothers” (Genesis 9:22), “Shem and Yefet took [vayikaḥ]” (Genesis 9:23), “they placed it [vayasimu] on the shoulders of both of them” (Genesis 9:23), “they walked [vayelekhu] backward” (Genesis 9:23), “they covered [vaykhasu] the nakedness of their father. They faced backward, and they did not see the nakedness of their father” (Genesis 9:23), “Noah awakened [vayikatz]” (Genesis 9:24), “He knew [vayeda] what…had done to him” (Genesis 9:24), “he said [vayomer]: Cursed is Canaan, as slave of slaves…” (Genesis 9:25).
“Ḥam, father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brothers outside” (Genesis 9:22). “Ḥam, father of Canaan, saw [and told [vayaged]]” – he said it to them and spoke persuasively to them;28Vayaged is interpreted in its Aramaic sense, of causing something to move forward, in this case, Ham’s brothers’ opinions. he said to them: Adam the first man had [only] two sons and one of them arose and killed the other. This one [Noah] has three sons and he seeks to make them four?29Noah sought to engage in marital relations (see section 4). He said it to them and spoke persuasively to them.  Rabbi Yaakov bar Zavdi said: What is the reason that a slave is liberated by [losing] a tooth or an eye?30If one strikes his slave and causes the loss of an eye or a tooth, he must free the slave (Exodus 21:27). It is from here: “He saw” and “he told.”31Canaan, Ḥam’s son, the archetypical slave (see Genesis 9:25), saw with his eyes and told with his teeth, which are instrumental in producing speech.
“Shem and Yefet took the garment, they placed it upon the shoulders of both of them, they walked backward, and they covered the nakedness of their father and they faced backward, and they did not see the nakedness of their father” (Genesis 9:23). “Shem and Yefet took the garment” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Shem began with the mitzva first, and Yefet came and heeded him.32He heeded Shem’s request to help him. That is why he [Shem] merited the prayer shawl33Shem is the ancestor of Israel. and Yefet, the regal cloak.  “They placed it upon the shoulders of both of them, they walked backward, and they covered the nakedness of their father.” From the fact that it is stated: “They walked backward,” do I not know that “they did not see the nakedness of their father”? Rather, it teaches that they placed their hands over their faces as they were walking backward, conducting themselves with respect, in keeping with the [appropriate] reverence for a father upon his son. The Holy One blessed be He said to Shem: ‘You covered your father’s nakedness, by your life, I will repay you, [as it is written]: “Then these men34Ḥananya, Mishael and Azaria, who were descendants of Shem. were bound in their sarbaleihon […and were thrown into the fiery furnace]”’ (Daniel 3:21). [What is sarbaleihon?] Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Huna, Rabbi Yudan said: Their cloaks. Rabbi Huna said: Their robes.35They were not stripped of their garments when thrown into the furnace, in the merit of their ancestor Shem. The Holy One blessed be He said to Yefet: ‘You covered your father’s nakedness, by your life, I will repay you [as it is written]: “It will be on that day, I will give Gog36Gog is the king of the nation of Magog, who are descendants of Yefet (Genesis 10:2). a place of burial there, in Israel, the valley of the passersby east of the sea, and it will block the passersby, and they will bury Gog and all his multitude there, and they will call it the valley of the Multitude of Gog”’ (Ezekiel 39:11).37Just as Yefet covered Noah’s body, so will the bodies of his descendants be covered up, in burial. The Holy One blessed be He said to Ḥam: ‘You brought shame to your father’s nakedness, by your life, I will exact retribution against you: “So the king of Assyria will lead the captives of Egypt and the exiles of Kush, youths and elders, naked and barefoot and bared of buttocks, the nakedness of Egypt”’ (Isaiah 20:4).38Egypt (Mitzrayim) and Kush were descendants of Ḥam (Genesis 10:6).
“Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his youngest son had done to him” (Genesis 9:24). “Noah awoke from his wine” – the effect of his wine ceased from him. “And knew what his youngest [hakatan] son had done to him” – his disqualified son. That is what is written: For the bronze altar that was before the Lord was too small [katan] to contain...” (I Kings 8:64).39It was, therefore, disqualified for service. “He said: Cursed be Canaan; a slave of slaves he shall be to his brothers” (Genesis 9:25).  “He said: Cursed be Canaan; a slave of slaves he shall be to his brothers” – Ḥam committed the sin and Canaan was cursed? This is astonishing. Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: Because it is written: “God blessed Noah and his sons” (Genesis 9:1), and a curse cannot be in a place where there is blessing.40So Noah was unable to curse Ḥam. That is why he said: “Cursed is Canaan.” Rabbi Neḥemya says: Canaan saw and told Ḥam;41Canaan himself was instrumental in bringing about Noah’s disgrace. therefore, one ascribes the curse to the corrupt one. Rabbi Berekhya said: Noah endured much suffering in the ark due to the fact that he did not have a young son to attend to him. He said: ‘When I emerge, I will produce a young son for myself to attend to me.’ After Ḥam performed that act [to Noah],42He castrated him, as he wished to prevent him from producing any more offspring (see section 5). he said: ‘You prevented me from producing a young son to attend to me; therefore, that man [your son Canaan] will be a slave to his brothers, who are servants to me.’ Rav Huna said in the name of Rav Yosef: [Noah said:] ‘You prevented me from performing an act that is done in darkness; therefore, that man [Canaan] will be ugly and darkened.’ Rabbi Huna said in the name of Rabbi Yosef: He said to him: ‘You prevented me from producing a fourth son; therefore, I am cursing your fourth son.’43See Genesis 10:6. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: Both Ḥam and the dog engaged in sexual relations in the ark. That is why Ḥam emerged darkened, and the dog is exposed when mating. Rabbi Levi said: This is analogous to one who imprinted his own coinage [with his image] inside the king’s tent.44This was, of course, an affront to the king. The king said: ‘I decree that his face should be blackened and his image defaced.’45The image on the coins should be defaced and blackened. So, Ḥam and the dog engaged in sexual relations in the ark,46They sought to reproduce their image, through the sexual act, inside the ark, which is analogous to the king’s palace. Therefore the king decreed that the image they produced, their descendants, should suffer humiliation.  and that is why Ḥam emerged darkened, and the dog is exposed when mating.
“He said: Blessed be the Lord, God of Shem, and Canaan shall be their servant” (Genesis 9:26). “May God expand Yefet, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be their servant” (Genesis 9:27). “He said: Blessed be the Lord, God of Shem […May God expand Yefet, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem]” – Reish Lakish said: From Yefet, as well, there were those [descendants] who stood in the tents of Shem.47Some of Yefet’s descendants joined the Jewish people and went to the “tent of Shem” – the Temple in Jerusalem. “He said: Blessed be the Lord, God of Shem, and Canaan shall be…may God expand Yefet” – this refers to Cyrus [the king of Persia and Madai]48The nation of Madai were descendants of Yefet (Genesis 10:2).  who decreed that the [second] Temple should be built. Nevertheless, “He shall dwell in the tents of Shem” – the Divine Presence rested only in the tents of Shem.49The full manifestation of the Divine Presence was found only in the Temple built by Solomon, a descendant of Shem, and not in the second Temple, which was sponsored by Cyrus, a descendant of Yefet.  Bar Kappara said: The words of the Torah will be said in the Greek language50The nation of Greece (Yavan) being a descendant of Yefet (Genesis 10:2). in the tents of Shem.51The Greek translation of the Torah was authorized to be read in the synagogue (see Mishna Megilla 1:8). Rabbi Yudan said: From here there is a source from the Torah for translations [of the Torah].52In our verse the Torah itself alludes to a Greek translation of the Torah. That is what is written: “They read in the scroll of the Torah of God, [explicated, providing insight, and they elucidated the reading]” (Nehemiah 8:8). “They read in the scroll of the Torah of God” – this is the biblical text itself; “explicated” – this refers to translation; “providing insight” – this refers to the cantillation notes;53Which serve as punctuation, imparting the proper manner of grouping the words with one another. “and they elucidated the reading” – this refers to [the demarcation of the] beginnings of the verses. Rabbi Huna ben Luleyani says: This refers to the delineation [of verses] and proofs.54When the text is unclear, one determines the meaning based on context and proofs cited from elsewhere. The Rabbis of Caesarea said: From here, the [concept of the] Masoret55Masoret is the body of work that establishes the correct pronunciation and spelling for each word of the Torah. is derived. Rabbi Ze’ira and Rabbi Ḥananel in the name of Rabbi: Even if one is as familiar with the Torah as Ezra, he should not recite it orally while writing [a Torah scroll].56When writing a Torah scroll, the scribe must copy from another Torah scroll, even if he knows the correct wording and spelling by heart. But is it not taught that there was once an incident involving Rabbi Meir in Asia Minor; there was no Scroll of Esther there, and he recited it orally and wrote it down [for use on Purim]? Over there57In Babylon. they say: He wrote two scrolls; he put the first one aside and certified the second [for use].58The second was copied from the first, so it was valid. The first, which was not copied from another text, was disqualified.

=== 37 | 37 ===
“The sons of Yefet: Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Yavan, and Tuval, and Meshekh, and Tiras” (Genesis 10:2). “The sons of Yefet: Gomer, and Magog [and Madai]” – these are Africa, Germania, Madai. [“And Yavan, and Tuval and Meshekh”] – Macedonia, Isnia, and Tonia. “Tiras” – Rabbi Simon said: This is Persia. The Rabbis say: Thrace.  “And the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, and Rifat, and Togarma” (Genesis 10:3). “And the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, and Rifat, and Togarma” – Asia, Adiabene, and Germania; Rabbi Berekhya said: Germanicia. “And the sons of Yavan: Elisha, and Tarshish, Kitim, and Dodanim” (Genesis 10:4). “And the sons of Yavan: Elisha, and Tarshish, [Kitim, and Dodanim]” – Hellas and Tarsus, Italia, and Dardania. One verse says: “And Dodanim” and another verse says: “and Rodanim” (I Chronicles 1:7).1Referring to the same nation. Rabbi Simon and Rabbi Ḥanin, Rabbi Simon said: Dodanim – because they were Israel’s cousins [benei dodin]. Rodanim – because they would come and oppress [rodin] them.2They sometimes regarded themselves as close as kin to Israel, and at other times they oppressed them. Rabbi Ḥanina said: When Israel is ascendant, they say to them: ‘We are your cousins,’ and when they are in decline, they come and oppress them.
“And the sons of Ḥam: Kush, and Mitzrayim, and Put, and Canaan” (Genesis 10:6). “And the sons of Ḥam: Kush, and Mitzrayim, and Put, and Canaan” –Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: We might have been under the impression that the family of Put was assimilated [into other nations].3Since, unlike all his brothers, he is never mentioned again in the Torah. But Ezekiel came and stated explicitly [otherwise]: “Kush, Put and Lud and all the intermingled people, Cub and the children of the land of the covenant, will fall with them by the sword” (Ezekiel 30:5).4Put is mentioned as an extant nation in the times of Ezekiel. “And Kush begot Nimrod; he began to be a mighty one in the earth” (Genesis 10:8). “He was a mighty hunter before the Lord; therefore it is said: Like Nimrod, a mighty hunter before the Lord” (Genesis 10:9). “And Kush begot Nimrod” – that is what is written: “A meditation by David, a song that he sang to the Lord concerning the words of Kush Ben Yemini” (Psalms 7:1). Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina ben Yitzḥak: He said it corresponding to the [harsh] justice administered by that wicked one.5Esau/Edom, and his descendants, the Romans. But was Esau a Kushite?6Of course not; he was a descendant of Abraham. The meaning [of this description] is, rather, that he performed deeds like the deeds of [Kush’s son] Nimrod. That is what is written: “Therefore it is said:…Nimrod, a mighty hunter before the Lord” is not written here, but rather, “like Nimrod, a mighty hunter” (Genesis 10:9)7Implying that there is someone else who is “like Nimrod.” – just as that one hunted [ensnared] people through their words, so, too, this one hunts [ensnares] people with their words.8Of Esau it is said “he had [meat from] hunted animals in his mouth” (Genesis 25:28). [They say:] ‘You [claim you] did not steal? Who stole with you?9The judge would thus seek to incriminate the defendant despite his protestations of innocence. You [claim you] did not kill? Who killed with you?’
“He [hu] was a mighty hunter before the Lord” – there five instances of hu10When hu (meaning “he is” or “he was”) is used to introduce a description of a person just named. that are in a good sense and five instances of hu that are in a bad sense. [These are the bad ones:] “He was a mighty hunter before the Lord”; “He is Esau, father of Edom” (Genesis 36:43); “He was Datan, and Aviram” (Numbers 26:9); “He was King Aḥaz” (II Chronicles 28:22); “He was Aḥashverosh” (Esther 1:1). And five are in a good sense: “Abram, he is Abraham” (I Chronicles 1:27); “He was Moses, and Aaron” (Exodus 6:27); “He is Aaron, and Moses” (Exodus 6:26); “He was King Hezekiah” (II Chronicles 32:30); “He was Ezra, ascended from Babylon” (Ezra 7:6). Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Ḥanin: We have one that is even better than them all: “He is the Lord our God” (Psalms 105:7), meaning that His attribute of mercy is eternal.
“The beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erekh, and Akad, and Kalne, in the land of Shinar” (Genesis 10:10). “The beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erekh, and Akad, and Kalne” – Ḥeren, Nesibin, and Katosfin.  “In the land of Shinar” – this is Babylon. Why was it called Shinar? Reish Lakish said: It is because all the dead of the Flood were deposited [ninaru] there. Another interpretation, [it is called] Shinar because it is empty [meno’eret] of mitzvot, as there is no teruma, no tithes, and no Sabbatical year [there]. Another interpretation, [it is called] Shinar because they [its inhabitants] would die in discomfort [tashnik], without a lamp and without a bath.11Oil for lamps and wood for heating water were in short supply in Babylon. Another interpretation, [it is called] Shinar because their princes12Torah scholars. die as youths [ne’arim]. Another interpretation, [it is called] Shinar because its princes look into the Torah while they are still youths [ne’arim]. Another interpretation, [it is called] Shinar because it produced an enemy [soneh] and a foe [ar] of the Holy One blessed be He. Who is that? It is Nebuchadnezzar. “Ashur left that land, and he built Nineveh, and Rehovot Ir, and Kalah” (Genesis 10:11). “And Resen between Nineveh and Kalah; that is the great city” (Genesis 10:12). “Ashur left that land” – Ashur left that conspiracy [of Babel].13The conspiracy that led to the building of the Tower of Babel. When he saw all of them coming to contest the Holy One blessed be He, he vacated his land. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You left four [cities],14Babel, and Erekh, and Akad, and Kalne. by your life, I will repay you by giving you four [cities]’: “And he built Nineveh, and Rehovot Ir, and Kalaḥ…and Resen” (Genesis 10:11–12). [Resen is] Telasar.15See Isaiah 37:12. But he [Ashur] did not do so [indefinitely]; rather, because it [the nation of Ashur] came and participated with them [the Babylonians] in the destruction of the Temple,16As it is stated: “Also Ashur has joined them” (Psalms 83:9). the Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Yesterday you were a chick [efroaḥ] and now an egg?17Instead of progressing, as an egg progresses into a chick, you regressed. Originally you forsook the generation of the Dispersion, but now you have joined the evildoers. Yesterday you soared [mafriaḥ] with mitzvot and good deeds, but now you are shut in like an egg? That is astonishing.’ That is why [it is written]: “[Also Ashur has joined them]; they give a hand to the sons of Lot, Selah.” (Psalms 83:9) – for a curse [levat].18Lot is interpreted as levat, a curse. Since you joined the others in destroying the Temple, you are cursed. “And Resen between Nineveh and Kalah …[that is the great city]” – we do not know whether Resen is the great city, or Nineveh is the great one. From what is written: “Nineveh was an exceptionally great city, a journey of three days” (Jonah 3:3), we see that Nineveh was the great city.
“And Mitzrayim begot Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehavim, and Naftuḥim” (Genesis 10:13). “And Mitzrayim begot Ludim…” – all of the coinages of Egypt are only with yam:19All the sons of Mitzrayim had names ending in yud mem, which spells yam [the sea].  Ludim – the Ludim of the sea [Ludei yam], Anamim – the Anamim of the sea [Anamei yam], as their names imply, Lehavim – the Lahav of the sea [Lahav yam], Naftuḥim – the Naftuḥim of the sea [Naftuḥei yam].20All these nations lived by the sea. “And Patrusim, and Kasluḥim, from which the Philistines and the Kaftorim emerged” (Genesis 10:14). “Patrusim” – Parvitot. “Kasluḥim” – Pekusim. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Patrusim and Kasluḥim produced bachelors, these would steal the wives of those, and those would steal the wives of these. What emerged from them? Philistines – mighty,21They would invade [poleshim] other lands. Kaftorim – dwarfs.22They were small and round like buttons [kaftorim].
“And Canaan begot Sidon his firstborn, and Ḥet” (Genesis 10:15). “And the Yevusites, and the Emorites, and the Girgashites” (Genesis 10:16). “And the Hivites, and the Arkites, and the Sinites” (Genesis 10:17). “And the Arvadites, and the Tzemarites, and the Ḥamatites and then the families of the Canaanites dispersed” (Genesis 10:18). “And Canaan begot Sidon… And the Hivites” – Ḥaldin; “and the Arkites” – Arka of Lebanon; “the Sinites” – Orthosia; “the Arvadites” – Aradus; “the Tzemarites” – Homs. Why does it call them Tzemarites? Yehuda bar Rabbi said: It is because they work with wool [tzemer]. The Ḥamatites – Epiphania. “The border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as you approach Gerar, until Gaza as you approach Sodom and Gomorrah and Adma and Tzevoyim, until Lasha” (Genesis 10:19). “The border of the Canaanites was from Sidon…[until Lasha] ” – until Callirhoe.
“And to Shem, father of all the children of Ever, brother of Yefet the eldest, children were also born” (Genesis 10:21). “And to Shem, father of all the children of Ever…[brother of Yefet the eldest]23This phrase could also be translated: the elder brother of Yefet.” – we do not know whether Shem is the eldest or Yefet is the eldest. From what is written: “These are the descendants of Shem. Shem was one hundred years old, and he begot Arpakhshad two years after the Flood” (Genesis 11:10),24Noah’s eldest son was born when he was five hundred year old (Genesis 5:32), and the Flood began when he was six hundred years old (Genesis 7:6), so Noah’s eldest son was one hundred years old when the Flood began. Shem, however, turned one hundred two years after the Flood. we see that Yefet was the eldest. “Two sons were born to Ever; the name of the one was Peleg, as in his days the world was divided, and the name of his brother was Yoktan” (Genesis 10:25). “Two sons were born to Ever; the name of the one was Peleg, as in his days the world was divided” – Rabbi Yosei says: The ancients, because they knew their ancestors [personally],25Since they lived very long lives, spanning many generations. would give names [to their children] on the basis of events [of their lives], but we, who do not know our ancestors,26Because they are already dead when our children are born. give names [to our children] after our ancestors. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: The ancients, because they utilized the divine spirit [of prophecy], would give names on the basis of events, but we, who do not utilize the divine spirit, give names after our ancestors. Rabbi Yosei ben Ḥalafta said: Ever was a great prophet, as he named [his son] on the basis of [future] events. That is what is written: “Two sons were born to Ever… [the name of the one was Peleg, as in his days the world was divided [niflega]].”27Ever named his son after the dispersion of the Tower of Babel, an event that would happen later in his life. Why was he named Yoktan? It is because he minimized [maktin] himself28He acted humbly. and his affairs. What did he merit? He merited to produce thirteen families. If for the younger son who minimized his affairs it is so, for an older one who minimizes his affairs, all the more so.29If even the younger son is rewarded for acting humbly, all the more so if an older son does so. Similarly, “Israel extended his right hand, and laid it upon the head of Ephraim, who was the younger [hatza’ir]” (Genesis 48:14) – Rabbi Huna said: From the report of their births,30In Genesis 41:51–52. do we not know that he [Ephraim] was the younger? The explanation [for repeating the information here] is that he used to downplay [matz’ir] his affairs. What did he merit? He merited the birthright. If the younger one who downplayed his affairs merited the birthright, an older one who downplays his affairs, all the more so.
“And Yoktan begot Almodad, and Shelef, and Ḥatzarmavet, and Yeraḥ” (Genesis 10:26). “And Yoktan begot Almodad, and Shelef, and Ḥatzarmavet” – Rabbi Huna said: There is a place named Ḥatzarmavet,31Literally, courtyard of death. [and it is so called] because they eat leeks and wear papyrus garments,32So dire is their poverty. and anticipate death every day.33They look forward to death, since they are so deprived. Rabbi Shmuel said: They do not have even papyrus garments. “Their dwelling was from Mesha, as you approach Sefar, the mountain of Kedem” (Genesis 10:30). “Their dwelling was from Mesha” – Elazar ben Pinḥas said: Mesha is death.34This is a metaphor. All the children there were illegitimate, and illegitimate children do not live long. Media is ill.35Their children are mostly legitimate, but there are some illegitimate among them. Eilam and Govevei are dying.36The majority are illegitimate. Ḥevel Yama is the sky blue wool of Babylon.37Sky-blue wool is the most expensive material. Ḥevel Yama contains people of the finest lineage in Babylon. Tzor and Tzayar are the sky blue wool of Ḥevel Yama. Rabbi Yehuda says: Mesopotamia is like the Exile38Exile is a moniker for Pumbedita, a place with fine lineage. in terms of lineage. “As you approach Sefar” – Tafrei. “The mountain of Kedem” – the mountains of the east.39Kedem often means east.

=== 38 | 38 ===
“The entire earth was of one language and of common speech” (Genesis 11:1). “The entire earth was of one language…” – Rabbi Elazar in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Zimra began: “Do not kill them, lest my people forget; scatter them by Your power and take them down” (Psalms 59:12). The Rabbis interpreted the verse regarding Do’eg and Aḥitofel. David said [to God]: ‘Do not kill Do’eg and Aḥitofel, “lest my people forget” – lest the coming generations forget [what they did]. “Scatter them by Your power” – displace them. “And take them down” – take them down from their prominence.’ As for us, what will He do for us? “My Lord is our shield” (Psalms 59:12). “The sin of their mouths, the words of their lips” (Psalms 59:13) – this one permitted sexual immorality and bloodshed, and that one permitted sexual immorality and bloodshed. This one permitted sexual immorality and bloodshed, as it is stated [that Aḥitofel said]: “Go consort with your father’s concubine” (II Samuel 16:21); “I will come upon him, and he will be weary and discouraged” (II Samuel 17:2). That one permitted sexual immorality and bloodshed – Naḥman son of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said [that Do’eg said to Saul]: ‘Now, free his wife and declare him a condemned man, so it is as if he is already dead, his life forfeited and his wife permissible [to remarry].’ Rabbi Elazar in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Zimra interpreted it regarding the generation of the Dispersion. Israel said: ‘Do not kill the generation of the Dispersion lest the coming generations forget [what they did]: “Scatter them by Your power and take them down” (Psalms 59:12) – displace them and take them down from above to below.’ As for us, what will He do for us? “My Lord is our shield” (Psalms 59:12). “The sin of their mouths” (Psalms 59:13) – because of the sinful words that they uttered with their mouths, [saying]: ‘Once every one thousand six hundred and fifty-six years, the firmament collapses.1The Flood occurred in year 1656 from Creation. These people believed that it was part of some natural cycle, not an act of God. Come, rather, and let us prepare supports; one to the north, one to the south, one to the west, and the one here will support it to the east.’ “The words of their lips [sefateimo]” (Psalms 59:13) – “the entire earth was of one language [safa] and of common speech.”
Rabbi Abba began: “If you crush a fool among the groats in a mortar with a pestle, his folly will not be removed from him” (Proverbs 27:22). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: This is analogous to one who crushes barley grains with a pestle, thinking that he is rendering them high quality. But even after he raises and lowers it, “his folly will not be removed from him.” So it was with the generation of the Flood and the generation of the Dispersion. [Two years] after the Flood, “the entire earth was of one language and of common speech.”
Rabbi Yoḥanan began: “One who repays good with evil, evil will not move from his house” (Proverbs 17:13). Rabbi Yoḥanan said: If your friend received you with [serving you] lentils, receive him with [serving him] meat. Why? Because he performed an act of kindness for you first.2The one who initiates kindness first has done something of great importance, and if you want to repay him in kind, you should show even greater kindness towards him. Rabbi Shimon bar Abba said: It is not only one who repays good with evil, but even one who repays evil with evil, that “evil will not move from his house.” Rabbi Alexandri said: “One who repays good with evil,” as the Torah said: “If you see the donkey of your enemy crouching under its burden, shall you refrain from assisting him? You shall surely assist him” (Exodus 23:5).3From this it is derived that even one who did evil to you, you are obligated to repay him with good and not evil. Regarding him4Regarding one who fails to do so. it says: “One who repays good with evil, [evil] will not move…” Rabbi Berekhya interpreted the verse regarding these generations, the generation of the Flood and the generation of the Dispersion, as it is written after the Flood: “The entire earth was of one language and of common speech.”5Having a common language is a great advantage, but these people repaid God’s kindness with evil.
Yehuda bar Rabbi began: “They do not know and they do not understand, for their eyes are sealed from seeing, their hearts from understanding” (Isaiah 44:18). That is what is written: “The giants were on the earth in those days” (Genesis 6:4). Yehuda bar Rabbi said: Should they not have learned from their predecessors? That is a rhetorical question. Should the generation of the Flood [not have learned] from the generation of Enosh;6They began engaging in idol worship and God inundated them with the ocean water. the generation of the Dispersion from the generation of the Flood, as it is written after the Flood: “The entire earth was ….”
Rabbi Azarya began: “We sought to heal Babylon, but it was not healed; forsake it, and let us go, each to his land, as its judgment reaches the heavens and rises to the sky” (Jeremiah 51:9). “We sought to heal Babylon” – in the generation of Enosh. “But it was not healed – in the generation of the Flood. Forsake it, and let us go, each to his land – “the entire earth was of one language.”
Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Yoḥanan, Rabbi Elazar says: “And common speech [udvarim aḥadim]” – obscured speech [diburim aḥudim].7Aḥudim means obscured in Aramaic. The [sinful] acts of the generation of the Flood are stated explicitly, while the [sinful] acts of the generation of the Dispersion are not stated explicitly. Udvarim aḥadim – they said harsh words regarding “the Lord is our God, the Lord is one [eḥad]” (Deuteronomy 6:4), and regarding “Abraham was one [eḥad]” (Ezekiel 33:24) – in the land. They said: ‘This Abraham is a barren mule, he does not beget children.’ Regarding the Lord our God, they said: ‘How arrogant of Him to select the upper reaches for Himself and to give us the lower reaches. Instead, let us come and make a tower and craft an idol at its top, place a sword in its hand, and it will appear as though it is waging war against Him.’ Another interpretation,8In some Midrash texts it says here: Rabbi Yoḥanan said. udvarim aḥadim, all their items were united [aḥudim] among them – what was in the possession of this one, was in the possession of that one, and what was in the possession of that one, was in the possession of this one.9They shared all their possessions as common property. The Rabbis say: “One language” – this is analogous to one who had a wine cellar. He opened one barrel and found it to be vinegar;10The wine had spoiled. a second, and found it to be vinegar; a third, and found it to be vinegar; [he said:] it is obvious that all of it has gone bad.11The generation was the third wicked generation after the generations of Enosh and of the Flood. The Holy One blessed be He saw this as proof that all future generations would also be wicked. Rabbi Eliezer said: Which is worse [for a king], the one who says to the king: ‘It is either me or you in the palace,’ or the one who says: ‘I am in the palace and you are not?’ Certainly, it is worse when one says to the king: ‘I am in the palace and you are not.’ So, the generation of the Flood said: “What is the Almighty that we should serve Him? What good will it do if we encounter Him?” (Job 21:15). The generation of the Dispersion said: ‘How arrogant of Him to select the upper reaches for Himself and to give us the lower reaches. Instead, let us come and make a tower and craft an idol at its top, place a sword in its hand, and it will appear as though it is waging war against Him.’12They are thus analogous to the one who said: “I am in the palace and you are not.” Yet those of the generation of the Flood, no remnant of them remained, while those of the generation of the Dispersion, a remnant of them remained.13The punishment of the generation of the Flood was worse than that of the generation of the Dispersion, although it seems that the sin of the generation of the Dispersion was more egregious. The explanation is that the generation of the Flood, because they were steeped in robbery, as it is stated: “They move boundaries; they rob a flock and herd it” (Job 24:2), that is why no remnant of them remained. But these, [the generation of the Dispersion], they loved each other, as it is stated: “The entire earth was of one language,” that is why a remnant of them remained. Rabbi says: Great is peace, as even if Israel engages in idol worship, but there is peace among them, the Omnipresent says: ‘It is, as it were, that I have no power over them, since there is peace among them,’ as it is stated: “Ephraim is attached to idols, leave him” (Hosea 4:17). But once there was divisiveness between them, what does it say? “Their heart has separated; now they will be punished” (Hosea 10:2). You thus learn: Peace is great, and dispute is despised. “Udvarim aḥadim” – the act of the generation of the Flood was stated explicitly; the act of the generation of the Dispersion was not stated explicitly. Another matter, “udvarim aḥadim” – they said sharp [ḥadim] words, saying: ‘Once every one thousand six hundred and fifty-six years, the firmament collapses. Come and let us prepare supports; one to the north, one to the south, one to the west, and the one here will support it to the east.’ That is what is written: “The entire earth was of one language and of common speech.”
“It was as they traveled from the east, and they found a valley in the land of Shinar and they settled there” (Genesis 11:2). “It was as they traveled from the east [mikedem]” – did they travel from the east to go to the east?14The valley of Shinar is also in the east. Rabbi Elazar ben Rabbi Shimon said: They transported themselves away from the ancient One [mikadmono] of the world. They said: ‘We want neither Him nor His divinity.’ “They found a valley” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: All the nations of the world assembled to determine which valley could contain all of them, and ultimately, they found one [in Shinar]. Rabbi Neḥemya said : “They found” – “if it is to scoffers, he will scoff” (Proverbs 3:34).15According to Rabbi Neḥemya, God showed them the valley, leading to their downfall, as is His practice when dealing with scoffers and sinners. “And they settled there” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Wherever you find settlement, Satan leaps.16He leaps at the opportunity to tempt man to sin. Rabbi Ḥelbo said: Wherever you find tranquility, Satan comes to act as accuser. Rabbi Levi said: Wherever you find [excessive] eating and drinking, Satan comes to act as accuser.
“Each man said to his counterpart: Come, let us make bricks, and burn them thoroughly. The brick was for them as stone, and the clay was for them as mortar” (Genesis 11:3). “Each man said to his counterpart” – who said to whom? Rabbi Berekhya said: Mitzrayim said it to Kush.17”Each man said to his counterpart” does not refer to a conversation between members of the same nation, but a conversation between different nations. “Come, let us make bricks and burn them thoroughly [venisrefa lisrefa]” – these peoples are going to be eradicated [mishtarpa] from this world.18By using this choice of words, they were unwittingly foretelling their own downfall. “The brick was for them as stone…” Rabbi Huna said: They met with success. One would come [with the intention] to lay one brick, and he would lay two. He would come [with the intention] to plaster two bricks, and he would plaster four. “They said: Come, let us build us a city, and a tower, with its top in the heavens, and let us make a name for us; lest we be dispersed upon the face of the entire earth” (Genesis 11:4). “They said: Come, let us build us…” – Rabbi Yudan said: They built the tower, but they did not build the city [completely]. An objection was raised to him: “The Lord descended to see the city and the tower” (Genesis 11:5). He said to them: ‘Read a subsequent verse: “They ceased to build the tower” is not written here, but rather, “they ceased to build the city”’ (Genesis 11:8).19They were in the middle of building the city, but they ceased building it. The tower, however, had been completed. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: The tower that they built, one-third of it was burned, one-third of it sank [into the ground], and one-third of it still exists. If you think it is small, Rabbi Huna said in the name of Rabbi Idi: Anyone who ascends to its top sees the palm trees before him as though they were grasshoppers.  “And let us make a name [shem] for us” – Rabbi Yishmael taught: Shem is nothing other than idol worship.20This is based on: “And the name [shem] of other gods you shall not mention” (Exodus 23:13). “Lest we be dispersed upon the face of the entire earth” – Rabbi Shimon ben Rabbi Ḥalafta said: “A fool’s mouth is ruin for him” (Proverbs 18:7).21They unwittingly declared their true fate.
“The Lord descended to see the city and the tower that the children of man built” (Genesis 11:5). “The Lord descended to see the city and the tower…” – Rabbi Shimon bar Ḥalafta taught: This is one of ten descents [of God] stated in the Torah.22See Pirkei deRabbi Eliezer 14 and Avot deRabbi Natan 34:5. “That the children of man [ha’adam] built” – Rabbi Berekhya said: What would we have thought - the children of donkeys or the children of camels?23Why does it have to mention that they were children of man? The explanation is that they were [true] sons of Adam the first man. Just as Adam the first man, after all the good that I performed on his behalf, he said: “The woman whom You gave to be with me…” (Genesis 3:12), so, two years from the generation of the Flood to the generation of the Dispersion, and “the entire earth was of one language” (Genesis 11:1).24They were ungrateful to God, just as Adam was. “The Lord said: Behold, they are one people, and there is one language for them all and this is what they have begun to do; now nothing of all that they plotted to do will be prevented from them” (Genesis 11:6). “The Lord said: Behold, they are one people, and there is one language for them all” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: Since they are one people and one language, if they repent, I will accept them.25Since they share a common language, and peace reigns among them, I will give them a chance to repent. Rabbi Neḥemya says: Who caused them to rebel against Me? Is it not because they were one people and one language? “Now [ve’ata], nothing…will be prevented [lo yibatzer] from them” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: It teaches that the Holy One blessed be He afforded them an opportunity for repentance, as it is stated: “Ve’ata,” and ve’ata means nothing other than repentance, just as it says: “Now [ve’ata], Israel, what does the Lord your God ask of you? Only to fear [the Lord your God]” (Deuteronomy 10:12). But they said: “No [lo].”26This is the interpretation of the word lo in lo yibatzer. The Holy One blessed be He then said: “All that they plotted to do will be prevented [yibatzer] from them.” This vineyard, when it does not produce fruit, what do its owners do to it? They sever its branches.27Severing from a grape vine is called betzira, and this is what the verse means by yibatzer.
“Come, let us descend, and we will muddle their language there, so that one will not understand the language of his counterpart” (Genesis 11:7). “Come, let us descend” – this is one of the instances that they altered for King Ptolemy28When translating the Torah for him. See Megilla 9b. – [they wrote:] “Come, I shall descend and I shall muddle.” “And muddle [navla] their language there” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: From their language, I will make them into carcasses [nevela]. One of them would say to another: ‘Give me an axe,’ and he would give him a shovel. He would then strike him and split his skull. That is what is written: From their language, I will make them into carcasses [nevela]. “The Lord dispersed them from there upon the face of the entire earth, and they ceased to build the city” (Genesis 11:8). “The Lord dispersed [vayafetz] them from there” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: The residents of Tyre went to Sidon, and the residents of Sidon to Tyre.29The dispersion was that each person went to a place different from his original home. Each land retained its borders. Rabbi Neḥemya said: Each and every person retained his land of his original residence and returned there. What, then, is meant by “He dispersed”? It is that each [of the residents] of the lands gathered at the mountaintops,30They emerged from the valley and ascended to the surrounding highlands, but they did not leave their country. and each one [mountaintop] would absorb the residents of its place. The Rabbis say: Vayafetz  is nothing other than inundated [vayatzef] – He inundated them with the sea and drowned thirty families of them. Rabbi Levi said: There is no misfortune that befalls a person that others do not benefit from it. Those thirty families, from where were they replaced? It was from Abraham: sixteen from Ketura, twelve from Ishmael, and the other two: “The Lord said to her: Two peoples are in your womb” (Genesis 25:23).
“Therefore, its name was called Babel; because the Lord confounded [balal] the language of all the earth there, and from there the Lord dispersed them on the face of the entire earth” (Genesis 11:9). “Therefore, its name was called Babel” – one of Rabbi Yoḥanan’s students was sitting before him. He kept explaining something to him but he could not grasp it. He said to him: ‘Why are you having trouble grasping this?’ He said to him: ‘It is because I am away from my native land.’ He said to him: ‘Where is your land?’ He said to him: ‘I am from Bursif.’31A place in Babylon with a climate not conducive to studying Torah. He said to him: ‘Do not say that to me, but rather, from Bulsif’ – “because the Lord confounded [balal] the language [safa] of all the earth there.”
“These are the descendants of Teraḥ. Teraḥ begot Abram, Naḥor, and Haran, and Haran begot Lot” (Genesis 11:27). “These are the descendants of Teraḥ. Teraḥ begot Abram…” Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Anyone whose name is doubled, he has a share in this world and in the World to Come. They raised an objection to him: ‘“Teraḥ, Teraḥ.” Does he have a share in this world and in the World to Come? That is astonishing.’ He said to them: ‘This, too, is not a contradiction, as Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Rabbi Abba bar Kahana: [God told Abraham:] “You shall go to your fathers in peace” (Genesis 15:15) – he gave him good tidings that his father has a share in the World to Come. “You will be buried at a good old age” (Genesis 15:15) – he gave him good tidings, that Ishmael would repent.32“Good old age” refers to being happy and content in old age.
“Haran died in the presence of Teraḥ his father in the land of his birth, in Ur of the Chaldeans” (Genesis 11:28). “Haran died during the lifetime of Teraḥ his father” – Rabbi Ḥiyya grandson of Rav Ada of Yafo: Teraḥ was an idol worshipper [and a seller of idols]. One time, he went away to some place, and he installed Abraham as salesman in his stead. A person would come seeking to buy. He [Abraham] would say to him: ‘How old are you?’ He would say to him: ‘Fifty or sixty years old.’ He would say to him: ‘Woe to this man who is sixty years old and seeks to prostrate himself before something that is one day old.’ He would be ashamed and leave. One time, a certain woman came, carrying a dish of fine flour in her hand. She said to him: ‘Here, offer it before them.’ He arose, took a club in his hand, shattered all the idols, and placed the club in the hand of the largest among them. When his father came, he said to him: ‘Who did this to them?’ He said to him: ‘I will not lie to you, a certain woman came, carrying a dish of fine flour in her hand. She said to me: Here, offer it before them. I offered it before them. This one [idol] said: I shall eat first, and another one said: I shall eat first. This big idol, who was standing among them, got up and took the club and shattered them.’ He [Teraḥ] said to him: ‘What, are you mocking me? Are they sentient at all?’ He said to him: ‘Do your ears not hear what your mouth is saying?’ He [Teraḥ] took him and handed him over to Nimrod.33The ruler of that land. He [Nimrod] said to him [Abraham]: ‘Let us bow down to fire.’ Abraham said to him: ‘Let us better bow down to water, that extinguishes fire.’ Nimrod said to him: ‘[All right,] let us bow down to water.’ He said to him: ‘If so, let us bow down to the clouds, that bear the water.’ He said to him: ‘[All right,] let us bow down to the clouds.’ He said to him: ‘If so, let us bow down to the wind, that scatters the clouds.’ He said to him: ‘[All right,] let us bow down to the wind.’ He said to him: ‘Better let us bow down to a person, who can withstand the wind.’ He said to him: ‘You are saying mere words. I bow down only to fire. I will cast you into it, and let that God to whom you bow down come and rescue you from it.’ Haran was there and he was conflicted. He said: ‘Either way [I will know what to do]; If Abraham is victorious, I will say: I am with Abraham, and if Nimrod is victorious, I will say: I am with Nimrod.’ When Abraham descended into the fiery furnace and was rescued, they said to him [Haran]: ‘With whom are you?’ He said to them: ‘I am with Abraham.’ They took him and cast him into the fire and his innards were scorched. He emerged and died in the presence of Teraḥ his father. That is what is written: “Haran died in the presence of Teraḥ…”
“Abram and Naḥor took wives for themselves; the name of Abram’s wife was Sarai and the name of Naḥor’s wife was Milka, daughter of Haran, father of Milka, and the father of Yiska” (Genesis 11:29). “Abram and Naḥor took wives for themselves” – Abram was one year older than Naḥor and Naḥor was one year older than Haran. Consequently, Abraham was two years older than Haran. Allow one year for the pregnancy of Milka and one year for the pregnancy of Yiska, Haran begot children at the age of six years,34Abraham was two years older than Haran and ten years older than Sarah, who is Yiska. Yiska, Haran’s younger daughter, was born when he was eight. Milka, the elder, was born when Haran was seven, meaning that the pregnancy occurred when he was six. and Abraham did not beget. This is astonishing. “Sarai was barren; she had no child” (Genesis 11:30). “Sarai was barren…[she had no [ein la] child]” – Rabbi Levi said: Every place that ein la is stated, ultimately she did have. “Sarai was barren; she had no [ein la] child” – she eventually had: “The Lord remembered Sarah” (Genesis 21:1). “Penina had children but Hannah had no [ein] children” (I Samuel 1:2) – and she eventually had: “For the Lord remembered Hannah, and she conceived and bore” (I Samuel 2:21). “It is Zion, it has no [ein la] seekers” (Jeremiah 30:17) – and it eventually had: “A redeemer will come to Zion” (Isaiah 59:20); “Sing, barren one, who did not give birth; burst into song and rejoice, [for more are the children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, says the Lord]” (Isaiah 54:1).

=== 39 | 39 ===
“The Lord said to Abram: Go you, from your land, and from your birthplace, and from your father’s house, to the land that I will show you” (Genesis 12:1). “The Lord said to Abram: Go you, from your land…” – Rabbi Yitzḥak began: “Listen, daughter, see, and incline your ear. Forget your people and your father’s house” (Psalms 45:11). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: This is analogous to one who was passing from place to place, and saw a building with a [candle] burning in it. He said: ‘Is it possible that this building has no one in charge of it?’ The owner of the building looked out at him and said: ‘I am the owner of the building.’ So, because Abraham our patriarch was saying: ‘Is it possible that this world is without someone in charge?’ The Holy One blessed be He looked at him and said to him: ‘I am the owner of the world.’ “The king will desire your beauty, as he is your master” (Psalms 45:12) – to show your beauty in the world. “And bow to him” (Psalms 45:12) – that is, “the Lord said to Abram.”
“The Lord said to Abram” – Rabbi Berekhya began: “By the fragrance of your good oils, your name is like poured oil” (Song of Songs 1:3). Rabbi Berekhya said: To what was Abraham our patriarch comparable? To a flask of balsam oil surrounded with a fastened cover, that was placed in a corner and its fragrance did not diffuse. When it was moved, its fragrance diffused. So, the Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham our patriarch: ‘Move yourself from one place to another place, and your name will be exalted in the world.’
“The Lord said to Abram” – Rabbi Berekhya began: “We have a little sister, and she has no breasts…” (Song of Songs 8:8). “We have a little sister [aḥot]” – this is Abraham, who joined together [iḥa] all the people of the world [in the service of God]. Bar Kappara said: Like one who sews up [meaḥeh] a tear. “Little” – while he was still little, he amassed mitzvot and good deeds. “And she has no breasts” – he was not suckled with mitzvot and good deeds.1He was not brought up by parents who fostered belief in God. “What shall we do for our sister on the day that she will be spoken for?” (Song of Songs 8:8) – on the day that Nimrod decreed upon him to be cast into the fiery furnace.2See Bereshit Rabba 38:13. “If she is a wall, we will build upon her” (Song of Songs 8:9) – if he stands firm on his principles, like a wall, “we will build upon her.” “And if she is a door [delet], we will decorate her” (Song of Songs 8:9) – if he is deficient [dal] in mitzvot and good deeds, “we will decorate [natzur] her with cedar panels” – just as a decoration is only temporary, so, too, I will support him only temporarily. He [Abram] said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, “I am a wall” (Song of Songs 8:10) – I stand firm on my principles.’ “My breasts are like the towers” (Song of Songs 8:10) – this refers to Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya. “Then I was, in his eyes, as one who finds peace” (Song of Songs 8:10) – as he entered [the furnace] in peace and emerged in peace.
“The Lord said to Abram: Go you, from your land” – “wisdom will fortify the wise more than ten rulers who were in a city” (Ecclesiastes 7:19) – more than the ten generations that were from Noah to Abraham. From among all of them, I spoke only with you: “The Lord said to Abram: Go you, from your land.”
Rabbi Azarya began: “We sought to heal Babylon, but it was not healed; forsake it, and let us go, each to his land” (Jeremiah 51:9). “We sought to heal Babylon” – in the generation of Enosh; “but it was not healed” – in the generation of the Flood; “forsake it” – in the generation of the Dispersion; “and let us go, each to his land” – “the Lord said to Abram: Go you, from your land.”
Rabbi Azarya in the name of Rabbi Aḥa began: “You love righteousness and abhor wickedness. Because of this, God, your God, has anointed you over your counterparts with the oil of joy” (Psalms 45:8). Rabbi Azarya interpreted the verse regarding Abraham. When our forefather Abraham arose to seek mercy for the Sodomites, what is written there? “Far be it from You to do a thing like this, to kill the righteous with the wicked, and [the righteous] will be…” (Genesis 18:25). Rabbi Aḥa said: [Abraham argued:] ‘You took an oath saying that You would not bring a flood upon the world. Are You seeking to evade Your oath? That is astonishing. You [swore that You] will not bring a flood of water, but you may bring a flood of fire? If so, You have not fulfilled Your oath.’ Rabbi Levi said: “Shall the Judge of all the earth not practice justice?” (Genesis 18:25) – [Abraham argued”] ‘If You wish to have a world, there can be no strict justice, and if you wish strict justice, there can be no world. But you seek to hold the rope at both ends; You wish [to have] a world and You wish [to have] strict justice. Choose one of them. And if You do not ease up a bit, the world will be unable to endure.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham: “You love righteousness and abhor wickedness.” “Over your counterparts” – what is “over your counterparts”? From Noah until you there were ten generations, and from among all of them, I did not speak with any of them except for you.
“The Lord said to Abram: Go you, from your land” – what is written prior to this matter? “Teraḥ died in Ḥaran” (Genesis 11:32). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: If you follow the calculation [of years] until now, he [Teraḥ] still had an additional sixty-five years coming to him.3Abraham was born when Teraḥ was seventy years old (see Genesis 11:26), and he left him the first time when he seventy years old (Seder Olam Rabba 1), when Teraḥ was a hundred and forty years old. But Teraḥ did not die until the age of two hundred and five (Genesis 11:32), sixty-five years after Abram left him. The explanation is that, initially, you expound that the wicked are considered dead [even] during their lifetimes.4So Teraḥ did die, in a sense, before Abraham left him. Because our forefather Abraham was fearful, and he said: ‘If I go, the name of Heaven will be desecrated because of me, as people will say: He abandoned his father and left him in his old age.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘I exempt you from honoring your father and mother, but I do not exempt anyone else from honoring their father and mother.5That is what is meant by “Go you.” Moreover, I will have his death recorded before your departure; first: “Teraḥ died in Ḥaran” and then: “the Lord said to Abram.”
Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: “Go you [lekh lekha]” – twice,6This is expounded as though it was written: Lekh lekh – go, go. one from Aram Naharayim and one from Aram Naḥor.7God told him to leave both places. Rabbi Neḥemya says: “Lekh lekha” – twice, one from Aram Naharayim and Aram Naḥor, and one when He flew him from [the Covenant] between the Pieces and brought him to Ḥaran.8Abraham was seventy years old when he first went to Canaan, and it was then that God made the Covenant between the Pieces (Genesis 15) with him (Seder Olam Rabba 1). He then returned to Ḥaran, and left again at age seventy-five, as recounted in our verse.  That is what is written: “Your people [amekha] will volunteer on your day of battle [ḥeilekha]” (Psalms 110:3) – I was with you [imekha] when you volunteered on My behalf to descend into the fiery furnace. “On your day of battle” – when you assembled for Me all the hosts [haḥayalot] and masses.9They converted when you emerged from the furnace unscathed. “In sacred glory [hadrei]” (Psalms 110:3) – from the radiance [hadar] of the world10From the east, where the sun rises, Ur of the Chaldeans. I sanctified you; “from the womb of the dawn [mishḥar]” (Psalms 110:3) – from the womb of the world11This, too, is a reference to the east. I have sought you out [sheḥartikha]. “Yours is the dew of youth” (Psalms 110:3) – because our forefather Abraham was fearful, saying: ‘Perhaps I have a sin on my hands because I was an idol worshipper all those years?’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: “The dew of your youth” – just as dew evaporates, so, too, your sins will evaporate; just as dew is a sign of blessing for the world, so, too, you are a sign of blessing for the world.  That is what is written: “I said: Would that I had wings like a dove; I would fly away and come to rest” (Psalms 55:7).12The verse is expounded as referring to Abraham, who had an intense desire to leave his land and go to the Land of Israel. Why like a dove?13As opposed to some other bird. Because all other birds, when they are weary, they rest on a stone or on a tree, but a dove, when it flies and grows weary, it folds one of its wings and flies with the other wing. “I would wander [nedod] far away” (Psalms 55:8) – movement after movement, wandering after wandering.14Nedod is expounded as nidnud ¬– one wandering [nod] after another, from Ur of Chaldeans to Ḥaran and from Ḥaran to Canaan. “To repose in the wilderness, Selah” (Psalms 55:8) – it is preferable to repose in the wildernesses of the Land of Israel rather than to repose in the palaces outside the Land. And if you object that Abraham did not act immediately, and did not rejoice over the words of the Omnipresent, and [you ask] why did he not depart [at once]? It is because he had not yet been permitted, but once he was permitted: “Abram went as the Lord had spoken to him, and Lot went with him” (Genesis 12:4). Rabbi Levi said: When Abraham was traveling through Aram Naharayim and Aram Naḥor, he saw them eating, drinking, and reveling. He said: ‘Would that my portion not be in this land.’ When he reached the Promontory of Tyre, he saw them engaged in weeding at the time of weeding, hoeing at the time of hoeing,15They were a hard-working people, not given to merry-making. he said: ‘Would that my portion be in this land.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: “To your descendants I will give this land” (Genesis 12:7).
Rabbi Levi said: Twice “go you [lekh lekha]” is written,16Here and in Genesis 22:2. but we do not know which is more dear, whether it is the second or the first. From what is written: “[Go you] to the land of Moriah” (Genesis 22:2), we see that the second is more beloved than the first.17In the second, God told him his destination. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: “Go you, from your land” – from your district; “and from your birthplace” – this means your neighborhood; “and from your father’s house” – this means from your father’s household. Why did he not reveal it [his destination] to him? It was to make it more endearing to him, and to give him a reward for each and every stride. That is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan [elsewhere], as Rabbi Yoḥanan said: “He said: Take your son, your only one” (Genesis 20:2). He [Abraham] said to Him: ‘This one is the “only one” to his mother and that one is the “only one” to his mother.’18Both Isaac and Ishmael were the only sons of their respective mothers. He said to him: “Whom you love” (Genesis 22:2). He said to Him: ‘Are their partitions in the innards?’19Is there any limit on a father’s love for all his sons? He said to him: “Isaac” (Genesis 22:2). Why did He not reveal it to him [immediately]? It was to make it more endearing to him, and to give him a reward for each and every statement.  As Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili: The Holy One blessed be He withholds [information at first] and keeps the eyes of the righteous directed toward Him, and only then does he reveal to them the particulars of the matter. So: “to the land that I will show you”; “upon one of the mountains that I will say to you” (Genesis 22:2); “proclaim the proclamation that I speak to you” (Jonah 3:2); “Go out to the valley and I will speak to you there” (Ezekiel 3:22).
Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Neḥemya: This is analogous to a king who was passing from place to place and a gem fell from upon his head. The king stopped walking and stopped his entourage. He made piles of dirt, brought a sieve, and sifted the first pile, but did not find it; the second, but did not find it; the third, and he found it. They said: ‘The king found his gem.’ So, the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘What purpose was there for Me to trace the lineage of Shem, Arpakhshad, Shelaḥ, Ever, Peleg, Re’u, Serug, Naḥor, Teraḥ? It was only for you [Abraham].’ “You found his heart faithful before You” (Nehemiah 9:8).20“Found,” as when one finds a gem. So, too, the Holy One blessed be He said to David: ‘What purpose was there for Me to trace the lineage of Peretz, Ḥetzron, Ram, Aminadav, Naḥshon, Salmon, Boaz, Oved, Yishai? It was only for you: “I found David, My servant; I anointed him with My sacred oil”’ (Psalms 89:21).
“I will make you a great nation, I will bless you [vaavarekhekha], I will render your name great, and you shall be a blessing” (Genesis 12:2). “I will make you a great nation” – he said to Him: ‘Did you not [already] produce seventy nations from Noah?’ He said to him: ‘That nation in whose regard it is written: “For who is a great nation [to whom God is so close]?” (Deuteronomy 4:7), I will produce from you.’ Rabbi Berekhya said: “I will give you” and “I will place you” are not written here, but rather, “I will make you [ve’e’eshkha]” – from when I make you into a new creation,21This could be referring to circumcision, or to the change of Abram’s name to Abraham. you will procreate. Rabbi Levi bar Ḥavyat and Rabbi Abba son of Rabbi Ḥiyya said: Three “greatnesses”22“I will make you a great nation” counts as two “greatnesses,” as “I will make you” is considered an expression of greatness (see I Samuel 12:6) and the third is “I will render your name great.”  and four “blessings” are written here.23Two in 12:2 and two in 12:3. He apprised him that there would be three patriarchs and four matriarchs. Rabbi Ḥiyya said: Because travel causes three results: it minimizes procreation, minimizes resources for expenditures, and minimizes one’s reputation.24God told Abraham that He would see to it that he would not suffer these three deprivations. It minimizes procreation – “I will make you a great nation,” minimizes resources for expenditures – “I will bless you,” minimizes one’s reputation – “I will render your name great.” As people say: From house to house – a robe; from place to place – a soul.25When one moves from one house to another in the same neighborhood, one will always find something, such as a robe, missing. When moving to a different place, one loses part of one’s very soul. However, you will lose neither soul nor property. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Ḥelbo: It26“I will make you a great nation.” means a coin with his image went out into the world. There are four people whose images appeared on coins that circulated in the world. Abraham – “I will make you a great nation” – his image circulated on coins. What was the image on his coins? It was an elderly man and an elderly woman on one side,27Representing Abraham and Sarah. and a young man and a maiden on the other side.28Representing the fact that Abraham and Sarah became rejuvenated when they bore Isaac. Joshua – “The Lord was with Joshua; his fame was throughout the land” (Joshua 6:27) – his image circulated on coins in the world. What was it? It was a bull on one side and an aurochs on the other side, after: “A firstborn bull is his majesty, and his horns are the horns of an aurochs” (Deuteronomy 33:17).29Joshua was from the tribe of Ephraim, and this verse was stated regarding Ephraim. David – “David’s renown circulated in all lands” (I Chronicles 14:17) – his image circulated on coins in the world. What was the image on his coin? It was a [shepherd’s] staff and satchel on one side, and a tower on the other side, after: “Your neck is like the tower of David” (Song of Songs 4:4). Mordekhai – “For Mordekhai was great in the king’s palace, and his renown spread in all the provinces” (Esther 9:4) – his image circulated on coins. What was the image on his coin? It was sackcloth and ashes on one side, and a golden crown on the other side. Rabbi Yudan said: [God said to Abraham:] ‘I will institute a blessing for you in the eighteen benedictions,30The Amida prayer. but you do not know whether Mine precedes yours, or whether yours takes precedence.’ Rabbi Aḥuya said in the name of Rabbi Ze’eira: Yours precedes Mine, when one recites first: Shield of Abraham, and only then, He revives the dead. Rabbi Abahu said: “Look now heavenward [hashamayim]” is not written here, but rather, “look now hashamaima” (Genesis 15:5).31With an added heh. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘I created the world with the letter heh. I will add the letter heh  to your name and then you will procreate.’32This is an interpretation of “I will render your name great” – the name was rendered great by adding a letter to it. Rabbi Yudan said: Your letters will have the numerical value of “I will bless you [avarekhekha]”33This word ends with a kaf in the Torah, but the midrash calculates its numerical value based on its ending with the letters kaf heh. – two hundred and forty-eight. Rabbi Levi said: No person [so much as] priced a cow from Abraham34In order to purchase it. before he was blessed, nor did any person price a cow for him35In order to sell it to Abraham. until he was blessed by Abraham. How so?36In what additional way was Abraham a source of blessing? Abraham would pray for barren women and they would be remembered,37God would remember them and grant them a child. and for the ill, and they would gain relief. Rav Huna said: It was not only when Abraham would go to the ill person, but even if the ill person would merely see him, he would gain relief. Rabbi Ḥanina said: Even ships that set sail in the Great Sea were saved due to the merit of Abraham. But were they not laden with libation wine?38Wine used for idol worship. Why should Abraham want to bless such cargo? This is astonishing. The explanation is that [there is a saying:] Vinegar lowers the price of wine.39When there is much vinegar on the market, it lowers the price of wine, even though more people buy wine than vinegar. Wherever the wine of idol worshippers is available, the wine of Jews is sold at lower prices.40Even though libation wine is forbidden for Jews, when it is sold in the market, it affects the price of all wine, including kosher wine – which makes it more affordable for Jews. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: He [God] did this for Job, as well, as it is stated: “You blessed his handiwork” (Job 1:10). A person never took a penny41As charity.  from Job and needed to take from him a second time.  “And you shall be a blessing [berakha]” – read it as “a pool [berekha].” Just as a pool purifies the impure, so, you draw the distant near and purify them for their Father who is in Heaven.  Rabbi Berekhya said: “I will bless you” is already written; why does the verse state [further]: “And you shall be a blessing”? The explanation is that He said to him: ‘Until this point I was required to bless My world, from now on, the blessings are passed to you; whomever you deem worthy to bless, bless him.’
I will bless those who bless you, and one who curses you, I will curse, and all the families of the earth shall be blessed in you” (Genesis 12:3). “I will bless those who bless you” – Rabbi Yirmeya said: The Holy One blessed be He was more exacting regarding the honor of the righteous man than regarding His own honor. Regarding His own honor it is written: “For those who honor Me, I will honor, but those who scorn Me will be dishonored” (I Samuel 2:30) – by others. Regarding the honor of the righteous it is written: “I will bless those who bless you, and one who curses you, I will curse” – I, Myself. It is taught:42This is based on the interpretation of the term venivrekhu (literally translated as “shall be blessed”) as deriving from the word berekh, knee, and meaning to bend the knee. These are the blessings43Of the eighteen blessings in the Amida prayer. during which a person bows: The blessing of the Patriarchs, at the beginning and the end; the blessing of thanksgiving, at the beginning and the end. One who bows during each blessing, he should be taught not to bow. Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Naḥman said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: A High Priest bows at the beginning of each blessing, and a king bows at the beginning of each blessing and at the end of each blessing. Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: The king, once he bowed [at the beginning], he would not stand upright until he would complete his entire prayer. That is what is written: “It was when Solomon had concluded praying this entire prayer and entreaty to the Lord that he rose from before the altar of the Lord, from kneeling [mikero’a] on his knees, and his hands were spread heavenward” (I Kings 8:54). What is keria and what is berikha?44These are two terms for bowing or prostration. Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great demonstrated keria before Rabbi,45Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi. and he became lame [as a result], but he was healed. Bar Sisi demonstrated berikha before Rabbi, and he became lame [as a result], and was not healed.46Standing up from berikha is much more difficult. “Shall be blessed in you” – the rains are due to your merit, the dews are due to your merit.  That is what is written: “The matter became known to Mordekhai, and he told Queen Esther…” (Esther 2:22).47Mordekhai found out about an assassination attempt against Aḥashverosh, and he warned him about it. This one [Mordekhai] is circumcised and that one [Aḥashverosh] is uncircumcised, and he took pity on him? That is astonishing. Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: [Mordekhai said:] ‘“I gain insight from the elders, for I uphold Your edicts” (Psalms 119:100) – Jacob blessed Pharaoh, as it is stated: “Jacob blessed Pharaoh” (Genesis 47:7). Joseph revealed [the dream] to him [Pharaoh].48He interpreted his dreams and revealed to Pharaoh how to conduct himself during the years of famine. Daniel revealed [the dream] to Nebuchadnezzar.49He interpreted his dreams and revealed to him how to avoid divine punishment. I, too, will do so: “And he told Queen Esther.”’ Rabbi Neḥemya said: The Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham our forefather: “All the families of the earth shall be blessed in you” (Genesis 12:3).. If you say that it means that they will be wealthy, they [the gentiles] are more wealthy than they [the Jews]. But rather, it is for consultation. When they encounter trouble, they consult with us and we reveal to them [what to do].
“Abram went, as the Lord had spoken to him, and Lot went with him; Abram was seventy-five years old upon his departure from Ḥaran” (Genesis 12:4). “Abram went, as the Lord had spoken to him, [and Lot went with him]…” – Lot was subordinate to him. “Abram was seventy-five years old.” That is what is written: “He was rearing Hadasa, she was Esther” (Esther 2:7) – Rav said: She was forty years old. Shmuel said: She was eighty years old. The Rabbis say: She was seventy-five years old. The Rabbis from there50Babylon. said: The Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham: ‘You departed from your father’s house when you were seventy-five years old, by your life, the redeemer that I will establish from you [from your descendants] will be seventy-five years old,’ corresponding to the numerical value of Hadasa.51The numerical value of Hadasa is 74, but often one number is added when such calculations are made.
“Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot, son of his brother, and all their property that they had acquired, and the people that they had made in Ḥaran; they departed to go to the land of Canaan and they came to the land of Canaan” (Genesis 12:5). “And the people that they had made in Ḥaran” – Rabbi Elazar bar Zimra said: If all the inhabitants of the world were to assemble, to create even a single gnat, they would be unable to inject a soul into it, and yet you say: “The people that they had made?” The explanation is that this refers to the proselytes that they converted. If so, [it should have said] “that they converted”; why “that they made”? It is to teach you that anyone who draws an idol worshipper near and converts him, it is as though he has created him. Let it, then, say: “that he made”? Rav Huna said: Abraham converted the men and Sarah converted the women.
“Abram passed through the land to the place of Shekhem, until the plain of Moreh. And the Canaanites were then in the land” (Genesis 12:6). “Abram passed through the land…[and the Canaanites were still in the land]” – until then, they still had a right to the land. “The Lord appeared to Abram, and said: To your descendants I will give this land. And he built there an altar to the Lord, who had appeared to him” (Genesis 12:7). “The Lord appeared to Abram, and said: To your descendants…[and he built an altar]” – he built an altar only over the good tidings of [being granted] the Land of Israel. “He relocated from there to the mountain east of Beit El, and he pitched his tent, Beit El to the west, and Ai to the east; he built an altar to the Lord there, and proclaimed the name of the Lord” (Genesis 12:8). “He relocated from there to the mountain east [kedem] of Beit El” – in the past it was called Beit El, and now it is called Beit Aven.52Aven means iniquity. The place Beit Aven is mentioned several times in Tanakh. The Midrash explains that it is a later name for Beit El. After Yerovam placed an idolatrous golden calf there, its name was changed to Beit Aven. The Midrash expounds kedem in the sense of previously. See Amos 5:5. Rabbi Elazar said: It53A certain idolatrous shrine. did not merit to be called Beit HeAmad, but is called Beit HeAmal. There54In Babylon. they call good deeds amida, and a chamber pot amila.  “He pitched his tent [oholo]” – ohola is written.55Using the feminine suffix. It teaches that he pitched Sarah’s tent first, and then pitched his tent.
“He built an altar to the Lord there” – Rabbi Elazar said: He built three altars; one for the good tidings of [being granted] the Land of Israel,56See Genesis 12:7. one for its acquisition,57See Genesis 13:18. and one so his descendants would not fall [in battle].58In this verse, Genesis 12:8. That is what is written [concerning the battle of Ai]: “Joshua rent his garments, fell on his face to the ground before the Ark of the Lord until the evening, he and the elders of Israel, and they put dust on their heads” (Joshua 7:6). Rabbi Elazar ben Shamua said: They began evoking the merit of Abraham our forefather, as it is stated: “I am dust and ashes” (Genesis 18:27). Did Abraham not build an altar in Ai specifically so that his descendants should not fall [in battle] at Ai? “And proclaimed [vayikra] the name of the Lord” – this teaches that he caused all the people to proclaim the name of the Lord. Vayikra59Literally, he called. – he began converting proselytes to bring them under the wings of the Divine Presence. “Abram journeyed, steadily journeying to the Negev” (Genesis 12:9).  “Abram journeyed, steadily journeying to the Negev” – he directed his attention and charted his path toward the site of the Temple.

=== 40 | 40 ===
“There was famine in the land and Abram descended to Egypt to sojourn there, as the famine was severe in the land” (Genesis 12:10). “There was famine in the land and Abram descended to Egypt to sojourn there.” It is written: “Behold, the eye of the Lord is on those who fear Him, on those who await His kindness” (Psalms 33:18). “Behold, the eye of the Lord is on those who fear Him” – this refers to Abraham, as it is stated: “For now I know that you are God fearing” (Genesis 22:12). “On those who await His kindness” – as it is stated: “Grant truth to Jacob, kindness to Abraham…” (Micah 7:20). “To deliver them from death” (Psalms 33:19) – from execution by Nimrod.1See Bereshit Rabba 38:13. “To sustain them in famine” (Psalms 33:19) – “there was famine in the land.”
“There was famine in the land” – Rabbi Pinḥas in the name of Rabbi Ḥanin of Tzippori began: “Blessed is the man whom You chastise, Lord” (Psalms 94:12) – but if he chooses to be indignant [about his misfortune], “You instruct him from Your Torah” (Psalms 94:12). What is written in Abraham’s regard? “I will bless you and I will render your name great” (Genesis 12:2). When he left [his homeland], famine confronted him, but he did not complain and he did not become indignant. Rather, “Abram descended to Egypt to sojourn there.”2This is what is meant by “You instruct him from Your Torah.” God instructs us regarding the proper response to misfortune, by the example of Abraham in the Torah. “There was famine in the land” – Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi began: “He gives food [teref] to those who fear Him” (Psalms 111:5) – He brings disruption [teiruf] in this world to those who fear Him, but in the future, “He remembers [His covenant] forever” (Psalms 111:5). What is written in Abraham’s regard? “I will bless you and I will render your name great” (Genesis 12:2). When he departed, famine confronted him, but he did not protest and he did not complain.3Despite the disruption that the famine brought to his life, he did not complain, because he knew that in the future he would receive his just reward. Rather, “there was famine in the land [and Abram descended to Egypt to sojourn there].”
“[There was famine in the land] and Abram descended to Egypt to sojourn there.” There were ten famines that came to the world: one in the days of Adam the first man, and [so on,] the rest of the discussion [regarding famines], until: And one in the future – “Not a famine for bread, and not a thirst for water, but rather, to hear the words of the Lord” (Amos 8:11), as cited above, [on the verse]: “From the ground, which the Lord has cursed…” (Genesis 5:29).4See Bereshit Rabba 25:3. Rabbi Huna and Rabbi Yirmeya in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Yitzḥak: In reality, it [David’s famine] should not have occurred in the days of David, but rather, in the days of Saul.5The reason underlying the famine was relevant to Saul, not David (II Samuel 21:1). However, because Saul was [like] the shoot of a sycamore,6Easily broken and unable to withstand pressure, due to his lack of merit. the Holy One blessed be He postponed it and brought it about in the days of David. [As the saying goes:] Shilo sinned, but Yoḥana pays? That is why they [the ten famines] all came about in the days of strong people, who were able to withstand them, and not in the days of downtrodden people, who were unable to withstand them.  Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great said: This is analogous to a glazier who had in his hand a basket filled with goblets and cut glass. When he would wish to hang his basket, he would [first] bring a peg, affix it, and suspend himself from it,7To check its sturdiness. and only then would he hang his basket. That is why they did not come about in the days of downtrodden people, but rather, in the days of strong people, who were able to withstand them. Rabbi Berekhya would cite this verse in their regard: “He gives strength to the weary” (Isaiah 40:29). Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Ḥelbo: There were two [famines] that occurred in the days of Abraham. Rav Huna in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: One was in the days of Lemekh, and one in the days of Abraham. The famine that came in the days of Elijah was a famine of drought. The famine that came in the days of Elisha was a famine of panic. The famine that was in the days that the judges judged,8See Ruth 1:1. Rabbi Huna in the name of Rabbi Dosa: For the price for which one used to purchase forty-two se’a, they could purchase [only] forty-one.9According to a different reading: the price for which one used to purchase two se’a, they could purchase [only] one. But is it not taught: A person should not depart and go outside the Land of Israel unless two se’a  of wheat sells for one sela?10Double the ordinary price of wheat, which was four se’a for a sela (Mishna Pe’a 8:7). Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: That is only when he does not find any [wheat] to buy, but if he can find to buy, even if it is one se’a for a sela, one should not depart and go outside the Land of Israel.
“It was when he drew near to come to Egypt, he said to Sarai his wife: Behold, I know now that you are a woman of fair appearance” (Genesis 12:11). “It will be, when the Egyptians will see you, they will say: This is his wife, and they will kill me, and keep you alive” (Genesis 12:12). “Please, say you are my sister, so that it may be well with me because of you, and my soul shall live because of you” (Genesis 12:13). “It was when he drew near to come to Egypt” – he was together with her all those years, and only now he says to her: “Behold, I know now that you are a woman of fair appearance”? The explanation is that due to travel a person [usually] becomes unsightly, but this one [Sarai] retained her beauty.11And this fact became known to Abraham only now. Rabbi Ze’eira said in the name of Rabbi Simon: [Abraham told her:] ‘We traveled through Aram Naharayim and Aram Naḥor and we did not encounter a woman as fair as you. Now that we are entering a place of ugly and swarthy people, “please, say you are my sister….”’12It was only now that her beauty could potentially cause problems. Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Avun: There were two people who were the principal party, but subordinated themselves, and then actually became subordinate: Abraham and Barak. Barak – “She [Deborah] sent and summoned Barak son of Avinoam from Kedesh Naphtali, and said to him: Behold, the Lord, God of Israel, has commanded, saying: Go and draw toward Mount Tavor and take with you ten thousand…” (Judges 4:6).13This shows that Barak was originally the principal figure, as he was appointed to lead an army of ten thousand against Yavin, king of Ḥatzor, and his general Sisera. “Barak said to her: If you go with me, I will go, but if you do not go with me, I will not go” (Judges 4:8).14He thereby subordinated himself to Deborah. Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: [Barak said:] ‘If you go with me to Kedesh, I will go with you to Ḥatzor.15There was a preliminary battle at Kedesh, followed by the decisive battle at Ḥatzor. For the Kedesh battle, Barak sought the company of Deborah, who, as a prophetess, would inspire the soldiers to fight valiantly. In return, he undertook to bring her along for the decisive battle of Ḥatzor. If you do not go with me to Kedesh, I will not go with you to Ḥatzor.’ Rabbi Neḥemya said: [Barak said:] ‘If you accompany me in song,16The song of praise that was to be sung after Israel’s victory (Judges 5). Barak requested the assistance of Deborah, the prophetess, to infuse his song with the prophetic spirit. I will go with you to war.17In return for your help in composing the song, I will allow you to join me in battle. If you do not accompany me in song, I will not go with you to war. “She said: I will go with you; however [efes], it will not be your glory [on the path that you take, for it is by the hand of a woman that the Lord will deliver Sisera]” (Judges 4:9). Rabbi Reuven said: Efes is a Greek expression.18It means: Stop, it is not yours. She said to him: ‘What do you think, that the glory of the song was assigned to you specifically?’ That was a rhetorical question. He then became subordinate [to her]: “Deborah and Barak son of Avinoam sang” (Judges 5:1).19The song is ascribed first and foremost to Deborah. Abraham was the principal party: “Abram took his wife Sarah” (Genesis 12:5). He subordinated himself: “Please, say you are my sister [so that it may be well with me because of you]” (Genesis 12:13). And he became subordinate to her: “He benefitted Abram for her sake” (Genesis 12:16).
“It was upon Abram’s arrival in Egypt, the Egyptians saw the woman, that she was very beautiful” (Genesis 12:14). “It was upon Abram’s arrival in Egypt, the Egyptians saw” – and where was Sarah?20“It was upon Abram’s arrival” implies that he was alone, without Sarai. He had placed her in a chest and locked her in it. When they arrived at customs, they said to him: ‘Pay the duty.’ He said: ‘I will pay the duty.’ They said to him: ‘[Perhaps] you are transporting garments?’ He said: ‘I will pay [the duty] for garments.’ They said to him: ‘[Perhaps] you are transporting gold?’ He said: ‘I will pay [the duty] for gold.’ They said to him:’ Perhaps you are transporting silk garments?’ He said: ‘I will pay [the duty] for silk garments.’ ‘[Perhaps] you are transporting gems?’ He said: ‘I will pay [the duty] for gems.’ [Nevertheless,] they said to him: ‘It is not possible [for you to pass] unless you open [the chest] and show us what is inside it.’ When he opened it, the entire land of Egypt shone with her radiance. Rabbi Azarya and Rabbi Yonatan bar Ḥagai said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: An image of Eve was passed down to the leaders of [all] the generations.21As a standard of unsurpassed beauty. Elsewhere it is written: “The young woman [Avishag] was very [ad meod] beautiful” (I Kings 1:4) – she approximated the image of Eve.22Ad means: Up to but not including. Me’od refers to the image of Eve (see next note). Avishag approximated Eve’s beauty, but did not reach that level. However, here it says: “That she was very [meod] beautiful” – meod is the image of Eve.23The letters of meod are the same letters as Adam. Eve is called Adam in the verse: “He called their name Adam” (Genesis 5:2). Therefore, Eve’s beauty is represented by the word me’od. “Pharaoh’s officials saw her, they praised her to Pharaoh, and the woman was taken to Pharaoh’s house” (Genesis 12:15). “Pharaoh’s officials saw her […and the woman was taken [vatukaḥ] to Pharaoh’s house]” – she was continuously increasing in price. One said: ‘I will give one hundred dinars and I will enter with her.’24I will present her to the king. This is expounded from the word vatukaḥ – indicating raising up. Another said: ‘I will give two hundred and enter with her.’ I know that this is so [regarding the righteous]25That people vie for the right to attend to them. only when they are ascendant.26When the righteous are on the ascent in their lives, as was Sarai at this point. From where do I derive that it is so [even] when they are descendant? “They pulled Jeremiah with the ropes and raised [vayaalu] him from the pit” (Jeremiah 38:13).27They sought to outbid one another [vayaalu] for the right to extricate Jeremiah from the pit. I know this only regarding this world, regarding the World to Come,28The messianic future. from where is it derived? The verse states: “The peoples will take them [ulkaḥum] and bring them to their place” (Isaiah 14:2).29The nations will vie with each other in sending the Jewish exiles among them back to the land of Israel.
“He benefitted Abram for her sake; he acquired flocks, cattle, donkeys, slaves, maidservants, female donkeys, and camels” (Genesis 12:16). “Pharaoh commanded men in his regard and they sent away him and his wife, and everything that was his” (Genesis 12:20). “He benefitted Abram for her sake; he acquired flocks, cattle…Pharaoh commanded men in his regard and they sent away him [and his wife]” – Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Hoshaya the Great: The Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham our forefather: ‘Go and pave the way before your descendants.’30The events of your life are portents for the events that will occur to your descendants. You find that everything that is written in Abraham’s regard is written regarding his descendants. In Abraham’s regard it is written: “There was famine in the land” (Genesis 12:10); in Israel’s regard it is written: “For these two years the famine is in the midst of the land” (Genesis 45:6). In Abraham’s regard it is written: “Abram descended to Egypt to sojourn there” (Genesis 12:10); in Israel’s regard it is written: “Our ancestors descended to Egypt” (Numbers 20:15). In Abraham’s regard it is written: “To sojourn there”; in Israel’s regard it is written: “We have come to sojourn in the land” (Genesis 47:4). In Abraham’s regard it is written: “As the famine was severe in the land” (Genesis 12:10); in Israel’s regard it is written: “The famine was severe in the land” (Genesis 43:1). In Abraham’s regard it is written: “It was when he drew near” (Genesis 12:11); in Israel’s regard it is written: “Pharaoh drew near” (Exodus 14:10). In Abraham’s regard it is written: “They will kill me, and keep you alive” (Genesis 12:12); in Israel’s regard it is written: “Every son who is born, you shall cast him into the Nile [and every girl you shall keep alive]” (Exodus 1:22). In Abraham’s regard it is written: “Please, say you are my sister; so that it may be well with me [yitav li] because of you…” (Genesis 12:13); in Israel’s regard it is written: “God favored [vayeitev] the midwives” (Exodus 1:20). In Abraham’s regard it is written: “It was upon Abram’s arrival in Egypt” (Genesis 12:14); in Israel’s regard it is written: “These are the names of the children of Israel who arrived in Egypt” (Exodus 1:1). In Abraham’s regard it is written: “And Abram was very wealthy in livestock, [in silver, and in gold]” (Genesis 13:2); in Israel’s regard it is written: “He took them out with silver and with gold” (Psalms 105:37). In Abraham’s regard it is written: “Pharaoh commanded [men] in his regard, [and they sent away him and his wife]” (Genesis 12:20); in Israel’s regard it is written: “The Egyptians urged the people, [to send them away in haste]” (Exodus 12:33). In Abraham’s regard it is written: “He went on his journeys” (Genesis 13:3); in Israel’s regard it is written: “These are the journeys of the children of Israel” (Numbers 33:1).

=== 41 | 41 ===
“The Lord afflicted Pharaoh and his household with great afflictions over the matter of Sarai, Abram’s wife” (Genesis 12:17). “The Lord afflicted Pharaoh…with great afflictions.” It is written: “The righteous man flourishes like a palm tree; [like a cedar in Lebanon he grows tall]” (Psalms 92:13) – just as the palm and cedar have neither curvatures nor protuberances, so, too, the righteous have neither curvatures nor protuberances.1In their character. Just as the palm tree and cedar, their shade extends far away, so the reward of the righteous extends far away.2Their reward is in the World to Come. Just as the palm tree and the cedar, their heart [trunk] goes straight upward, so too the righteous, their heart is straight toward the Holy One blessed be He. That is what is written: “My eyes are always toward the Lord, as He draws my feet out of the net” (Psalms 25:15). Just as the palm tree and the cedar have desire,3The reference is to the palm tree, which unlike most trees, come in male and female varieties. Only the female produces fruit, and only if it is cross-pollinated from a male tree. so too the righteous have desire. What is their desire? It is for the Holy One blessed be He, as it is stated: “I hoped for the Lord” (Psalms 40:2). Rabbi Tanḥuma said: There was once an incident involving a palm tree that was situated in Ḥamtan, and it would not produce fruit. A certain palm farmer passed by and saw it. He said: ‘This palm is yearning toward Jericho.’4It desires a male palm from Jericho. Once they pollinated it [from that Jericho palm], it produced fruit. But might one not argue: Just as vessels are not made from [the wood of] the palm tree, so, too with the righteous?5The righteous provide no benefit or value to the world. That is astonishing. The verse therefore states: “Like a cedar.”6Cedar wood is used to make vessels. Rav Huna said: There,7In Babylon. they do craft utensils from it [palm wood]. And might one not argue: Just as the cedar does not produce fruit, so too the righteous? That is astonishing. The verse therefore states: “Flourishes [like a palm tree].” [Furthermore,] just as the palm has nothing that goes to waste, but, rather, it [produces] dates for eating, fronds for praise,8They are waved during Hallel on Sukkot. branches for roofing, fiber for ropes, leaves for sieves, large beams for roofing the house, so, too, Israel has no one who goes to waste. Rather, some of them are masters of Bible, some of them are masters of Mishna, some of them are masters of Talmud, some of them are masters of aggada. [Furthermore,] just as with the palm tree and cedar, anyone who climbs to the top of them and does not take care falls and dies,9Because they are very tall. so, too, anyone who comes to accost Israel, will receive his just deserts by their hand. You may know that it is so, since Sarah, because Pharaoh took her for just one night, he and the members of his household were punished with afflictions. That is what is written: “The Lord afflicted Pharaoh…with great afflictions…”
Reish Lakish said in the name of bar Kappara: Pharaoh was stricken with raatan.10A kind of skin disease. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: A certain elder afflicted with a skin disease encountered me in Tzippori. He said to me: ‘There are twenty-four types of skin disease and none is more difficult regarding [sexual relations with] women than raatan.’ It was this with which Pharaoh was afflicted. Rabbi Aḥa said: Even the beams of his palace were afflicted.11This is the meaning of “The Lord afflicted Pharaoh and his household [beito],” the literal meaning of beito being “his house.” And everyone was saying: “It is over the matter of Sarai, Abram’s wife.”12There was no other explanation as to how the beams of the house could become diseased other than through divine intervention. Rabbi Berekhya said: All the insolent ones have come in to touch the noblewoman’s shoe.13This is a saying, referring to insolent behavior on the part of lowly people who dare to touch the princess’s shoes, and are severely punished. The Midrash applies this saying to the members of Pharaoh’s household who acted disrespectfully toward Sarah. Throughout that night Sarah was prostrated on her face and saying: ‘Master of the universe, Abraham departed [from our home country] with a promise,14Abraham was told by God that He would protect him. and I departed only on faith. Abraham departed outside the cage, but I am in the cage.’15I am here is the cage with all these beasts. The Holy One blessed be He said to her: ‘Everything I do, I do on your behalf.’ And all of them were saying: “…over the matter of Sarai, Abram’s wife.” Rabbi Levi said: Throughout that night, an angel was standing with a rod in his hand. He said to her: ‘If you say: Strike, I will strike; if you say: Cease, I will cease.’16This is what is meant by “over the matter [al devar] of Sarai.” Al devar Sarai can also mean “by Sarai’s word.” Why [was Pharaoh punished] to such an extent? It is because she kept telling him: ‘I am a married woman,’ but he would not keep away from her.17“Over the matter of [al devar] Sarai, Abram’s wife” is expounded to mean: “by the words of Sarai, who said that she was Abram’s wife.”  Rabbi Elazar taught it in the name of Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov: We have heard that Pharaoh was afflicted with leprosy18The word nega’im, translated here as “afflictions,” often refers specifically to leprosy. and Avimelekh was afflicted with obstruction.19They were afflicted with obstruction of their bodily orifices (see Bereshit Rabba 52:13). From where is it derived to apply this [affliction] to there, and that [affliction] to here?20Pharaoh and Avimelekh were both afflicted with leprosy and obstruction. It is from al devar, al devar21“For the Lord had obstructed all wombs of the house of Avimelekh, over the matter [al devar] of Sarah, Abraham's wife” (Genesis 20:18). for a verbal analogy.
“Abram was very wealthy in livestock, in silver, and in gold” (Genesis 13:2). “Abram was very wealthy in livestock, in silver, and in gold.” That is what is written: “He took them out with silver and gold…” (Psalms 105:37).22All the details of this incident with Abraham foreshadowed the events of the Exodus, as the Midrash explained earlier (40:6). “He went on his journeys from the Negev to Beit El, to the place where his tent had been initially, between Beit El and Ai” (Genesis 13:3). “He went on his journeys” – on the same journeys [routes] that he went [to Egypt], he returned. Rabbi Elazar ben Rabbi Menaḥem said: He went to pay his credit debts.23He had been granted credit at various inns on the way to Egypt, and he now went to repay those debts. “Lot, who went with Abram, also had flocks, cattle, and tents” (Genesis 13:5). “Lot, who went with Abram, also…” – Lot derived four benefits due to Abram: “Abram went…and Lot went with him” (Genesis 12:4); “Lot, who went with Abram, also [had flocks, cattle…]”; “He returned all the possessions, and also his brother Lot” (Genesis 14:16); “It was when God destroyed…God remembered Abraham, and He sent out Lot from the midst [of the upheaval]…” (Genesis 19:29). Corresponding to them, his descendants24The nations of Ammon and Moav (Genesis 19:37-38). should have repaid us with favors. But not only did they not repay us with favors, but [they paid us] with [four] troubles. That is what is written: “He25Balak, king of Moav. sent messengers to Bilam son of Beor…now, please come curse this people for me” (Numbers 22:5–6); “He gathered to him the children of Ammon and Amalek, and he went and smote Israel, and they took possession of the city of the date palms” (Judges 3:13); “It was thereafter that the children of Moav, [the children of Ammon], and some Ammonites with them, came against Yehoshafat” (II Chronicles 20:1). Moreover, it is written: “The foe26Referring to Ammon and Moav (Eikha Rabba 1:38). spread its hand over all its delights” (Lamentations 1:10). And their sin is recorded in four places: “An Ammonite or a Moavite shall not enter [into the congregation…] because they did not greet you with bread and with water…[and because they hired…Bilam…to curse you]” (Deuteronomy 23:4–5); and it is written: “My people, remember now what Balak king of Moav counseled, and what [Bilam son of Beor] answered him” (Micah 6:5); “Because they [Ammon and Moav] did not greet the children of Israel with bread and with water, and hired Bilam against them, to curse them” (Nehemiah 13:2); “Balak son of Tzipor, king of Moav…summoned Bilam son of Beor to curse you” (Joshua 24:9). [Consequently,] four prophets arose and sealed their sentence. They are: Isaiah, Jeremiah, Zephaniah, and Ezekiel. Isaiah said: “A prophecy of Moav: For on the night that Ar of Moav was plundered, it was ruined; for on the night that Kir of Moav was plundered, it was ruined” (Isaiah 15:1). Jeremiah said: “Therefore, behold, days are coming, the utterance of the Lord, and I will sound to Raba of the Ammonites an alarm of war, and it will become a mound of desolation, and its environs will be burned in fire, and Israel will dispossess its dispossessors, said the Lord” (Jeremiah 49:2). Ezekiel said: “To the children of the east, against the children of Ammon, I will give it as a heritage, so that the children of Ammon will not be remembered among the nations. I will administer punishments to Moav, and they will know that I am the Lord” (Ezekiel 25:10–11). Zephaniah said: “Therefore, as I live – the utterance of the Lord of hosts, God of Israel – Moav will be like Sodom, and the children of Ammon like Gomorrah” (Zephaniah 2:9).
“Had flocks, cattle, and tents” – Rabbi Toviya bar Yitzḥak said: [Lot had] two tents27“Tent” is sometimes used to mean one’s wife. Lot had two famous “tents” that would descend from him. – Ruth the Moavitess28Ancestress of David. and Naama the Ammonitess.29Solomon’s main wife. Similarly, “Take your wife, and your two daughters [who are found here]…” (Genesis 19:15) – Rabbi Toviya bar Yitzḥak said: Two tents – Ruth the Moavitess and Naama the Ammonitess. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: “I found David My servant” (Psalms 89:21) – where did I find him? It was in Sodom.30That is the meaning of “your two daughters who are found.”
“There was a quarrel between the herdsmen of Abram’s livestock and the herdsmen of Lot’s livestock. And the Canaanites and the Perizites then lived in the land” (Genesis 13:7). “There was a quarrel between the herdsmen of Abram’s livestock and the herdsmen of Lot’s livestock” – Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon: Abraham’s animals would go out muzzled,31To prevent them from eating other people’s vegetation, which would amount to theft. but Lot’s animals would not go out muzzled. Abraham’s herdsmen would say to them: ‘Has theft now been permitted?’ Lot’s herdsmen would say to them: ‘The Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham: “To your descendants I will give this land” (Genesis 12:7). Abraham is [like] a sterile mule and cannot bear children. One day he will die and Lot his nephew will inherit [from] him. We are not consuming their property, we are consuming our own property.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to them: ‘This is what I said to him: “To your descendants I will give [this land].” When? Only after the seven nations are uprooted from it [the land].’32See Genesis 15:16. “The Canaanites and the Perizites then lived in the land” – as of now, they still maintain their right to the land.
“Abram said to Lot: Please, let there not be a quarrel between me and you and between my herdsmen and your herdsmen, for we are brothers” (Genesis 13:8). “Abram said to Lot: Please, let there not be a quarrel between me and you…” – Rabbi Azarya said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon: Just as there was a quarrel between Abram’s herdsmen and Lot’s herdsmen, so there was a quarrel between Abram and Lot. That is what is written: “Abram said to Lot: Please, let there not be a quarrel between me and you…” [“For we are brothers”] – were they in fact brothers?33Lot was Abraham’s nephew. It means, rather, that his facial features resembled his. “Is the whole land not before you? Please, part from me; if to the left, I will go right, and if to the right, I will go left [veasme’ila]” (Genesis 13:9). “Is the whole land not before you? Please, part from me” – Rabbi Ḥelbo said: “Separate from me” is not written here, but rather, part [hipared] – just as a mule [pirda] does not take in seed,34It is sterile and cannot be inseminated. so, it is impossible for this man to be intermingled with the seed of Abraham. “If to the left, I will go right, and if to the right, I will go left”35Smol and yamin can mean either left and right or north and south. – he said to him: ‘If you go to the left [north], I will go to the south, and if I go to the south, you go to the left [north].’36Abraham was telling Lot that, in any event, he wanted the land to the south for his portion. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: This is analogous to two people who had two heaps of grain – one was of wheat and one was of barley. One said to the other: ‘If the wheat is mine, the barley is yours, and if the barley is yours, the wheat is mine; in either case, the wheat is mine.’ So, too, “if to the left, I will go right and if to the right, I will go left.” Rabbi Ḥanina bar Yitzḥak said: “I will go left [ve’esmola] is not written here, but rather, “I will cause to go left [ve’asme’ila] – in any case, I will make that person [Lot] go to the left.
“Lot raised his eyes and saw the entire plain of the Jordan, that it was all watered, before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, like the garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt, as you come to Tzoar” (Genesis 13:10). “Lot raised his eyes and saw the entire plain of the Jordan” – Rabbi Naḥman bar Ḥanin said: Anyone who has a voracious appetite for sexual immorality will ultimately be fed from his own flesh and blood.37He will end up committing incest. See Genesis 19:32. Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: This entire verse is comprised of expressions of sexual immorality. [“Lot raised his eyes”] – just as it says: “His master's wife raised her eyes [toward Joseph and she said: Lie with me]” (Genesis 39:7). “And saw the entire plain [kikar] of the Jordan, that it was all watered” – just as it says: “For due to a licentious woman, one is brought to a loaf [kikar] of bread” (Proverbs 6:26). “That it was all watered [mashke]” – just as it says: “He shall give the woman to drink [hishka] the bitter water that causes a curse” (Numbers 5:24). “Before the Lord destroyed [shaḥet]” – just as it says: “It was when he consorted with his brother's wife, he would spill [veshiḥet] on to the ground” (Genesis 38:9).  “Like the garden of the Lord” – for trees; “like the land of Egypt” – for seeds. “Lot chose for himself all the plain of the Jordan, and Lot journeyed from the east, and each parted from his brother” (Genesis 13:11). “Abram lived in the land of Canaan, and Lot lived in the cities of the plain, and pitched his tent as far as Sodom” (Genesis 13:12). “And the men of Sodom were extremely wicked and sinful to the Lord” (Genesis 13:13). “Lot chose for himself” – Rabbi Yosei ben Zimra said: Like a person selecting his mother’s marriage contract.38When a man marries several women, each of the women brings property into the marriage as part of the marriage contract. When the husband dies after the wives, each of the sons inherits the property that his mother had introduced into the marriage. Lot chose Sodom as if it were his ordained legacy.  “Lot journeyed from the east [mikedem]” – he moved himself away from the One who preceded [kadmono] the world. He said: ‘I desire neither Abram nor his God.’  “Each parted from his brother. Abram lived [in the land of Canaan]” – Rabbi Meir says: You do not have among the cities any as evil as Sodom, as when a person is wicked, they refer to him as a person of Sodom.39And yet Lot chose that place to live in. You do not have any among the peoples as tough as the Emorites, as when a person is tough, they refer to him as an Emorite. Rabbi Yosei said: You do not have among the cities any as beautiful as Sodom, as Lot circulated among all the cities of the plain and did not find a place as fine as Sodom, and these [the people of Sodom] were the most distinguished among them40According to Rabbi Yosei, the people of Sodom were better than those of the other cities in the area, and that is why Lot chose it to live in. Yet, despite their relative eminence, the Torah testifies that they “were extremely wicked.” – “and the men of Sodom were extremely wicked and sinful to the Lord” (Genesis 13:13). “Wicked” – towards one another; “sinful” – through sexual immorality; “to the Lord” – through idolatry; “extremely” – through bloodshed.
“The Lord said to Abram, after Lot parted from him: Raise now your eyes, and look from the place where you are, northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward” (Genesis 13:14). “The Lord said to Abram…” – Rabbi Yuda says: There was anger towards our forefather Abraham when he distanced his nephew Lot from him. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘He attaches himself to everyone else,41Abraham always sought to bring people closer to God. but to his own kinsman, Lot, he does not attach himself?’ Rabbi Neḥemya said: [On the contrary,] The Holy One blessed be He was angry while Lot was traveling with Abraham our forefather. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘I said to him: “To your descendants I have given this land” (Genesis 15:18), and he attaches Lot to him, so that he should inherit [from] him? If so, let him go and find two foundlings in the street and bequeath to them what is his, as he wishes for his nephew.’ That is what is written: “Banish the scoffer, and strife will depart” (Proverbs 22:10). “Banish the scoffer” – this refers to Lot; “and strife will depart” – “there was a quarrel between the herdsmen of Abram’s [livestock and the herdsmen of Lot’s livestock]….” “And contention and disgrace will cease” (Proverbs 22:10) – “Please, let there not be a quarrel [between me and you]….” “One who loves purity of heart, he who has grace on his lips, his friend is a king” (Proverbs 22:11) – the Holy One blessed be He loves whoever is pure of heart. “He who has grace on his lips, the king is his friend” – this refers to Abraham, who was faultless and pure of heart and became one who loved the Omnipresent, as it is stated: “Descendants of Abraham who loved Me” (Isaiah 41:8). Because he had “grace on his lips,” as it is stated: “Speaking of his feats, and the grace of his speech” (Job 41:4), the Holy One blessed be He became like a friend to him, saying to him: “To your descendants I have given this land” (Genesis 15:18).
“For all the land that you see, I will give to you, and to your descendants, forever” (Genesis 13:15). “I will render your descendants like the dust of the earth; if a man could count the dust of the earth, so your descendants shall be counted” (Genesis 13:16). “The Lord said to Abram, after Lot parted…For all the land that you see, I will give to you…I will render your descendants like the dust of the earth” – just as the dust of the earth is found from one end of the earth to the other, so your descendants will be dispersed from one end of the earth to the other. Just as the dust of the earth becomes blessed only through water [rain], so Israel is blessed only through the merit of the Torah, which is likened to water.42See Isaiah 55:1, Bereshit Rabbah 54:1. Just as dust wears out metal vessels43A metal implement buried in the ground will rust away. and endures forever, so, too, with Israel – all the idolaters will vanish, but they will endure. Just as dust is regularly trodden, so your descendants will be regularly trodden by the idolaters. That is what is written: “I will place it44The cup of bitter punishment (see Isaiah 51:22). in the hand of your oppressors [mogayikh]…” (Isaiah 51:23) – what is mogayikh? They are those who cause your wounds to bleed [memigin] and cause your wounds to ooze. Nevertheless, it is for your benefit, as they mitigate your [liability for your] sins, just as it says: “Soften it [temogegena] with showers” (Psalms 65:11). “Who said to your soul: Bend down, and we shall pass” (Isaiah 51:23) – what would they do to them? They would have them lie in the plazas and drive their ploughs over them. Rabbi Azarya in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: This was actually a good omen – just as a plaza outlasts those who traverse it, so, your descendants will outlast the idol worshippers and will endure forever.
“Arise, walk about the land to its length and to its breadth, as to you I will give it” (Genesis 13:17). “Arise, walk about the land” – it is taught: One who walks about a field,45An ownerless field, or one that is being sold to him by another person. whether along its length or its breadth, acquires the field up to the place that he has walked; this in accordance with the statement of Rabbi Eliezer, as Rabbi Eliezer used to say: Walking about [in a field] is an act of acquisition. The Sages say: One does not acquire it until he walks along it to its breadth and its length. Rabbi Yaakov ben Zavdi said: Rabbi Eliezer’s source is: “Arise, walk about the land [to its length and to its breadth].”

=== 42 | 42 ===
“It was in the days of Amrafel king of Shinar, Aryokh king of Elasar, Kedorlaomer king of Eilam, and Tidal king of Goyim,” (Genesis 14:1). “It was in the days of Amrafel king of Shinar” – Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin in the name of Rabbi Levi began: “The wicked drew their swords…their swords will come into their own hearts….” (Psalms 37:14–15). There was an incident involving Rabbi Eliezer ben Hurkenos, that his brothers were plowing in the plain and he was plowing on the mountain. His cow fell and was incapacitated. He said: It was for my benefit that my cow was incapacitated. He ran away and went to study under Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Zakai. He would eat clods of earth,1Out of dire poverty. He hoped to gain nutrition from the roots in those clods. until the odor of his breath became foul.2From starvation. They went and said to Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Zakai: ‘Rabbi Eliezer’s breath is unpleasant.’ He said to him: ‘Just as the odor of your breath was befouled over Torah study, so may the scent of your Torah teaching go forth from one end of the world to the other.’ Sometime later, his [Rabbi Eliezer’s] father went up3To Rabbi Yoḥanan’s yeshiva. with the intent to disinherit him from his property. He found him sitting and delivering a lecture, and the most prominent men of his province were sitting before him: Ben Tzitzit HaKeset, Nakdimon ben Guryon, and ben Kalba Savua. He found him expounding this verse: “The wicked drew their swords…” – this is Amrafel and his cohorts. “To topple the poor and the needy” (Psalms 37:14) – this is Lot.4He was “poor and needy” in the sense that he was defenseless against these invaders. “To slaughter those whose path is upright” (Psalms 37:14) – this is Abraham. “Their swords will come into their own hearts” – “he arrayed against them at night…and smote them” (Genesis 14:15). His [Rabbi Eliezer’s] father said to him: ‘Son, I came up here only to disinherit you from my property. Now, all my property is hereby given to you as a gift.’ He said: ‘It [the extra portion you are giving me] is hereby proscribed from me by vow, and my rights in it [the entire property] shall be equal to that of my brothers.’ Another interpretation, “the wicked drew their swords [and stretched their bows]” – this is Amrafel and his cohorts.5This interpretation appears to be identical to the previous one. According to Matnot Kehuna, the Midrash is alluding to the exposition presented in Midrash Tanḥuma 7, which opens with these words.
“It was in the days of Amrafel” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Shilat began: “This too is a grave evil; just as one came, so will he go” (Ecclesiastes 5:15). Rabbi Shmuel bar Shilat said: Just as one comes with seizing, so he goes with seizing.6If someone seizes property unjustly, it will ultimately be seized from him. Rabbi Avon said: Just as he started off with four kingdoms,7Abraham’s travails began with these four kingdoms. so will he conclude with four kingdoms.8The travails of Abraham’s descendants throughout history will end with four kingdoms. [He started off with four kingdoms] – “with Kedorlaomer king of Eilam, Tidal king of Goyim, and Amrafel king of Shinar, and Aryokh king of Elasar” (Genesis 14:9). So will he conclude with four kingdoms: The kingdom of Babylon, the kingdom of Media, the kingdom of Greece, and the kingdom of Edom.9These are the four kingdoms that would subjugate Israel up to Messianic times, as foretold in Daniel chapter 2. Rabbi Pinḥas in the name of Rabbi Aivu began: “They do not know the thoughts of the Lord, and they do not understand His counsel, that He has gathered them together like sheaves brought to the threshing floor” (Micah 4:12).10The enemies of Israel who band together to attack Israel do not realize that God has brought them together only to destroy them. Why? “All these joined forces at the valley of Sidim” (Genesis 14:3) – so that they should come and fall into the hand of Abraham. That is what is written: “It was in the days of Amrafel…”
Another interpretation, “it was in the days of Amrafel” – Rabbi Tanḥuma in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great and Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Eliezer: The following exposition was brought with us in our hands when we came up from the Diaspora:11When the exiles of Israel returned to the land of Israel with Ezra from Babylon. Wherever it is stated: “It was [vayhi] in the days,” it indicates trouble.12Vayhi is seen as a combination of the words vay and hi, both expressions of woe and misfortune. “It was in the days of Amrafel” – what was the trouble there? “They waged war” (Genesis 14:2). Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: There are five such instances.13For the other four instances, see: Isaiah 7:1; Jeremiah 1:3; Ruth 1:1; Esther 1:1. This is analogous to a friend of a king who lived in a certain province, and for his sake the king took an interest in that province. Once some barbarians came to attack him, and they said: ‘Woe unto us, as the king will not show favor to the province as was his wont if they kill his friend.’ That is what is written: “They turned back, and came to Ein Mishpat, which is Kadesh” (Genesis 14:7) – Rabbi Aḥa said: They came only to fight against the eyeball [ein] of the world;14Abraham is called the eyeball of the world, because it was only for his sake that God took an interest in and looked out for the benefit of the people of the world. they sought to blind the eye [ayin] that overcame the attribute of justice [mishpat] in the world. “Which is [hi] Kadesh” – Rav Aḥa said: Hu is written. It is he [hu] who sanctified [kiddesh] the name of the Holy One blessed be He in the fiery furnace. When the barbarians came to attack him, everyone began crying out: ‘Woe [vay].’ That is what is written: “It was [vayhi] in the days of Amrafel.” “It was in the days of Aḥaz” (Isaiah 7:1) – what was the trouble there? “Aram from the east and the Philistines from the west” (Isaiah 9:11).15Israel was under attack from all sides. This is analogous to a king’s son, whose caretaker resolved to kill him. He said: ‘If I kill him, I will be liable to execution by the king. Instead, I will take away his wet nurse from him, and he will die on his own.’ So, too, Aḥaz said: ‘If there are no kids, there will be no goats, and if there are no goats there will be no flock, and if there is no flock there will be no shepherd, and if there is no shepherd, there will be no world.’16That is, the world will not be able to function in its conventional manner. That is what Aḥaz thought to himself: ‘If there are no children [in school], there will be no students, if there are no students there will be no scholars, if there are no scholars there will be no elders, if there are no elders there will be no prophets, if there are no prophets the Holy One blessed be He will not rest His Divine Presence upon them [Israel].17Consequently, he closed all the schools. That is what is written: “Bind the testimony, seal the Torah in my disciples” (Isaiah 8:16). Rabbi Ḥonya bar Rabbi Elazar said: Why was he named Aḥaz? It is because he locked up [aḥaz] the synagogues and study halls. Rabbi Yaakov bar Abba in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: Isaiah said: ‘“I will hope for the Lord, who conceals His face from the house of Jacob” (Isaiah 8:17). There was no moment that was as grim as that time, in whose regard it is stated: “I will conceal My face on that day” (Deuteronomy 31:18). But at that very time, I [Isaiah] hoped for Him, as it is written [immediately afterwards]: “For it will not be forgotten from the mouths of their descendants” (Deuteronomy 31:21).18When God said that He would hide His face from Israel, He continued, that nevertheless the Torah would never be forgotten by them. Of what use was it to him [Ahaz]?19Despite his best efforts, the Torah continued to be taught, as the Midrash goes on to explain. [Of no use, as Isaiah declared:] “Behold, I, and the children whom the Lord gave me, are to become signs and wonders in Israel”’ (Isaiah 8:18). Were they20The young men Isaiah was referring to. his children? Were they not actually his students? However, we learn from here that they [his students] were as beloved to him as sons. When he [Aḥaz] locked up the synagogues and study halls, people began crying out: ‘Woe [vay]’ – “it was [vayhi] in the days of Aḥaz.” “It was in the days of Yehoyakim” (Jeremiah 1:3) – what was the trouble there? [It was as Jeremiah prophesied:] “I saw the land, and behold, it is emptiness and disorder” (Jeremiah 4:23). This is analogous to a king who sent a proclamation throughout the province. What did the residents of one province do to it? They took it, ripped it, and burned it in fire. Thus it is stated: “It happened that as Yehudi would read three or four sections…” (Jeremiah 36:23)21It was the Book of Lamentations that was being read. – this means three or four verses. When he reached the fifth verse, “Its besiegers have become dominant” (Lamentations 1:5) – “He cut it up with a scribe’s razor and cast it into the fire that was in the fireplace, until the entire scroll was consumed in the fire that was in the fireplace” (Jeremiah 36:23). When everyone saw this, they began crying out: ‘Woe [vay]’ – “it was [vayhi] in the days of Yehoyakim.” “It was in the days that the judges judged” (Ruth 1:1)22A more literal translation would be, “in the days of the judging of the judges.” – what was the trouble there? “There was a famine in the land” (Ruth 1:1). This is analogous to a province that owed a tax to the king. The prince sent a tax collector to collect it. What did the residents of the province do to him? They took him and beat him. They then said: ‘Woe to us when the king becomes aware of these events; what he sought to do to us,23Subdue us. we did to him.’ So, too, in the days of the judging of the judges – when a person of Israel would engage in idol worship, and the judge sought to implement against him the attribute of strict justice,24And decree for him corporal punishment. he would come and flog the judge. He said: ‘What he sought to do to me, I did to him.’25“The judging of the judges” is interpreted to mean that the people committed acts of judgment and punishment against their judges. They said: ‘Woe [vay] to the generation that judges its judges.’ That is what is written: “It was [vayhi] in the days when the judges judged, there was a famine in the land” (Ruth 1:1). “It was in the days of Aḥashverosh” (Esther 1:1) – what was the trouble there? [Haman’s decree:] “to destroy, to kill, and to eliminate [all the Jews]” (Esther 3:13). This is analogous to a king who had a certain vineyard, and three enemies rose up against it. The first began picking unripe grapes, the second began cutting off the clusters, and the third began uprooting the vines. So too, Pharaoh [said]: “Every son who is born you shall cast into the Nile…” (Exodus 1:22). Nebuchadnezzar [exiled] “the ḥarash and the masger,26These are two classes of Torah scholars (Gittin 88a). one thousand” (Jeremiah 29:2) – Rabbi Berekhya said: One thousand ḥarash and one thousand masger; the Rabbis said: They were one thousand altogether. Haman sought to uproot the entire vineyard, as it is stated: “To destroy, to kill, and to eliminate all the Jews…” (Esther 3:13). When everyone saw that it was so, they began crying out: ‘Woe [vay].’ That is what is written: “It was [vayhi] in the days of Aḥashverosh.” Rabbi Shimon bar Abba in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Everywhere that vayhi is stated it refers either to trouble or to joy; if the context is one of trouble, it is unparalleled trouble, if it is one of joy, it is unparalleled joy. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman came and made a distinction: Everywhere that vayhi is stated,27Even when it is not connected with “in the days of.” it alludes to trouble, and vehaya [alludes to] joy. They raised an objection to him: But is it not written: “And there was [vayhi] light”? (Genesis 1:3). He said to them: That was nevertheless not complete joy, as the world was not privileged to use that light. Rabbi Yehuda son of Rabbi Simon said: By the light that was created on the first day, a person could see from one end of the world to the other. When the Holy One blessed be He foresaw the generation of the Flood and the generation of the Dispersion, He hid it away for the righteous in the future. That is what is written: “But the path of the righteous is like a dawning light, growing brighter until the day is established” (Proverbs 4:18). They raised an objection to him: But is it not written: “It was [vayhi] evening and it was morning, one day”? (Genesis 1:5). He said to them: That was nevertheless not complete joy, as everything that was created on the first day is destined to wear away, as it is stated: “For the heavens will vanish like smoke and the earth will wear away like a garment” (Isaiah 51:6). They raised an objection to him: But is it not written: “It was [vayhi] evening and it was morning, a second day” (Genesis 1:8), “…a third day” (Genesis 1:13), “a fourth day” (Genesis 1:19), “a fifth day” (Genesis 1:23), “a sixth day”? (Genesis 1:31). He said to them: That was nevertheless not complete [joy], as everything that was created during the six days of Creation requires some act [to perfect it], e.g., mustard requires sweetening, wheat requires grinding, and lupines require sweetening. They raised an objection to him: But is it not written: “The Lord was [vayhi] with Joseph”? (Genesis 39:2). He said to them: That was nevertheless not complete joy, as that bear28Potifar’s wife. then accosted him. They raised an objection to him: But is it not written: “It was [vayhi] on the eighth day, Moses summoned”? (Leviticus 9:1). He said to them: That was nevertheless not complete joy, as Nadav and Avihu died [that day]. They raised an objection to him: But is it not written: “It was [vayhi] on the day that Moses completed assembling the Tabernacle”? (Numbers 7:1). He said to them: That was nevertheless not [complete] joy, as it was hidden away with the building of the Temple.29Moses’ Tabernacle was stored away forever when the permanent Temple was built. They raised an objection to him: But is it not written: “The Lord was [vayhi] with Joshua”? (Joshua 6:27). He said to them: That was nevertheless not [complete] joy, as it became necessary for him to rend his garments.30Joshua 7:6.  They raised an objection to him: But is it not written: “It was [vayhi] when the king31David. resided in his house, and the Lord had given him respite…”? (II Samuel 7:1). He said to them: It was nevertheless not complete joy, as Natan then came and said to him: “However, you will not build the House…for My name” (I Kings 8:19). They said to him: We have said our [arguments], now you say yours. He said to them,32To prove his contention that vehaya always alludes to a joyous event. is it not written: “It will be [vehaya] on that day that spring water will emerge…” (Zechariah 14:8). It will be [vehaya] on that day, each man will keep a calf of the herd…” (Isaiah 7:21). “It will be [vehaya] on that day, the mountains will drip with nectar” (Joel 4:18). “It will be on that day that the Lord will continue…[to acquire the remnant of His people]” (Isaiah 11:11). “It will be [vehaya] on that day, a great shofar will be sounded…” (Isaiah 27:13).  They raised an objection to him: “And it was [vehaya] when Jerusalem was captured” (Jeremiah 38:28). He said to them: That was nevertheless joyous, as on that day, Israel gained atonement for its sins, as Rav and Shmuel say: Israel gained great atonement for their iniquities on the day that the Temple was destroyed, as it is stated: “Your sin is completed, daughter of Zion, He will not continue to exile you again” (Lamentations 4:22).
“It was in the days of Amrafel” – he was called by three names: Kush, Nimrod, and Amrafel. Kush – because he was literally a Kushite.33Nimrod was the son of Kush (Genesis 10:8). Nimrod – because he brought about a rebellion [mered] in the world. Amrafel – because his statements [imrato] were darkness [afela]. [In addition,] it is because he defied [amrei] and ridiculed [aflei] the world, and because he defied and ridiculed Abraham, because he said [amar] that he should be cast down34Amrafel is interpreted as: he said [amar] and cast him down [hipil]. into the fiery furnace.  “Aryokh king of Elasar” – Rabbi Yosei of Milḥaya said: There35In Babylon. we learned: The isar coin was named for Elasar.36This is because Aryokh instituted this coin. “Kedorlaomer king of Eilam, and Tidal king of Goyim” – Rabbi Levi said: There is a place there in Rome37Some delete the words “in Rome” (Ot Emet). that is called this [Goyim].38Meaning nations. It had this name because people from several different nations settled there.  They took one person and made him king over themselves. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Tidal was his name.39Tidal was the one whom the nations of Goyim crowned as king. Another matter: “It was in the days of Amrafel king of Shinar” – this refers to Babylon; “Aryokh king of Elasar” – this refers to Greece;40In the Vilna edition “Antiochus” was substituted for Greece for reasons of censorship. “Kedorlaomer king of Eilam” – this refers to Media; “and Tidal king of Goyim” – this refers to the kingdom of Edom,41The ancestors of the Romans. which recruits conscripts from all the nations of the world.42Rome is called Goyim because it recruits conscripts from many nations. Rabbi Elazar bar Avina said: If you see kingdoms clashing with one another, you should anticipate the coming of the Messiah. You may know that it is so, as in the days of Abraham, as a result of the kingdoms clashing with one another, redemption came to Abraham.
“They waged war with Bera king of Sodom, with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Adma, and Shemever king of Tzevoyim, and the king of Bela, which is Tzoar” (Genesis 14:2). “They waged war with Bera…” – Rabbi Meir used to expound names.43He would interpret the meaning of people’s names to uncover something about their inner nature. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa would [also] expound names. “Bera” – as he was a wicked son [ben ra]; “Birsha” – as he was an evil son [ben rasha]; “Shinav” – as he aspired [shoev] to wealth; “Shemever” – as he would fly off44Sam ever – he would spread his wings to fly, i.e., he would travel far and wide in search of money.  to bring wealth; “and the king of Bela, which is Tzoar” – as its residents were swallowed up [nitbale’u]. “All these joined forces at the valley of Sidim, which is the Dead Sea” (Genesis 14:3). “All these joined forces at the valley of Sidim” – it was called three names: The valley of Sidim, the valley of Shaveh,45Genesis 14:17. and the valley of Sukkot.46Psalms 60:8. The valley of Sidim – because it grew [wood used for] chopping blocks [sedanim]. Alternatively, it is because it was divided into many fields [sadim] with plowed furrows. Alternatively, it is because it nourished its offspring47Those who resided in that land. like breasts [shadayim]. Valley of Shaveh – Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Ḥelbo in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: Because there all the idolaters came to a consensus [hushvu], chopped down cedars, constructed a large platform, seated him [Abraham] atop it, and lauded him, saying: “Hear us, my lord: you are a Godly ruler in our midst” (Genesis 23:6). They said to him: ‘You are king over us, you are ruler over us, you are a god over us.’ He said to them: ‘Let the world not lack its [true] King, and let the world not lack its [true] God.’48You should realize that God, not I, is the true king and God. Valley of Sukkot – because it was covered with trees.49Sukkot means something that provides shade. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: Grapevines, fig trees, pomegranate trees, walnut trees, almond trees, apple trees, and peach trees. “Which is the Dead Sea” – Rabbi Aivu said: There were [originally] only channels of rivers, that broke open and became a sea. That is what is written: “He breaks channels through the rocks” (Job 28:10).
“Twelve years they served Kedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled” (Genesis 14:4). “Twelve years they served [Kedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year50Literally, “and thirteen years.” they rebelled]” – Rabbi Yosei and Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel, Rabbi Yosei says: Twelve plus thirteen, this is twenty-five.51The rebellion lasted thirteen years, after twelve years of submission. He translates the words: “thirteen years.” Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel said: They were thirteen years altogether.52He translates the words: “in the thirteenth year.” How does Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel53This should be corrected to: Rabbi Yosei (Radal). explain: “And in the fourteenth year”?54According to Rabbi Yosei, twenty-five years had already passed; how can the following year be called “the fourteenth year", as it is in the subsequent verse? The explanation is that it was the fourteenth year after their rebellion began. “And in the fourteenth year, Kedorlaomer and the kings who were with him came and smote Refa’im in Ashterot Karnayim, the Zuzim in Ham, and the Eimim in Shaveh Kiryatayim” (Genesis 14:5). “And in the fourteenth year, Kedorlaomer…came” – the owner of the beam bears its thickest part,55Kedorlaomer was the main party among the five kings against whom the rebellion was directed (Genesis 14:4). “and the kings who were with him.” “And smote Refa’im in Ashterot Karnayim” – in Ashtera DeKarna.56This is what that place was called in the days of the Midrash. “The Zuzim in Ham [beham]” – the radiant ones [ziv] among them [bahem]. “And the Eimim in Shaveh Kiryatayim” – they were two cities [kiryan].57The ending ayim is generally used to refer to two items. “And the Ḥori in their mountain, Se'ir, until Eil Paran, which is adjacent to the wilderness” (Genesis 14:6). “And the Ḥori” – this is a metropolis.58The reading in manuscripts is: This is Eleutheropolis (Free City) – the Greek name for Bet Guvrin in southern Israel.  Why is it called it Ḥori? Because they selected it to be a free place in the generation of the Dispersion.59The residents were not scattered when the Dispersion occurred. “Until Eil Paran, which is adjacent to the wilderness” – until the plain of Paran.60Eil Paran means the Plain of Paran.
“They turned back, and came to Ein Mishpat, which is Kadesh, and smote the entire field of the Amalekites, and also the Emorites, who reside in Ḥatzetzon Tamar” (Genesis 14:4). “They turned back, and came to Ein [Mishpat]…” – Rabbi Aḥa said: They came only to fight against the eyeball [ein] of the world;61Abraham is called the eyeball of the world, because it was only for his sake that God took an interest in and looked out for the benefit of the people of the world. they sought to blind the eye [ayin] that overcame the attribute of justice [mishpat] in the world.62Abraham. That is astonishing. “Which is [hi] Kadesh” – Rav Aḥa said: Hu is written. It is he [hu] who sanctified [kiddesh] the name of the Holy One blessed be He in the fiery furnace. “And smote the entire field of the Amalekites” – Amalek had not yet been born, and yet you say: “And smote the entire field of the Amalekites”? The explanation is that [God] “tells the outcome from the outset” (Isaiah 46:10).63God knows the future, so He is able to name places after future events. “And also the Emorites, who reside in Ḥatzetzon Tamar” – in Ein Gedi, with the dates [temaraya].64The identification of Ḥatzetzon Tamar with Ein Gedi is stated explicitly in II Chronicles 20:2. “The king of Sodom, the king of Gomorrah, the king of Adma, the king of Tzevoyim, and the king of Bela, which is Tzoar, went out and they waged a war with them in the valley of Sidim” (Genesis 14:8). “With Kedorlaomer king of Eilam, and Tidal king of Goyim, and Amrafel king of Shinar, and Ariokh king of Elasar; four kings against the five” (Genesis 14:9). “The king of Sodom, the king of Gomorrah…went out…with Kedorlaomer king of Eilam…” – four kings waged war against five, and yet they overcame them. “The valley of Sidim was full of clay pits and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and they fell there, and they who remained fled to the mountain” (Genesis 14:10). “The valley of Sidim was full of clay pits” – many pits producing clay. “The kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and they fell there, 65“They fell there” means that they died in the pits. [and they who remained fled to the mountain]” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: “They fell there” – this refers to the multitudes; “and they who remained fled to the mountain” – this refers to the kings. Rabbi Neḥemya said: “They fell there” – this refers to the kings; “and they who remained fled to the mountain” – this refers to the multitudes. According to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda, it works out well, but according to the opinion of Rabbi Neḥemya, it is difficult.66In Genesis 14:17 we read that the king of Sodom survived.  Rabbi Azarya and Rabbi Yonatan ben Ḥagai said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: When Abraham descended into the fiery furnace and was saved, there were some idolaters who believed [the story of Abraham’s miraculous rescue], and there were some idolaters who did not believe. When the king of Sodom descended into the clay pit and was rescued, they began believing in [the rescue of] Abraham retroactively. “They took all the property of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their food, and they went” (Genesis 14:11). “They took all the property of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their food” – Rabbi Yehuda says: This refers to their tools of work.67“Their property” refers to their means of sustenance. Rabbi Neḥemya said: This refers to their dates.68Their main food staple. “They took Lot, son of Abram’s brother, and his property and they went, and he resided in Sodom” (Genesis 14:12). “They took Lot, [son of Abram’s brother]…” – this is what they did to Lot: They placed him in a cage and they took him with them.69This is derived from the fact that the words “they took” already appear in the previous verse. The repetition of these words here indicates that he was treated with special harshness. Why to such an extent?70What did Lot do to deserve such harsh punishment? “And he resided in Sodom” – in realization of what is stated: “One who walks with the wise will become wise, and one who consorts with fools will be broken” (Proverbs 13:20).
“The refugee came and told Abram the Hebrew, and he was dwelling in the plains of Mamre the Emorite, brother of Eshkol and brother of Aner, and they were allies of Abram” (Genesis 14:13). “The refugee came” – Reish Lakish in the name of bar Kappara: This is Og; he is the “refugee.” Why is he called Og? Because he came and found Abram sitting and engaging in the mitzva of baking [unleavened] loaves [ugot] [for Passover].71See Exodus 12:39. His intentions [in informing Abraham] were not to act for the sake of Heaven. Rather, he said: ‘This Abraham is a zealot. If I say to him now: Your nephew has been taken captive, he will go out to war and be killed, and I will take his wife Sarai.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘By your life, you will receive reward for your strides that you walked [to travel to Abraham], in that you will live long in the world.72He was ultimately killed by Moses, centuries later (Numbers 21:35). But because you thought to kill that righteous man, by your life, you will see thousands upon thousands and tens of thousands upon tens of thousands of his descendants, and the end of that man73You, Og. will be only to fall into their hand,’ as it is stated [by Moses]: “The Lord said to me: Do not fear him, as [I have delivered him]…into your hand” (Deuteronomy 3:2). “And told Abram the Hebrew [Ivri]” – Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Neḥemya, and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yehuda says: The entire world was on one side and he was on the other side [ever].74In an ideological sense. Rabbi Neḥemya said: Because he was among the descendants of Ever. The Rabbis say: It is because he is from the other side [ever] of the river,75Abraham came to the land of Israel from the other (eastern) side of the Euphrates. and he spoke the Hebrew [Ivri] language. “He was dwelling in elonei Mamre” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: [This means] in the plains of Mamre. Rabbi Neḥemya said: In the palace of Mamre. According to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda, it is a place whose name is Mamre. According to the opinion of Rabbi Neḥemya, it is a person whose name was Mamre. And why was he called Mamre? Rabbi Azarya in the name of Rabbi Yehuda in the name of Rabbi Simon: It is because he was brazen-faced regarding Abraham.76He was bold in his support of Abraham, as the Midrash goes on to relate. When the Holy One blessed be He told Abraham to circumcise himself, he went and consulted with his three friends.77Listed in Genesis 14:24. Aner said to him: ‘You are already one hundred years old and you are going to bring pain upon yourself?’ Eshkol said to him: ‘What, are you going to put an end to yourself in the midst of your enemies?’78People will say that you have castrated yourself. Mamre said to him: ‘[This is] your God who stood by you [during your ordeal] in the fiery furnace, and during [your war with] the kings, and during the famine, and in this matter that He has said to you, to circumcise yourself, you do not heed Him?’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You gave him counsel to circumcise himself; by your life, I will not appear to him in Aner’s palace, nor in Eshkol’s palace, but only in your palace.’ That is what is written: “The Lord appeared to him in the palace of Mamre” (Genesis 18:1).

=== 43 | 43 ===
 “Abram heard that his brother had been taken captive, and he marshaled his disciples, born in his house, three hundred and eighteen, and he gave chase until Dan” (Genesis 14:14). “Abram heard that his brother had been taken captive” – “He fears no evil tidings; his heart is steadfast, trusting in the Lord. His heart is secure. He will not fear, until he beholds the fall of his foes” (Psalms 112:7–8).1The Psalm begins: “Hallelujah. Fortunate is the man who fears the Lord.” “He fears no evil tidings” – this refers to Abraham.2Who had just heard the bad news about Lot. “For now I know that you are God-fearing” (Genesis 22:12).3This verse is cited to prove that Abraham is “the man who fears the Lord.” “His heart is steadfast, trusting in the Lord” – “You found his4Abraham’s. heart faithful before You” (Nehemiah 9:8). “His heart is secure. He will not fear” – as it is stated: “Do not fear, Abram” (Genesis 15:1). “Until he beholds the fall of his foes” – “he divided up against them at night” (Genesis 14:15).
“Abram heard that his brother had been taken captive” – that is what is written: “He seals his ears from hearing of bloodshed” (Isaiah 33:15).5The righteous will not accept the prospect of bloodshed, so they take action against that eventuality.  “He marshaled [vayarek] his disciples” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: Their faces turned pale [horiku] towards Abraham. They said: ‘Five kings could not overcome them, and [you think] we will be able to overcome them?’ Rabbi Neḥemya said: Abraham turned pale [horik] towards them. He said: ‘Shall I go and fall [in battle] in sanctification of the name of the Omnipresent?’ Abba bar Zavda said: He armed them with weapons, just as it says: “Unsheathe [harek] a spear to block my pursuers” (Psalms 35:3). Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: He showered them with jewels and gems, as it says: “Its pinions with shimmering [yerakrak] gold” (Psalms 68:14). Rabbi Levi said: He emptied [horikan] their ranks through the passage about the officers, as it says: “[Then the officers shall speak further to the people and say:] Who is the man who is fearful and faint hearted? Let him go and return to his house” (Deuteronomy 20:8).6The assembled force of three hundred and eighteen men was depleted due to this warning, until only Eliezer remained. “His disciples [ḥanikhav]” – they bore his name [ḥanikhato].Their name was Abram, like his name.7Upon their conversion, they took his name as their own, or they referred to themselves as “sons of Abram,” as all converts do. “Three hundred and eighteen” – Reish Lakish in the name of bar Kappara: It was Eliezer alone. The numerical value of Eliezer is three hundred and eighteen.  “And he gave chase until Dan” – that is the name of an idol.8See I Kings 12:28–29. It was preceded and followed by a blow.9It was always a place of misfortune, from beginning to end. It was preceded by a blow: “And he gave chase until Dan.”10He had to stop his pursuit when he reached Dan, due to its ill-fated status. And it is followed by a blow: “The snorting of his horses is heard from Dan” (Jeremiah 8:16).11The Babylonians, on their way to destroy Jerusalem, were referred to as approaching from Dan.
“He divided up against them at night, he and his servants, and he smote them and pursued them until Ḥova, which is north of Damascus” (Genesis 14:15). “He divided up against them at night”12This can also be translated: “The night was divided before them.” – Rabbi Binyamin bar Yefet in the name of Rabbi Yonatan: The night became divided on its own.13Abraham’s pursuit ended at midnight, when he vanquished his enemies. The Rabbis say: Its Maker divided it.14God intentionally arranged it that the battle should conclude at midnight. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Their father took action for Me at midnight, I, too, will take action for his descendants at midnight.’ When? In Egypt, as it is stated: “It was at midnight, and the Lord smote every firstborn …” (Exodus 12:29). Rabbi Tanḥuma said: There are those who express it in a different formulation: The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Their father went out at midnight; I will go out for his sons at midnight,’ as it is stated: “Moses said: So said the Lord: About midnight, I shall go out in the midst of Egypt” (Exodus 11:4). “And he smote them and pursued them” – is there a person who pursues the slain? Rabbi Pinḥas said: The pursuers of Abraham our patriarch were [as if] slain [from the start], as it is stated: “The one You have smitten, they have pursued” (Psalms 69:27).15Once God has decreed that someone is to be smitten, it is as if he is already dead. That is what is written: “Who awakens [he’ir] from the east, righteousness attending his footstep?” (Isaiah 41:2). Who is the one who roused the heart of the easterners16Kedorlaomer and his three allies in this battle came from the east. so they would come and fall into Abraham’s hand? “Righteousness [tzedek] attends his footstep” – [The righteous One,] He whose life is everlasting, who would illuminate17The Midrash interprets he’ir, written with ayin, as if it were written with alef, meaning illuminated. for him every place he would go. Rabbi Berekhya said: The star Jupiter [tzedek] would illuminate [the way] for him. Rabbi Reuven said: Righteousness itself called out18The word yikra’ehu, translated earlier as “attends,” literally means “calls out.” before him, saying: ‘If not for Abraham, there would be no one to implement me.’  That is what is written: “He subdued nations before him and subjugated kings; [He made his sword like dust, his bow as driven stubble]” (Isaiah 41:2) – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: Abraham would cast dust at them and it became swords, straw and it became arrows. Rabbi Neḥamya said: “He made [his sword] dust” is not stated,19If it had said: “He made [his sword] dust” the Hebrew could also be rendered “He made dust his sword,” as Rabbi Yehuda said. but rather, “[He made his sword] like dust” (Isaiah 41:2) – they20Abraham’s enemies. would cast swords on Abraham and they became dust, arrows, and they became straw.  That is what is written: “He pursued them and passed peacefully; [he did not tread on the road]” (Isaiah 41:3). Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Zimra: Each of the strides of Abraham our forefather was three miles.21This is what is meant by “he did not tread on the road.” His pursuit of his enemies was achieved by miraculous means, not by traveling on the road in the normal manner. Rabbi Yudan bar Rabbi Simon said: One mil, as it is stated: “he did not tread on the road” (Isaiah 41:3). Rabbi Neḥemya said in the name of Rabbi Abahu: Their feet did not become soiled,22As would normally occur when walking long distances on a road. but rather, like one who walks from his house to the [nearby] synagogue.
“He returned all the goods, and also his brother Lot and his property he returned, and also the women and the people” (Genesis 14:16). “He returned all the goods, and also [his brother] Lot…” – Rabbi Yudan said: He returned the men and the women, but did not return the children. [Rather,] they went ahead and converted, and fenced themselves off from the sexual immorality of their fathers. That is what is written: “I will bring in the wicked of the nations” (Ezekiel 7:24)23God will bring them in, in the sense that He will take them under His care and see to it that they abandon their evil ways. – who are “the wicked of the nations”? Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Simon: These are the people of Sodom, as it is stated: “The men of Sodom [were extremely wicked]” (Genesis 13:13).
“The king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return from smiting Kedorlaomer and the kings who were with him, to the valley of Shaveh, which is the valley of the king” (Genesis 14:17). “The king of Sodom went out to meet him…” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: He began to ‘wag his tail’ at him.24He sought to endear himself to Abraham.  He said to him: ‘Just as you descended into the fiery furnace and were rescued, I, too, descended into the clay pits and was rescued.’ “To the valley of Shaveh” – Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Ḥanina in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: It is [called this] because there all the idolaters came to a consensus [hushvu], chopped down cedars, constructed a large platform, seated him [Abraham] atop it, and lauded him, saying to him: “Hear us, my lord, [you are a Godly ruler in our midst]…” (Genesis 23:6). They said to him: ‘You are king over us, you are ruler over us, you are god over us.’ He said to them: ‘Let the world not lack its [true] King, and let the world not lack its [true] God.’
“Malkitzedek king of Salem took out bread and wine, and he was a priest of God, the Most High” (Genesis 14:18). “Malkitzedek king of Salem…” – that is what is written: “Daughter of Tzor, the wealthiest of the people will seek your favor with gifts” (Psalms 45:13).25The “daughter of Tzor” refers to Abraham, who distressed (hetzer) the four kings, and who was distressed by them. “The wealthiest of the people,” referring to Malkitzedek king of Salem, “will seek your favor with gifts,” as he did in this verse (Yalkut Shimoni).  “Malkitzedek king of Salem” – this place26Salem is short for Jerusalem (see Psalms 76:3). renders its inhabitants righteous, [and this is why he was called] Malkitzedek,27Malkitzedek means king of righteousness [tzedek]. [and we find as well] “Adoni Tzedek [king of Jerusalem]” (Joshua 10:1).28Adoni Tzedek means “lord of righteousness.” Jerusalem itself is called righteousness [tzedek], as it is stated: “Justice [tzedek] abided in it” (Isaiah 1:21).29See also Isaiah 1:26. “King of Salem [Shalem]” – Rabbi Yitzḥak the Babylonian says: He was born circumcised.30Melekh shalem, translated earlier “king of Salem,” can also mean “the perfect king,” meaning that he was born in a perfected state, having had no need for circumcision. “[He] took out bread and wine, and he was a priest of God, the Most High” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman and the Rabbis, Rabbi Shmuel said: He revealed to him the laws of the High Priesthood.31Malkitzedek brought bread and wine in order to show Abraham the priestly rites involving these items. “Bread” – this alludes to the showbread;32Described in Leviticus 24:5–9. “and wine” – this alludes to the libations. The Rabbis say: He revealed Torah [precepts] to him, as it is stated: “Come, partake of my bread, and drink of the wine that I have mixed” (Proverbs 9:5).33The speaker in this verse is divine wisdom, the Torah. It refers to its teachings metaphorically as bread and wine. “And he was a priest of God, the Most High” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana and Rabbi Levi, Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Any time wine is written in the Torah it connotes a [negative] impact,34As when Noah (Genesis 9:21) and Lot (Genesis 19:32–35) became drunk, both instances leading to humiliating consequences. except for this one. Rabbi Levi said: We cannot except this one either, as it was immediately after this that He decreed upon him: “They35Abraham’s descendants. will be enslaved to them and they will oppress them” (Genesis 15:13).
“He blessed him, and he said: Blessed is Abram to God, the Most High, Maker of heavens and earth” (Genesis 14:19). “He blessed him, and he said: Blessed is Abram to God, the Most High, Acquirer of heavens and earth” – from whom did He acquire them? Rabbi Abba in the name of Rav Kahana and Rabbi Yitzḥak, Rabbi Abba said: It is like a person who says: The eyes of so-and-so are fair, his hair is fair.36Koneh does not refer to acquisition, but to one’s fixing and perfecting something that already belongs to him. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: He [Abraham] would receive passersby into his house. After they had eaten and drunk, he would say to them: ‘Say a blessing.’ They would say to him: ‘What shall we say?’ He would say to them: ‘Say: Blessed is God, the Most High, of whose food we have eaten.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘My name had not been known by My creations, and you caused My creations to recognize me. I consider it for you as though you were My partner in creation of the world.’ That is what is written; “Maker of heavens and earth.”37According to Rabbi Yitzḥak, the words “Acquirer of heaven and earth” refer to Abraham, not God. Abraham acquired this status by making God’s presence known in the world.
“And blessed is God, the Most High, who delivered your enemies into your hand. He gave him a tithe of everything” (Genesis 14:20). “And blessed is God, the Most High, who delivered [migen] your enemies into your hand” – Rabbi Huna said: He turned the plot [mangenin] against you upon your enemies. Rabbi Yudan said: How many stratagems [mangenaot] did I perform in order to deliver them into your hand. They38The two sets of kings. had been fond of one another; this one would send letters to that one, and that one would send gifts to this one, but I incited discord between this one and that one so they would come and fall into your hand.  “He gave him a tithe of everything [mikol]” – Rabbi Yehuda bar Rav Simon said: On the basis of that tribute, three of the pillars of the world, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, benefitted. Regarding Abraham it is written: “The Lord had blessed Avraham with everything [bakol]” (Genesis 24:1), due to the merit of: “He gave him a tithe of everything [mikol].” Regarding Isaac it is written: “And I partook of all [mikol]” (Genesis 27:33), due to the merit of: “He gave him a tithe of everything [mikol].” Regarding Jacob it is written: “For God has graced me and because I have everything [kol]” (Genesis 33:11), due to the merit of: “He gave him a tithe of everything [mikol].” From where did Israel merit the Priestly Benediction?39Numbers 6:23–26. Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Neḥemya, and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yehuda said: From Abraham: “So [ko] shall your descendants be” (Genesis 15:5) – “so [ko] shall you bless the children of Israel” (Numbers 6:23). Rabbi Neḥemya said: From Isaac, as it is stated: “I and the lad will go to there [ko]” (Genesis 22:5). That is why the Omnipresent said: “So [ko] you shall bless the children of Israel.” The Rabbis said: From Jacob, as it is stated: “So [ko] you shall say to the house of Jacob” (Exodus 19:3). Corresponding to it is: “So [ko] shall you bless the children of Israel.” Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina, Rabbi Eliezer said: [God said:] ‘When will I increase your descendants like the stars?40This section is referring to the verse: “He took him outside, and said: Look now to the heavens, and count the stars, if you could count them, and He said to him: So [ko] will your offspring be” (Genesis 15:5). When I reveal Myself to them through the word ko’ – “So [ko] you shall say to the house of Jacob” (Exodus 19:3). Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: When I reveal Myself to their leader41Moses. through the word ko: “So [ko] said the Lord: My firstborn son is Israel” (Exodus 4:22).
“The king of Sodom said to Abram: Give me the people, and take the property for yourself” (Genesis 14:21). “Abram said to the king of Sodom: I have raised my hand to the Lord, God Most High, master of heaven and earth” (Genesis 14:22). “The king of Sodom said to Abram: Give me the people…Abram said to the king of Sodom: I have raised [harimoti] my hand…” – Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Neḥemya, and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yehuda said: He rendered it as teruma,42The portion separated from produce and given to the priest. Abraham vowed that he would not take any of the spoils, just as a non-priest may not take teruma for himself. just as it says: “You shall separate [vaharemotem] from it teruma for the Lord” (Numbers 18:26). Rabbi Neḥemya said: He subjected it to an oath,43He took an oath that he would derive no benefit from the spoils. just as it says: “He raised [vayarem] his right and his left to the heavens, and he took an oath by the One whose life is everlasting” (Daniel 12:7). The Rabbis say: He rendered it as a song of praise, just as it says: “This is my God and I will glorify Him; my father’s God and I will exalt Him [vaaromemenhu]” (Exodus 15:2).44As part of his song of praise to the Lord for his victory over the kings, he forswore any benefit from the property. Rabbi Berekhya, Rabbi Ḥelbo, and Rabbi Ami said in the name of Rabbi Elazar: Moses said: ‘With the expression that my forefather recited a song of praise: “Harimoti my hand to the Lord,” with that same expression, I will recite a song of praise: “My father’s God and I will exalt Him [vaaromemenhu].”’ “Neither a thread nor a shoelace, I will not take of anything that is yours, that you will not say: I made Abram wealthy” (Genesis 14:23). “Neither a thread” – Rabbi Abba bar Mamal said: The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘[Since] you said: “Neither a thread,” by your life, I will give your descendants the mitzva of ritual fringes, just as it says: “They shall place on the fringe of the corner a petil of sky blue wool” (Numbers 15:38), and we translate it in Aramaic: “A thread of sky blue wool. “Nor a shoelace” – by your life, I will give your descendants the mitzva of the levirate wife, just as it says: “She shall remove his shoe [naalo] from his foot”’ (Deuteronomy 25:9).  Alternatively, “neither a thread” – this alludes to the Tabernacle,45The building of the Tabernacle, which enabled the Divine Presence to dwell in Israel, was in the merit of Abraham’s actions here. which was adorned with sky blue and purple wool threads. “Nor a shoelace” – this alludes to the taḥash hides.46This was a kind of hide that served as the uppermost covering of the Tabernacle, and is also referred to in Ezekiel 16:10 as the material used to make shoes.  Alternatively, “neither a thread [ḥut]” – this alludes to the sacrifices, like what we learned: A red line [ḥut] circumscribed it47The altar. in the middle, to separate between the upper blood and the lower blood.48There were offerings whose blood was sprinkled on the upper part of the altar, and others whose blood was sprinkled on the lower part. “Nor a shoelace” – this alludes to the footsteps of [those traveling to] the pilgrimage festivals, just as it says: “How fair are your steps in shoes” (Song of Songs 7:2). “Nothing for me, only what the young men have eaten; and the portion of the men who went with me, Aner, Eshkol, and Mamre, they will take their portion” (Genesis 14:24). “Nothing for me, only what the young men have eaten” – that is what is written: “Every evil and wicked man among the men who had gone with David spoke up and said: Because they49Those who stayed behind in the camp to guard everyone’s possessions. did not go with me, we will not give them from the spoils50The plundered livestock. that we recovered; rather each man [of us will take] for his wife and his children, who will lead the animals off and go. But David said: Do not do so, my brethren, with what the Lord has granted us. He protected us, and He delivered the troop that came against us into our hand. Who would heed you in this matter? For like the share of the one who descends into battle, so is the share of the one who remains with the baggage; they shall share alike. It was from that day forward [vamala], he rendered it a statute and an ordinance for Israel to this day” (I Samuel 30:22–25). Rabbi Yudan said: Vahala is not written here, but, rather vamala.51Vahala is the standard term for onward. Vamala also has the connotation of beforehand. From whom did he learn? From Abraham his forefather, who said: “Nothing for me, only what the young men have eaten; and the portion of the men….”

=== 44 | 44 ===
“After these matters, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision, saying: Fear not, Abram, I am a shield for you; your reward is very great” (Genesis 15:1). “After these matters, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision, saying…” “The Almighty’s way is faultless; the word of the Lord is refined [tzerufa]. He is a shield for all who take refuge in Him” (Psalms 18:31) – if His ways are faultless, all the more so that He Himself is. Rav said: The mitzvot were given only to refine [letzaref] people through them. After all, why should the Holy One blessed be He care whether one slaughters an animal from the throat or he slaughters it from the nape? Thus we learn that the mitzvot were given only to refine the creations with them. Another interpretation, “the Almighty’s way is faultless” – this refers to Abraham,1The verse is interpreted to mean: The Almighty’s way is with the faultless, referring to Abraham. as it is stated: “You found his heart faithful before You” (Nehemiah 9:8). “The word of the Lord is refined” – as the Holy One blessed be He refined him in the fiery furnace.2The Hebrew tzaref, translated earlier as “refined,” literally refers to smelting in a furnace. “He is a shield for all who take refuge in Him” – “fear not, Abram, I am a shield for you.”
Another matter, “after [these] matters…” – it is written: “A wise man fears and turns from evil, but the fool becomes enraged and overconfident” (Proverbs 14:16). “A wise man fears” – “fear not, Abram.”3Since God told him not to fear, the implication is that he had been afraid. [And God said to him,] “Do not be wise in your own eyes; fear the Lord and turn away from evil” (Proverbs 3:7). “Do not be wise in your own eyes” – with what you see with your eyes, thinking: ‘Perhaps I will produce offspring, perhaps I will not produce offspring.’ [Rather,] “fear the Lord” – “fear not, Abram.” Rabbi Avin in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina began: “The wicked man performs acts of falsehood…” (Proverbs 11:18). “The wicked performs acts of falsehood” – this is Nimrod, whose actions were based on falsehood. “And he who sows righteousness [has a true reward]” (Proverbs 11:18) – this refers to Abraham, as it is stated [concerning Abraham]: “[For I have known him, because he will command his children…] and they will observe the way of the Lord, to perform righteousness and justice” (Genesis 18:19). “Has a true reward” (Proverbs 11:18) – “fear not, Abram…[your reward is very great].”
Another interpretation, “fear not Abram” – that is what is written: “But it is you, Israel, My servant, Jacob, whom I have chosen, descendants of Abraham who loved me, whom I have taken from the ends of the earth” (Isaiah 41:8–9) – from Mesopotamia and its environs. “And from its noblemen I called you” (Isaiah 41:9) – from its prominent leaders. “I called you” – I designated you. “I chose you and did not reject you” (Isaiah 41:9). “I chose you” – when you were Abram; “and did not reject you” – when you became Abraham. “Do not fear, as I am with you; do not waver, as I am your God” (Isaiah 41:10) – Rabbi Hoshaya said: When Isaac said to Jacob: “Please approach so I may feel you, my son” (Genesis 27:21), his water spilled onto his knees4Out of fright. and his heart became soft as wax. The Holy One blessed be He appointed two angels for him, one to his right and one to his left, and they grasped him by his elbow so he would not fall. That is what is written: “Do not waver [tishta], as I am your God” – do not be like wax [tishva]. “I strengthened you, even helped you…behold, [all who provoke you] will be ashamed and humiliated” (Isaiah 41:10–11) – those who are hostile to you. “They will be like nothing, and the people who quarrel with you will perish” (Isaiah 41:11) – those who incite quarrels with you. “You will seek them…but not find them” (Isaiah 41:12) – those who contend with you. “For I am the Lord your God…who says to you: Fear not” (Isaiah 41:13), as it is stated: “Fear not, Abram.”
“I am a shield for you” – Rabbi Levi said two [interpretations], the Rabbis said one. Rabbi Levi said: Because our forefather Abraham was fearful, and saying: ‘Perhaps those people whom I killed, there was among them one righteous man, or one God-fearing man.’5And therefore I have incurred God’s wrath and will be held accountable. This is analogous to a person who was passing by the king’s orchard. He saw a bundle of thorns and he went down and took it away. The king peered out and saw him. He began hiding from him. He [the king] said to him: ‘Why are you hiding from me? How many laborers would I have needed to gather it up. Now that you have gathered them up, come and collect your reward.’ So, the Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham: ‘Those people whom you killed were like cut thorns.’ That is what is written: “Peoples will be like burnings of lime, cut thorns ignited with fire” (Isaiah 33:12). Rabbi Levi said another interpretation: Because our forefather Abraham was fearful, and saying: ‘Perhaps those kings whom I killed, their sons will assemble multitudes and they will come and wage war against me,’6To avenge their fathers’ death. the Holy One blessed be He said to him: “Fear not, Abram, I am a shield for you” – just as a shield, even if all the swords [in the world] were to come up against it, it would withstand them, so you, even if all the idolaters were to gather against you, I will fight against them. The Rabbis said one: Because our forefather Abraham was fearful, and saying: ‘I went down into the fiery furnace and was saved, I went down to do battle with the kings and was saved, perhaps my reward has already been received in this world, and I have nothing [left] for the future.’ The Holy One blessed be He said: “Fear not, Abram, I am a shield [magen] for you” – everything that I have done for you in this world, I did for you without cost,7In Aramaic, magan means gratis. but your reward is allocated for you in the future – “your reward is very great,” just as it says: “How great is the goodness You have in store for those who fear You” (Psalms 31:20).
Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Huna, both of them in the name of Rabbi Yosei ben Zimra: Rabbi Yudan said: Wherever aḥarei is stated, it refers to immediate events; aḥar refers to distant events.8The Hebrew uses both aḥar and aḥarei [“after”] in the common phrase “after these matters.” The Midrash explains that difference between them is that one indicates that what follows took place immediately after the events recorded previously, while the other indicates that it took place after some time. Rav Huna said: Wherever aḥar is stated, it is immediate; aḥarei, distant. “After these matters”9Devarim, translated here as “matters,” can also mean words. – after thoughts of words that took place there. Who had these thoughts? Abraham had the thoughts. He said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘Master of the universe, You made a covenant with Noah that you would not eliminate his descendants. I arose and amassed mitzvot and good deeds more that he did, and my covenant overrode his covenant.10And thus I was able to slay many of his descendants. Perhaps someone else will arise [one day] and amass mitzvot and good deeds more than I did, and his covenant will override my covenant.’11And he will be able to harm me. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘From Noah, I did not bring forth righteous protectors [from his descendants], but from You I will produce righteous protectors. Moreover, when your descendants will come to commit transgressions and bad deeds, I will see one righteous man among them, I will consider him to be equal to all of them combined, as he is capable of saying to the attribute of justice: Enough. I will take him away12He will die. and serve as atonement for them.’
“The word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision, saying” – it13Prophecy. is referred to by ten expressions: a prophecy, a vision,14See Psalms 89:20. preaching,15See Ezekiel 21:2. speaking,16See II Samuel 23:2. saying,17See Exodus 4:22. a command,18See Genesis 2:16. a burden,19See Malachi 1:1. a parable,20See Isaiah 14:4. a metaphor,21See Proverbs 1:6. an enigma.22See Numbers 12:8. Which is the harshest of them all? Rabbi Eliezer said: Vision, as it is stated: “A harsh vision was told to me” (Isaiah 21:2). Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Speaking, as it is stated: “The man, lord of the land, spoke harshly with us” (Genesis 42:30). The Rabbis said: Burden, as is its plain sense: “Like an onerous burden, they are too heavy for me” (Psalms 38:5). Abram’s potency [of prophecy] was great, as God spoke to him with both speaking [dibur] and vision, as it is stated: “The word [devar] of the Lord came to Abram in a vision.”
“Fear not, Abram” – whom did he fear? Rabbi Berekhya said: He feared Shem. That is what is written: “The islands saw and feared, the ends of the earth trembled…” (Isaiah 41:5) – just as islands are conspicuous in the sea, so Abraham and Shem were conspicuous in the world. “And feared” – each one feared the other. This one [Abraham] feared the other, saying: Perhaps Shem has resentment in his heart against me because I killed his descendants.23Kedorlaomer was king of Eilam (Genesis 14:1), and Eilam was Shem’s son (Genesis 10:22). And that one [Shem] feared the other, saying: Perhaps Abraham has resentment in his heart against me because I produced wicked offspring. “The ends of the earth” – this one was situated at one end of the earth, and that one was situated at the other end of the earth. “They approached and came” (Isaiah 41:5) – each one approached the other. “Each man would help the other” (Isaiah 41:6) – this one [Shem] helped the other one with blessings, and that one [Abraham] helped the other one with gifts. This one helped the other one with blessings – “He blessed him, and he said: Blessed is Abram to God, the Most High…” (Genesis 14:19).24These words were spoken by Malkitzedek, who is identified with Shem.  And that one helped the other one with gifts: “He gave him a tithe from everything” (Genesis 14:20). “The carpenter encouraged [the smith]” (Isaiah 41:7) – this refers to Shem, who built the ark. “The smith” – this refers to Abraham, whom the Holy One blessed be He refined in the fiery furnace. “And one who smooths with a hammer, one who strikes on the anvil [paam]” (Isaiah 41:7) – as he [Abraham] would direct his hammer and strike all the people of the world onto a single path25Paam can also mean “a step,” and “once.” Abraham’s “hammer” was his ability to persuade others to recognize and follow God, and with this he led them on a path towards closeness with God. to the Omnipresent. “Saying of the glue: It is good” (Isaiah 41:7) – these are the nations of the world, who say: ‘It is preferable to adhere to the God of Abram, and we will not adhere to Nimrod’s idolatry.’ “He strengthened it with nails” (Isaiah 41:7) – Abraham strengthened Shem in mitzvot and good deeds. And, [as a result] “It26Or “he.” shall not topple” (Isaiah 41:7) – referring to Abraham.
“Abram said: My Lord God, what will You give me, being that I go childless, and the one who has charge of my house is Damascus Eliezer?” (Genesis 15:2). “Abram said: My Lord God, what will You give me…?” – Rabbi Yonatan said: There are three people regarding whom it is stated: Make a request. These are Solomon, Aḥaz, and the messianic king. Solomon, as it is written: “In Givon, the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream at night, and God said: Request what I shall give you” (I Kings 3:5). Aḥaz, as it is written: “Request a sign for yourself from the Lord” (Isaiah 7:11). The messianic king, of whom it is written: “Request of Me, and I will render nations your inheritance” (Psalms 2:8). Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Aḥa say in the name of Rabbi Shmuel: We cite an additional two cases from aggada, Abraham and Jacob. Abraham, of whom it is written: “My Lord God, what will You give me?” He would not have said: “What will You give me…?” unless He had first said to him: ‘Make a request.’ Jacob, as it is written: “Everything that You will give me I will tithe to You” (Genesis 28:22). He would not have said this unless He had first said to him: ‘Make a request.’
Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Aivu in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: There were two people who said the same thing, Abraham and David. Abraham, of whom it is written: “My Lord God, what will You give me?” He said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, if I am destined to produce offspring and [they will ultimately] anger you, it is preferable for me that “I go childless.”’27The verse is interpreted to mean: Abram said: What will You give me? [If it is unworthy descendants,] I would rather go childless. David said: “Search me, God, and know my heart; [try me and know my thoughts [sarapai]]” (Psalms 139:23) – know those who emerge from me.28Sarapai can also mean branches that emerge from a tree. “And see, if there is any grievous way in me, lead me on the path to eternity” (Psalms 139:24). He said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, if I am destined to produce offspring who will aggrieve You, it is preferable for me that You lead me on the path to eternity.’29It is preferable that You take my life.  “And the one who has charge of my house” – Rabbi Elazar says: “The one who has charge [meshek] of my house” – this is Lot, whose soul longs [shokeket] to inherit me. “Is Damascus Eliezer” – as on his account I pursued the kings to Damascus, and the Almighty helped me [azarani hael].30According to this interpretation, Eliezer is not a name, but means “God was my assistance” (see Exodus 18:4). Reish Lakish said in the name of bar Kappara: “the one who has charge of my house” – the one who lives in my house is [Damascus] Eliezer, as it was through his help that I pursued the kings to Damascus. And Eliezer was his name. So it is stated: “He marshaled his disciples, born in his house, three hundred and eighteen” – the numerical value of Eliezer being three hundred and eighteen.
“Abram said: Behold, to me You have not given offspring, and a member of my household is my heir” (Genesis 15:3). “Abram said: Behold, to me You have not given offspring” – Rav Shmuel bar Rav Yitzḥak said: [Abram said to God:] My astrological constellation is pressuring me and saying to me: Abram, you will not beget offspring. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Indeed, it is as you say; Abram will not beget offspring, but Abraham will beget offspring. “Sarai your wife, you shall not call her name Sarai” (Genesis 17:15) – Sarai will not bear children, but Sarah will bear children.’
“Behold, the word of the Lord came to him, saying: This man will not inherit you; rather, one who shall emerge from your loins, he will inherit you” (Genesis 15:4). “Behold, the word of the Lord came to him, saying: This man will not inherit you” – Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Elazar in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Zimra: “The Lord to him,” “the word of the Lord came to him,” “behold, the word of the Lord came to him” – one angel after another, one statement after another.31There are many seemingly extraneous words here; it could have been, simply: God said. [God said:] ‘I and three angels will reveal ourselves to you, and [we all] say to you: The accursed [luta] Lot will not inherit Abram.’32Because you will have your own son. The revelation of the three angels refers to Genesis 18:2. Rabbi Huna and Rabbi Elazar in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Zimra: It is written: “Behold, the word of the Lord came to him” – behold the Lord came, and His speech was with Him.33The wording should not be understood to imply the revelation of three angels.
“He took him outside, and said: Look now to the heavens, and count the stars, if you can count them, and He said to him: So will your offspring be” (Genesis 15:5). “He took him outside” – Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin in the name of Rabbi Levi: Did He take him outside the world, that the verse should say: “He took him outside [haḥutza]”? Rather, he showed him the streets of the heavens,34The arrangements of the stars into patterns. Ḥutzot can also mean streets. just as it says: “While He had not yet made earth and the outer ranges [ḥutzot]” (Proverbs 8:26).35The heavens are called here “outer ranges.” Rabbi Yehuda said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: He took him up above the dome of the heavens. That is what He said to him: “Look [habet] now to the heavens” – [the expression] habata refers only to looking from above to below. The Rabbis say: [God told him:] ‘You are a prophet, not an astrologer,’36God "took him outside” of his reliance on astrological predictions. Astrology yields only an imprecise glimpse into the future. God told him that he, as a prophet, had much clearer insight than an astrologer. as it is stated: “Now, restore the man's wife, as he is a prophet” (Genesis 20:7). In the days of Jeremiah, Israel sought to adopt this mindset,37Reliance on astrology. but the Holy One blessed be He did not allow them to do so. That is what is written: “So said the Lord: Do not learn the way of the nations, and from the signs of the heavens do not fear…” (Jeremiah 10:2) – your forefather Abraham sought to adopt that mindset, but I did not allow him to do so. Rabbi Levi said: [The saying goes:] While your sandal is on your foot, trample the thorns. Anyone who is situated below them [the stars] fears them, but you, who are situated above them, trample them.38Trampling the stars is a metaphor for overcoming what the stars have predicted.  Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Rabbi Elazar: There are three things that can annul evil decrees,39Misfortunes that have been decreed by God as punishment for wrongdoing. and they are: Prayer, charity, and repentance. And the three of them are stated in one verse. That is what is written: “My people upon whom My name is called humble themselves, and pray” (II Chronicles 7:14) – this is prayer; “and seek My presence” (II Chronicles 7:14) – this is charity, as you say: “I shall encounter Your presence through charity” (Psalms 17:15); “and repent from their evil ways” (II Chronicles 7:14) – this is repentance. And following these, “I will forgive their sin and will heal their land” (II Chronicles 7:14). Rabbi Huna bar Rav Yosef said: Change of name and a good deed also [can annul evil decrees.] Change of name, we learn from Abraham: “Your name will no longer be called Abram” (Genesis 17:5). A good deed, we learn from the people of Nineveh, as it is stated: “God saw their actions, that they turned away [from their evil ways, and God relented of the disaster that he had said]…” (Jonah 3:10). Some say: Change of location, as well, as it is stated: “The Lord said to Abram: Go you [from your land]” (Genesis 12:1).40God told Abram to move from his native land, and only then would He “make you a great nation.” Rabbi Muna said: A fast as well, as it is stated: “May the Lord answer you on a day of trouble” (Psalms 20:2).41Meaning, a fast day. Rava bar Maḥasya and Rabbi Ḥama ben Guryon said in the name of Rav: A fast is as effective against a [bad] dream42That the bad dream should not materialize. as fire is against chaff. Rav Yosef said: [Only if the fast is done] on that same day, even if it is on Shabbat.
“He said to him: I am the Lord who took you out of Ur of the Chaldeans, to give you this land to inherit it” (Genesis 15:7). “He said to him: I am the Lord who took you out of Ur of the Chaldeans…” – Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov and the Rabbis, Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov said: Mikhael descended and rescued him from the fiery furnace.43Ur means furnace. The Rabbis said: The Holy One blessed be He Himself rescued him. That is what is written: “I am the Lord who took you out of the furnace of the Chaldeans.” When did Mikhael descend [to save someone from a fiery furnace]? It was with Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya.44See Daniel 3:25.
“He said: My Lord God, how can I know that I will inherit it?” (Genesis 15:8). “He said: My Lord God, how can I know” – Rabbi Ḥiyya ben Rabbi Ḥanina said: [Abraham said this] not like someone who is complaining, but rather, he said to Him: ‘By what merit [will I inherit it]?’ He said to him: ‘By means of the atonements that I will provide for your descendants.’ “He said to him: Take for Me three calves, and three goats, and three rams, and a dove, and a young pigeon” (Genesis 15:9). “He said to him: Take for Me three calves” – He showed him three types [of atonement] involving bulls, three types involving goats, and three types involving rams: Three types involving bulls: the bull of Yom Kippur;45See Leviticus 16:3. the bull that is brought for the transgression of any of the mitzvot;46See Leviticus 4:13–21. and the beheaded calf.47See Deuteronomy 21:1–8. Three types involving goats: the goats of the festivals;48See Numbers 28:22–29:38. the goats of the New Moon;49See Numbers 28:15. and the goat offered by the individual.50See Numbers 15:27. Three types involving rams: the definite guilt offering;51See Leviticus 5:15, 5:20–25, 19:20–21. the provisional guilt offering;52See Leviticus 5:17–18. and the lamb offered by the individual.53See Leviticus 4:32. “And a dove, and a young pigeon.”54See Leviticus 5:7. “He took all these for Him. He divided them in the middle, and placed each half opposite the other; but the birds he did not divide” (Genesis 15:10). “He took all these for him” – Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai and the Rabbis, Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai says: He showed him all the [other] types of atonement, but the tenth of an ephah [meal offering]55See Leviticus 5:11. He did not show him. The Rabbis say: He showed him the tenth of an ephah as well. It is stated here: “He took all these [eleh] for Him” and it is stated elsewhere: “You shall bring the meal offering that is prepared of these [eleh] to the Lord” (Leviticus 2:8).56The word eleh, found in both verses, forms the basis of a verbal analogy, suggesting that the meal offering is alluded to here as well.  “But the birds he did not divide” – the Holy One blessed be He showed him that [the head of] the bird burnt-offering is to be severed57The bird is slaughtered so that the neck is cut all the way through, the head being almost severed.  but [the head of] the bird sin-offering is not to be severed.58The slaughter of this bird sacrifice does not pierce through the entire neck (see Leviticus 5:8). Since the birds brought by Abraham alluded to the atonement of a bird sin-offering, he did not cut it in two.
Another interpretation, “Take for Me three calves,” this alludes to Babylon, which produced three kings – Nebuchadnezzar, Evil Merodakh, and Belshatzar. “And three goats,” this alludes to Media, which produced three kings – Cyrus, Darius, and Aḥashverosh. “And three rams” – this alludes to Greece.59Babylon, Media and Greece were the first three of the Four Kingdoms that would subjugate Israel (see Daniel chapters 2 and 7). Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Yoḥanan, Rabbi Elazar said: [The number three] indicates that the Greeks conquered all of the directions [of the world], but they did not conquer the eastern direction. Rabbi Yoḥanan said to him: But is it not written: “I saw the ram goring to the west, and to the north, and to the south, and no beasts could withstand it, and there was no savior from its hand; it did as it willed, and became great”? (Daniel 8:4).60“No beasts could withstand it, and there was no savior from its hand” implies that it conquered the entire world. This verse is [actually] the basis of the opinion of Rabbi Elazar, as the verse [mentions three directions, but] did not say “east.” “And a dove and a young pigeon [gozal]” – this alludes to the kingdom of Edom.61Ancestor of the Romans, the fourth kingdom. It is a dove,62It seeks to portray itself as a peace-loving dove. but it is a robber [gazlan].63It seizes all the riches of its subjects. Another interpretation, “He took all these for Him. [He divided them in the middle, and placed each half opposite the other]” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: [With this command,] He showed him the princes of the idolatrous nations. Rabbi Neḥemya said: He showed him the princes of Israel. According to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda, it was the thrones of these opposite the thrones of others.64One prince opposing the other, vying for control of the people. According to the opinion of Rabbi Neḥemya, it was there that the Great Sanhedrin of Israel convened and decreed laws for Israel.65Literally, they cut (and shape) the laws for Israel (see Matnot Kehuna), just as Abraham cut the animals. “But the birds he did not divide” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said in the name of Rabbi Levi: The Holy One blessed be He [thereby] showed him: Anyone who seeks to confront the wave, the wave will sweep him away. But anyone who does not seek to confront the wave, the wave will not sweep him away.66One who yields when confronted by a more powerful force will survive, just as the birds, who are the most vulnerable of creatures, were not cut up by Abraham. 
“Birds of prey descended upon the carcasses, and Abram drove them away” (Genesis 15:11). “Birds of prey descended upon the carcasses [and Abram drove them away]” – Rabbi Asi said: Abraham took a stick and was striking them, but they would not yield to his blows. Nevertheless, “Abram drove them away [vayashev]” – by means of repentance [teshuva].67Although Israel will be set upon by its enemies, ultimately, it will be redeemed through repentance, not through physical force. Rabbi Azarya said: [God said:] When your descendants will become like carcasses without sinews and bones,68Through all their persecutions. your merit will stand them in good stead.69And bring about salvation for them in the end.
“It was as the sun was setting, and a slumber fell upon Abram, and, behold, dread, a great darkness, fell upon him” (Genesis 15:12). “It was as the sun was setting, [and a slumber fell]” – Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: The beginning of downfall is sleep,70This is alluded to by the words “slumber fell.” as when one sleeps one does not toil in Torah study, when one sleeps one does not do any work. Rav said: There are three kinds of slumber – the slumber of sleep, the slumber of prophecy, and the slumber of a trance. The slumber of sleep – “The Lord God cast a slumber upon the man, and he slept” (Genesis 2:21). The slumber of prophecy – “It was as the sun was setting, and a slumber fell upon Abram” (Genesis 15:12). The slumber of a trance – “No one saw, and no one knew, and no one awoke, as they were all asleep because a deep slumber from the Lord had fallen upon them” (I Samuel 26:12). The Rabbis said: There is also the slumber of foolishness, as it is written: “For the Lord poured upon you a spirit of deep slumber…” (Isaiah 29:10). Rabbi Ḥanina bar Yitzḥak said: There are three microcosms: sleep is a microcosm of death; a dream is a microcosm of prophecy; Shabbat is a microcosm of the World to Come. Rabbi Avin adds another two: The orb of the sun is a microcosm of the supernal light; Torah is a microcosm of supernal wisdom.  “And, behold, dread, a great darkness, fell upon him.” “Dread [eima]” – this alludes to Babylon, as it is written: “Then Nebuchadnezzar was filled with fury [ḥema]” (Daniel 3:19). “Darkness” – this alludes to Media, which darkened the eyes of Israel with fasts and privation.71As a reaction to their evil decrees (see Esther 4:16). “Great” – this alludes to Greece. Rabbi Simon and the Rabbis, Rabbi Simon said: [The Greeks have] one hundred and twenty dukes, one hundred and twenty governors, and one hundred and twenty generals.72And that is why they are called “great.” The Rabbis said: Sixty of each, as it is written: “Serpent, fiery serpent, and scorpion” (Deuteronomy 8:15). “Serpent” – this alludes to Babylon; “fiery serpent” – this alludes to Media; “scorpion” – this alludes to Greece; just as the scorpion gives birth to sixty young at a time, so the kingdom of Greece appointed sixty of each [kind of official]. “Fell upon him” – this alludes to Edom, as it is stated [regarding them]: “From the sound of their fall the earth quaked” (Jeremiah 49:21). Some transpose it: “Fell upon him” – this alludes to Babylon, in whose regard it is written: “Fallen, fallen is Babylon” (Isaiah 21:9). “Great [gedola]” – this alludes to Media, as it is written: “After these matters, King Aḥashverosh promoted [gidal]” (Esther 3:1). “Darkness” – this alludes to Greece, which darkened the eyes of Israel with its edicts, as they would say to Israel: ‘Inscribe on the horn of an ox that you have no share in the God of Israel.’ “Dread” – this alludes to Edom, as it is written: “Behold, a fourth beast, fearsome, dreadful, and very strong” (Daniel 7:7).
“He said to Abram: Know with certainty that your descendants will be strangers in a land that is not theirs, and they will be enslaved to them and they will oppress them, four hundred years” (Genesis 15:13). “He said to Abram: Know with certainty [yado’a teda]73In Hebrew a verb is often doubled to express intensity or certainty. that your descendants will be strangers” – “yado’a” – know that I will scatter them; “teda” – know that I will gather them [again]. “Yado’a” – know that I will give them over as a pledge;74I will give them over to subjugation until their sins are expiated. “teda” – know that I will redeem them.75As someone redeems a pledge by paying his debt. “Yado’a” – know that I will enslave them; “teda” – know that I will liberate them.  “That your descendants will be strangers in a land that is not theirs” – from when you will see descendants.76The tally of four hundred years would begin with the birth of his son, Isaac. Being strangers in a land that is not theirs, enslavement, and oppression are all included in their tally.77These were the different stages that they experienced that together totalled four hundred years.
“And also that nation that they will serve, I will judge and after that they will go out with great property” (Genesis 15:14). “And also that nation that they will serve, I will judge” – it could have said: “Also.” Why “and also”? The explanation is, “also” refers to Egypt, “and also” is to include the Four Kingdoms.78The four kingdoms who would subjugate Israel throughout the ages, as foretold by Daniel (chapters 2 and 7). “[That nation] that they will serve, I will judge [dan]” – Rabbi Elazar in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Zimra: Through these two letters79Dan – dalet, nun. the Holy One blessed be He promised Abraham our patriarch that He would redeem his descendants [in any event], but if they repent, He will redeem them through the [Name of] seventy-two letters,80God’s name of seventy-two letters actually consists of seventy-two group of letters, each group being three letters. The letters dalet nun appear in the fiftieth group. Israel would be redeemed through an incomplete name of God if they would not repent, but through repentance they would experience redemption through the full name of seventy-two. as Rav Yudan said: From “to come and take for Himself a nation from the midst of a nation” until “with great awesome deeds” (Deuteronomy 4:34),81The verse describes the redemption from Egypt. there you find seventy-two letters alluding to the Holy One blessed be He. And if someone says to you: There are seventy-five, exclude from them the second [instance of the word] goy, which is not included in the tally.82The second goy refers to the Egyptians and are not part of God’s name. Rabbi Avin said: He redeemed them [from Egypt] through His name, as the name of the Holy One blessed be He consists of seventy-two letters.83Since the Israelites repented before the Exodus, they were redeemed through the full seventy-two letter name.
“And after [aḥarei] that they will go out with great property” – Rabbi Aḥa said: “Aḥar that” is not written here, but rather “aḥarei that”84Aḥarei has an added yod, whose numerical value is ten. – after I bring ten plagues upon them, then they will go out with great property. “You will go to your ancestors in peace; you will be buried at a good old age” Genesis 15:15). He said to Him: ‘Will I, too, be involved in the enslavement?’ He said to him: ‘[No.] “You will go to your ancestors in peace…”’ Reish Lakish said: There are three in whose regard “good old age” is stated. Abraham was worthy of this, David85I Chronicles 29:28. was worthy of this, [but] Gideon86Judges 8:32. was not worthy of it. Why? “Gideon crafted it into an ephod” (Judges 8:27) – for idol worship.
“It happened when the sun had set, that there was extreme darkness, and, behold, there was a smoking furnace, and a flaming torch that passed between those pieces” (Genesis 15:17). “It was when the sun had set, that there was extreme darkness [alata]” – there was a thick mist.87Since alata is a rare word, the Midrash explains that it is a thick mist, using the Aramaic translation for arafel, thick mist (Onkelos Exodus 20:18). “Behold, there was a smoking furnace, and a flaming torch” – Shimon bar Abba said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: He [thereby] showed him four things: Gehenna;88Represented by the smoking furnace. [the Four] Kingdoms;89Represented by the dread (Genesis 15:12; see Bereshit Rabba 44:17). the giving of the Torah;90Represented by the flaming torch (see Exodus 20:15). and the Temple [service].91Represented by the animals taken by Abraham (see Bereshit Rabba 44:14). He said to him: ‘As long as your descendants are engaged in two [of these],92Torah and the Temple service. they will be saved from [the other] two. If they deviate from the two, they will be sentenced with [the other] two.’ He said to him: ‘Through which do you wish your descendants to be punished, through Gehenna or through the Kingdoms?’ Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa said: Abraham chose the Kingdoms.93The lesser of the two evils. God then agreed with Abraham’s choice. Rabbi Yudan, Rabbi Idi, and Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: Abraham chose Gehenna, but the Holy One blessed be He [demurred and] chose the Kingdoms on his behalf. That is what is written: “Had their rock not given them over” (Deuteronomy 32:30), this is Abraham;94As it is stated: “Look upon the rock from which you are hewn…Look upon Abraham your forefather” (Isaiah 51:1–2). “and the Lord delivered them” (Deuteronomy 32:30), it teaches that the Holy One blessed be He agreed with his words.95This sentence is intended to prove Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa’s position, that God and Abraham agreed.  Rabbi Huna said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: This is how our forefather Abraham sat and pondered that entire day. He said: ‘What shall I choose, Gehenna or the Kingdoms?’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Abraham, eliminate your anxiety from here [and choose the Kingdoms].’  “On that day, the Lord established a covenant with Abram, saying: To your descendants I have given this land, from the river of Egypt until the great river, the Euphrates River” (Genesis 15:18). “On that day, the Lord established a covenant with Abram, saying” – what is meant by “saying”? We come to the dispute between Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa [on the one side, and] Rabbi Yudan, Rabbi Idi, and Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina [on the other]. Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa has said: Abraham chose the Kingdoms [and God concurred].96“Saying” indicates that God agreed with Abraham. [And Rabbi Yudan, Rabbi Idi, and Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina have said: Abraham chose Gehenna, but the Holy One blessed be He chose the Kingdoms on his behalf.] That is what is written: “You let people stand over our heads; we would have gone through fire and water” (Psalms 66:12).97Instead of Gehenna, which includes punishments by fire and water, You chose for us to be subjugated by the Kingdoms, who stand over our heads. According to this approach, “saying” indicates that God disagreed with Abraham’s choice of Gehenna and told him to make a different choice.  Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: He showed him the splitting of the Red Sea as well, as it is written: “That passed between those pieces [gezarim]” (Genesis 15:17), just as it says: “Who split the Red Sea into sections [gezarim]” (Psalms 136:13).
“On that day, the Lord established a covenant with Abram, saying” – Rabbi Yudan [said]: Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai and Rabbi Akiva, one said: He told him about this world98The events that would take place through history, namely, the subjugation of the Four Kingdoms. but He did not tell him about the World to Come. Another said: He told him about this world and the World to Come. Rabbi Berekhya, saying [in the name of] Rabbi Elazar, and Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina, one said: He told him about [the events] until this day.99Until the day mentioned in this passage – the exodus from Egypt. The other said: He told him about [the events] until that day.100The day of the messianic redemption, as it is written “on that day the Lord will be one and His name one” (Zechariah 14:9). “To your descendants I have given…” – Rav Huna and Rabbi Dostai in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: Even a mere statement by the Holy One blessed be He, too, is considered like an act,101Once God states that something will occur, it is as if it has already taken place in actuality. as it is stated: “To your descendants I have given.” “I will give this land” is not written here, but rather, “I have given this land.” Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Rabbi Abba bar Kahana: “Let those whom the Lord has redeemed say” (Psalms 107:2). “Those whom He redeems” is not stated, but rather, “those whom [the Lord] has redeemed.” Rabbi Avun said: “For the Lord is redeeming Jacob” is not written here, but rather, “for the Lord has redeemed Jacob” (Jeremiah 31:11). The Rabbis say: “I will whistle to them and gather them” (Zechariah 10:8), “for I will redeem them” is not written here, but rather, “for I have redeemed them” (Zechariah 10:8). Rabbi Yehoshua said: “The Lord will create over every structure of Mount Zion” is not written here, but rather, “He has created” (Isaiah 4:5) – it is [as if it is] already created and ready.
“The Kenites, the Kenizites, and the Kadmonites” (Genesis 15:19). “The Ḥitites, the Perizites, and the Refa’im” (Genesis 15:20). “The Emorites, the Canaanites, the Girgashites, and the Yevusites” (Genesis 15:21). Rabbi Dostai said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: Because it does not mention the Ḥivites here,102The Hivites are usually mentioned as one of the nations dwelling in Canaan (see Genesis 10:17, 34:2). that is why it cites the Refa’im in their place.103The Hivites and the Refa’im are one and the same. Rabbi Ḥelbo in the name of Rabbi Abba in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: It entered the mind of the Holy One blessed be He to bequeath to Israel the land of ten peoples, [including] “the Kenites, the Kenizites, and the Kadmonites,” but He gave them only seven. “The Ḥitites, the Perizites, and the Refa’im, the Emorites, the Canaanites, the Girgashites, and the Yevusites” – there you have seven. Why did He give them [just] seven ?104The answer to this question is in the following paragraph. Which are the three that were not given to them?105What is the identity of the three nations mentioned here, the Kenites, the Kenizites, and the Kadmonites?  Rabbi says: Arabia, the Shalmaite, and the Nabatean. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says: Damascus, Asia Minor, and Apamea. Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov said: Asia Minor, Thrace, and Carthage. The Rabbis say: “Edom, Moav, and the foremost of the children of Ammon” (Daniel 11:41). These are the three that were not given them in this world. Edom, as it is stated: “For I will not give you even the tread of a foot from their land, because I have given Mount Se’ir as an inheritance to Esau” (Deuteronomy 2:5). Regarding Moav, it is written: “Do not besiege Moav, and do not provoke war with them, [as I will not give you from his land]” (Deuteronomy 2:9).106And there is a similar verse regarding Ammon (Deuteronomy 2:19). The Kenizite is from Esau. The Kenite and Kadmonite are from Ammon and Moav. But in the messianic era they will revert to the people of Israel, in fulfillment of the statement of the Holy One blessed be He.107Who promised all ten nations to Abraham.  But for now, He gave them seven, as it is stated: “Seven nations greater and mightier than you” (Deuteronomy 7:1). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: A pig grazes with ten [offspring], and a sheep with not even one.108This is a folk saying. The idea is that pigs, which are impure animals, are plentiful, but sheep, which are pure, are more scarce. All these, the Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham that He would give him, the Kenite, the Kenizite…,109And they were already established nations at that time. but as of yet: “Sarai, Abram’s wife, had not borne him any children” (Genesis 16:1).

=== 45 | 45 ===
“Sarai, Abram’s wife, had not borne children to him, and she had an Egyptian maidservant, and her name was Hagar” (Genesis 16:1). “Sarai, Abram’s wife, had not borne children to him…” “A woman of valor who can find? Far beyond pearls is her value [mikhra]” (Proverbs 31:10) – what is her “mikhra”? Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Her pregnancy.1For a righteous woman, conception is difficult, more precious than pearls, as the Midrash goes on to elaborate. That is what is written: “Your origins [mekhorotayikh] and your birth” (Ezekiel 16:3).2Since mekhorotayikh precedes “your birth,” the Midrash interprets it to mean conception. Abram was one year older than Naḥor and Naḥor was one year older than Haran. Consequently, Abram was two years older than Haran. Allowing one year for the pregnancy of Milka and one year for the pregnancy of Yiska, Haran begot children at the age of six years3Milka and Yiska were Haran’s daughters (Genesis 11:29). Yiska is another name for Sarah. Sarah (Yiska) was ten years younger than Abraham (Genesis 17:17), and Haran was two years younger than Abraham. Sarah was thus born when Haran was eight years old, and her older sister Milka was conceived when Haran was six years old.  and Abraham did not beget children.4Because he was so righteous, begetting children was much more difficult for him than for Haran. “Sarai, Abram’s wife, had not borne children to him [lo] [and she had [vela] an Egyptian maidservant]” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: To Abraham she did not bear children, but had she married someone else, she would have borne children.5It was Abraham who was infertile, not Sarah. Rabbi Neḥemya said: Neither to him, nor to another. What then, is that which is written: “Had not borne children to him”? It means to him and to her [lo vela].6Although the word vela is the beginning of the next phrase, it is expounded as though it were appended to the previous phrase. “And she had an Egyptian maidservant, and her name was Hagar” – she was a maidservant of usufruct [melog] property.7Property that belongs to the wife, but whose produce or profit belongs to the husband. He was obligated to pay for her sustenance but was not permitted to sell her.8That is why it states that Hagar was “her” maidservant. Had Abraham had ownership rights to her, she would have been "their” maidservant. They asked before Reish Lakish: What is the meaning of that which is stated in the Mishna:9Mishna Yevamot 7:1. Usufruct [melog] slaves? He said to them: As one might say: ‘Pluck, pluck [melog melog].’10Just as one can pull out or cut someone’s hair, and that person’s head will constantly produce more hair, so with melog property, the husband keeps taking the profits, while the principle remains intact. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: Hagar was Pharaoh’s daughter. When Pharaoh saw the [miraculous] acts that were done on Sarah’s behalf in his palace, he took his daughter and gave her to him [Abraham].11In manuscripts: “To her (Sarah).” He said: ‘It is preferable that my daughter be a maidservant in that household than be the mistress in another household.’ That is what is written: “And she had an Egyptian maidservant, and her name was Hagar” – here is your reward [ha agrikh]. Avimelekh, too, when he saw the miracles that were performed on Sarah’s behalf in his palace, he took his daughter and gave her to him.12In manuscripts: “To her (Sarah).” He said: ‘It is preferable that my daughter be a maidservant in that household than be the mistress in another household.’ That is what is written: “The daughters of kings are among those who honor you; at your right hand stands the consort, attired in gold from Ofir” (Psalms 45:10).
“Sarai said to Abram: Behold now, the Lord has prevented me from bearing children; please, consort with my maidservant; perhaps I will be built up through her. Abram heeded the voice of Sarai” (Genesis 16:2). “Sarai said to Abram: Behold now, the Lord has prevented me from bearing children” – she said: ‘I know what my condition comes from. It is not as they say about me: She requires an amulet, she requires a cure. It is, rather, “the Lord has prevented me from bearing children.”’13There is no natural cause for my infertility; it is God’s decree. It is taught: Anyone who does not have a child, it is as though he were dead, as though he were demolished. As though he were dead – as it is stated: “Rachel…said to Jacob: Give me children, [and if not, I am dead]” (Genesis 30:1). As though he were demolished, as it is stated: “Perhaps I will be built up from her” – one builds up only what is demolished. “Abram heeded the voice of Sarai” – Rabbi Yosei said: The voice of the divine spirit,14Sarah’s request was actually a reflection of the divine will. just as it says: “Now, heed the voice of the words of the Lord” (I Samuel 15:1).
“Sarai, Abram’s wife, took Hagar the Egyptian, her maidservant, at the conclusion of ten years of Abram’s residence in the land of Canaan, and she gave her to Abram her husband as a wife” (Genesis 16:3). “Sarai, Abram’s wife, took Hagar the Egyptian, her maidservant” – she took her with words [of persuasion]. She said to her: ‘How fortunate you are, that you are going to cleave to this sacred body.’ “At the conclusion of ten years of Abram’s residence in the land of Canaan” – Rabbi Ami in the name of Reish Lakish: From where is it derived what we learned in a Mishna: If one married a woman and remained with her ten years but she did not bear any children, he is not permitted to refrain from procreation, but rather, he should divorce her and marry another woman?15Mishna Yevamot 6:6. It is from here: “At the conclusion of ten years of Abram’s residence in the land of Canaan.” This teaches us that residence outside of the Land is not included in the tally.16As Abraham and Sarah were married many years before their ten years of residence in the land of Canaan. “And she gave her to Abram her husband” – [“to Abram”] and not to another;17Sarah wished to be “built up” by having her maidservant bear children for her. She could have accomplished this goal by giving her to any man, but she gave her specifically to Abraham. “as a wife” – and not as a concubine.
“He consorted with Hagar, and she conceived; she saw that she conceived, and her mistress was diminished in her eyes” (Genesis 16:4). “He consorted with Hagar, and she conceived” – Rabbi Levi bar Ḥayata said: She conceived from the initial act of intercourse. Rabbi Elazar said: A woman never conceives from her initial act of intercourse. But is it not written: “Lot’s two daughters conceived from their father”? (Genesis 19:36). Rabbi Tanḥuma said: They manipulated themselves, broke their hymens, and conceived as though it were from a second act of intercourse. Rabbi Ḥanina ben Pazi said: Thornbushes are neither weeded nor sown, yet they emerge on their own, grow tall, and rise up; as for wheat, [however,] how much travail and how much toil [must one undertake] until they grow.18Plants of great worth have much more difficulty growing and prospering than worthless weeds. This is a metaphor for people. The most righteous women often have the most difficulty with procreation. Why were the matriarchs barren?19Sarah, Rebecca and Rachel all had great difficulty conceiving. Rabbi Sheila of Kefar Temarta and Rabbi Ḥelbo in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: It is because the Holy One blessed be He desires their prayers and desires their supplications, as it is stated: “My dove, in the clefts of the rock” (Song of Songs 2:14). “My dove, in the clefts” – why did I render you barren?20As infertile as rocks. It is for this reason: “Show me your countenance, let me hear your voice” (Song of Songs 2:14). Rabbi Azarya in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan bar Pappa: It was so that they would become beloved to their husbands in their beauty. Rabbi Huna in name of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba: So that most of the years would pass without enslavement.21Four hundred years of exile, oppression and enslavement had been decreed for Abraham’s descendants (Genesis 15:13). The enslavement portion of the four hundred years was to begin after the deaths of all of Jacob’s sons. By delaying the births of Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph, this most extreme component of the decree would be shorter.  Rabbi Huna and Rabbi Avun said in the name of Rabbi Meir: It was so that their husbands could enjoy them, for whenever a woman carries a fetus, she becomes unsightly and neglected. All ninety years that Sarah did not bear children, she was as [beautiful as] a bride under her wedding canopy.  Noblewomen would come and inquire after Sarah’s wellbeing, and Sarah would say: ‘Go and inquire after the wellbeing of that meek woman’ [Hagar]. Hagar would say to them: ‘My mistress Sarah, her inner reality is not like her outward impression. She gives the impression of being a righteous woman, but she is not a righteous woman. Were she a righteous woman, look at how many years that she did not conceive, whereas I conceived in one night.’ Sarah would then say: ‘Should I have a discussion with this woman? Better that I should have a discussion with her master.’22She then went to Abraham and complained about Hagar, as the next verse relates.
“Sarai said to Abram: The injustice done to me is on you. I gave my maidservant into your bosom and she saw that she conceived and I was diminished in her eyes; May the Lord judge between me and you” (Genesis 16:5). “Sarai said to Abram: The injustice done to me [ḥamasi] is on you” – Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon: You are committing an injustice of words against me, as you hear my humiliation23From Hagar. and remain silent. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Abba bar Kahana: [Sarah said:] ‘I have a grievance against you.’ This is analogous to two men incarcerated in prison. Once it happened that the king passed by. One of them said to him: ‘Take up my cause for the wrong done to me.’ He said [to the jailers]: ‘Free him.’ His counterpart24The other prisoner. said to him: ‘I have a grievance against you. Had you said: Take up our cause for the wrong done to us, just as he freed you, he would have freed me. Now that you said: Take up my cause for the wrong done to me, he freed you and did not free me.’ So, too, [Sarah said:] ‘Had you said: “We go childless,” just as He granted you [a child], so would He have granted me. But now that you have said: “I go childless” (Genesis 15:2), He granted you [a child], but did not grant me.’  This is analogous to two people who went to borrow seeds from the king. One of them said to him: ‘Lend me seeds.’ He gave the order and they gave it to him. His counterpart said: ‘I have a grievance against you. Had you said: Lend us seeds, just as he gave you, so he would have given me.’ Here, too, [Sarah said: ‘Had you said: “Behold, you have not given us descendants,” just as He granted you [a child], so would He have granted me. Now that you said: “Behold, you have not given me descendants” (Genesis 15:3), He granted you, but did not grant me.’ Rabbi Neḥemya said in the name of Rabbi Avun: She scratched [ḥimesa] him in the face. The Rabbis said: Four traits are mentioned regarding women: Gluttons, eavesdroppers, lazy people, and jealous people. Gluttons, from Eve – “she took of its fruit and ate” (Genesis 3:6). Eavesdroppers – “Sarah heard” (Genesis 18:10). Lazy – “quickly bring three seah of high quality flour” (Genesis 18:6).25Since Abraham had to urge her to hurry, the implication is that she would not otherwise have acted with alacrity. Jealous, as it is written: “Rachel was jealous of her sister” (Genesis 30:1). Rabbi Yehuda bar Neḥemya said: Sensitive and chatty, as well. Sensitive – “Sarai said to Abram: The injustice done to me is on you.” Talkative – “Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses” (Numbers 12:1). Rabbi Levi said: Thieves, as well, as it is stated: “Rachel stole the household idols” (Genesis 31:19). Roamers – “Dina went out [to see the girls of the land]” (Genesis 34:1). Rabbi Tanḥuma said in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great and Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya: Anyone who assiduously pursues the attribute of justice will not emerge intact from its effects. Sarah was worthy of reaching Abraham’s years, but because she said: “May the Lord judge between me and you” (Genesis 16:5), thirty-eight26Manuscripts read: Forty-eight. years were deducted from her life. It is written: “He consorted with Hagar, and she conceived.” Why, then, does the verse [later] state [to Hagar]: “Behold, you will conceive and bear a son”? (Genesis 16:11). The explanation is that it teaches that Sarah directed an evil eye against her and caused her to miscarry her fetus. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: “Between me and you [uveinekh] – uvinkha is written.27The word could be read uvinkha, your son. Rabbi Ḥanina said: Had Elisha the prophet said this [to Hagar] through the Divine Spirit, it would have been sufficient. But she was privileged to have an angel speak with her.28“The angel of the Lord said to her: Behold, you will conceive and bear a son” (Genesis 16:11).
“Abram said to Sarai: Behold, your maidservant is in your hand; do to her what is favorable in your eyes. Sarai treated her harshly, and she fled from her” (Genesis 16:6). “Abram said to Sarai…do to her what is favorable in your eyes” – she said to him: ‘I do not care neither for her benefit nor for her detriment.’ [He told her:] ‘It is written: “You shall not enslave her, because you afflicted her” (Deuteronomy 21:14).29Regarding a woman captured in war. This woman, after we caused her distress,30After we subjected her to conjugal relations. shall we enslave her?’ [Sarah repeated:] ‘I do not care for her benefit nor for her detriment.’ [Abraham said:] ‘It is written: “He shall not domineer over her, to sell her to a foreign people in his betrayal of her” (Exodus 21:8).31Regarding a Hebrew bondswoman. This woman, after we made her a mistress shall we make her a maidservant?’ [Sarah repeated:] ‘I do not care for her benefit nor for her detriment.’ “Sarai treated her harshly, and she fled from her” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: She prevented her from engaging in conjugal relations. Rabbi Berekhya said: She hit her in the face with a slipper. Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Abba bar Kahana: She made her take buckets and towels to the bathhouse for her.
“The angel of the Lord found her in the wilderness, at the spring of water on the road to Shur” (Genesis 16:7). “The angel of the Lord found her…at the spring of water [on the road to Shur]…” – on the road to Ḥalutza. “He said: Hagar, Sarai’s maidservant, from where did you come, and where are you going? She said: From my mistress Sarai I am fleeing” (Genesis 16:8). “He said: Hagar, Sarai’s maidservant” – if one says to you: Your ears are like those of a donkey, pay him no mind; if two [people tell you this], make a bridle for yourself.32If one person points out a fault to you, pay him no heed. If two people tell you, realize that the critique is true.  So, Abram said: “Behold, your maidservant is in your hand.” The angel said: “Hagar, Sarai’s maidservant.” So she said: “From my mistress Sarai I am fleeing.”33Both Abraham and the angel referred to her as a mere maidservant; as a result she regarded herself as a mere maidservant, by referring to Sarah as “my mistress.”  “The angel of the Lord said to her: Return to your mistress and suffer under her hands” (Genesis 16:9). “The angel of the Lord said to her: I will multiply your descendants, and they shall not be counted due to their great number” (Genesis 16:10). “The angel of the Lord said to her: Return to your mistress and suffer…The angel of the Lord said to her: I will multiply…” How many [different] angels encountered her? Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: Five – every time “saying” is stated, there was another angel.34The words: “The angel of the Lord found her” is also counted as a “saying.” The Rabbis say: Four – every time “angel” is stated [there was another angel]. Rabbi Ḥiyya said: Come and see how great the difference is between the earlier generations and the later generations. Manoaḥ said to his wife [upon seeing an angel]: “We will die because we have seen God” (Judges 13:22). But Hagar, Sarai’s maidservant, saw five angels one after the other and did not fear them. Rabbi Ḥiyya said: [Better] the fingernail of the forefathers and not the belly of the descendants.35The preceding generations are so much greater than their descendants that even the former’s fingernails are most substantial than the latter’s torso. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: “She supervises [tzofiya] the proceedings of her household” (Proverbs 31:27)36This verse is expounded as a reference to Abraham and Sarah in the Midrash of Proverbs. – the members of Abraham’s household were prophets [tzofim], so she was accustomed to seeing them [angels].
“The angel of the Lord said to her: Behold, you will conceive and bear a son; you will call his name Ishmael, as the Lord has heard your suffering” (Genesis 16:11). “The angel of the Lord said to her: Behold, you will conceive [and bear a son; you will call his name Ishmael]…” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: There are three who were called by their names by the Holy One blessed be He before they were created. They are: Isaac, Solomon, and Yoshiyahu. Regarding Isaac it is written: “But Sarah your wife will bear you a son, and you will call his name Isaac” (Genesis 17:19). Regarding Solomon, what does it say? “Behold, a son will be born to you, he will be a man of rest, and I will give him rest from all his enemies…Solomon will be his name” (I Chronicles 22:9). Regarding Yoshiyahu it is written: “He called against the altar by the word of the Lord, and said: Altar, altar! So said the Lord: Behold, a son will be born to the house of David, Yoshiyahu is his name” (I Kings 13:2). Some say: Also Ishmael, among the nations – “Behold, you will conceive and bear a son; you will call his name Ishmael.”
“He will be a wild man: His hand will be against everyone and everyone’s hand against him and he will dwell among all his brethren” (Genesis 16:12). “He will be a wild [pereh] man” – Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: This means that everyone else would inhabit settlements, but he would inhabit the wilderness.37The word peleh is used in connection with the wilderness in Jeremiah 2:24: “A wild ass [pereh] accustomed to the wilderness.” Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: “A wild man” – in its plain sense. Most people plunder wealth, but he plunders people. “His hand will be against everyone and everyone’s hand against him [kol bo].” Read it as “his dog [kalbo]” – he and a dog are equal; just as the dog eats carcasses, so, too, he eats carcasses. Rabbi Elazar said: When will it be that “his hand will be against everyone and everyone’s hand against him”? It will be with the advent of that man38Nebuchadnezzar. in whose regard it is written: “And everywhere the sons of man, the beasts of the field, and the birds of the heavens dwell, He has given into your hand and set your rule over all of them” (Daniel 2:38). That is what is written: “Concerning Kedar,39Kedar was one of Ishmael’s sons (see Genesis 25:13). and concerning the kingdoms of Ḥatzor that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote” (Jeremiah 49:28) – Nebuchadrezzar is written,40With an added vav, so that the last four letters spell atzur, gathered in. as he gathered them together in the wilderness and killed them. “He will dwell among all his brethren” – here it says: “He will dwell [yishkon] [among all his brethren],” but elsewhere it is written “He settled [nafal]41Literally, fell. [among all his brethren] (Genesis 25:18). The explanation is that as long as Abraham our patriarch was alive – yishkon. When Abraham died – nafal.42He fell in stature. Before he extended his hand against the Temple – yishkon. Once he extended his hand against the Temple43See Psalms 83:7–13. – nafal. In this world – yishkon; but in the future – nafal.
“She called the name of the Lord Who spoke to her: You are the God who sees me, for she said: Indeed, I have seen here too, after my vision” (Genesis 16:13). “She called the name of the Lord Who spoke to her: You are the God who sees me” – Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon and Rabbi Yoḥanan in the name of Rabbi Elazar bar Shimon: The Holy One blessed be He never deigned to speak with a woman except for that righteous woman [Sarah], and that, too, was out of necessity.44God had been speaking to Abraham: “Why is it that Sarah laughed” (Genesis 18:13). Sarah interrupted with her denial: “I did not laugh” (Genesis 18:15). Then it was necessary for the Holy One blessed be He to set her straight: “No, but you did laugh” (Genesis 18:15). Rabbi Abba said in the name of Rabbi Beiri: See how much He spoke in a roundabout manner with her: “No, but you did laugh” (Genesis 18:15).45Instead of saying: “Yes, you laughed,” He said it in an indirect manner. But is it not written [here]: “She called the name of the Lord who spoke to her”? Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya said: That was through an angel. But is it not written [regarding Rebecca]: “The Lord said to her”? (Genesis 25:23). Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina bar Ḥama: That was through an angel. Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Yosei ben Zimra: It was through Shem.46Rebecca had gone to consult Shem son of Noah, who was a spiritual leader at the time. “You are the God who sees me” – Rabbi Aivu said: It is You who sees the wretchedness of the wretched. “For she said: Indeed, I have seen here [halom] too, after my vision” – she said: ‘As if it was not enough that I encountered divine speech, [I have been granted] kingship as well,’47I was informed that kings would descend from my son. just as it says [of David]: “That You have brought me to this point [halom]” (II Samuel 7:18). “Indeed, I have seen…after my vision” – as if it was not enough that I was enabled to see an angel together with my mistress, even my mistress who was with me did not see it.48As explained later in a parable. Another interpretation, as if it was not enough for me that I encountered [angels] together with my mistress, I [have encountered them now] by myself. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: This is analogous to a noblewoman to whom the king said: ‘Pass by in front of me.’ She passed before him as she was being supported by her maidservant. She turned her face aside and did not see the king, but the maidservant saw him.

=== 46 | 46 ===
“Abram was ninety-nine years old, and the Lord appeared to Abram; He said to him: I am God Almighty; walk before Me, and be faultless” (Genesis 17:1). “Abram was ninety-nine years old.” “Like grapes in the wilderness I found Israel, like a first fruit on the fig tree in its first season…” (Hosea 9:10) – Rabbi Yudan said: A fig tree is initially picked one fig at a time, then two at a time, then three at a time, until one picks it with baskets and rakes [at one’s side].1At first the figs ripen individually; afterwards all the remaining figs ripen at once. So, too, initially, “Abraham was one and he inherited the land” (Ezekiel 33:24), then there were two – Abraham and Isaac; then three, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and then: “The children of Israel were fruitful, teemed, increased, and grew exceedingly mighty” (Exodus 1:7). Rabbi Yudan said: Just as a fig has no refuse other than its stem, just remove it and its imperfection is eliminated, so, the Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham: ‘You have no refuse [on your body] other than the foreskin, remove it and the imperfection is eliminated: “Walk before Me, and be faultless.”’
“For everything there is a season, and a time for every purpose beneath the heavens” (Ecclesiastes 3:1) – there was a set time for Abraham when circumcision was given to him, as it is stated: “On that [hazeh] very day,2The word hazeh indicates that it was a preordained time. Abraham was circumcised, and Ishmael his son” (Genesis 17:26). There was a set time for his descendants, who underwent [mass] circumcision twice, once in Egypt3Before offering the Passover sacrifice, which could not be eaten by the uncircumcised (Exodus 12:48). and once in the wilderness,4In the time of Joshua (Joshua 5:3). as it is stated: “All the people who went out were circumcised [but all the people born in the wilderness, on the way as they came out of Egypt, had not been circumcised]…” (Joshua 5:5). He [Abraham] could have been circumcised at age forty-eight when he came to know his Creator.5See Bereshit Rabba 30:8. Why did God wait until Abraham was ninety-nine years old to command him to circumcise himself? However, this was not done so as not to close the door in the face of proselytes.6It is to show them that even at an advanced age it is possible to be circumcised and convert. And if you ask: He could have been circumcised at age eighty-five,7Before Yishmael was conceived. [or]8This word is added by Rashash. when He spoke with him [at the covenant] between the pieces,9At age seventy (Seder Olam chapter 1). this was not done so that Isaac10Isaac alone, and not Yishmael. would emerge from a sacred drop.11So that Isaac’s conception, but not Yishmael’s, would be after the circumcision, in order to endow Isaac with special sanctity. He could have been circumcised at age eighty-six, after the time Ishmael was born. Reish Lakish said: [God said:] ‘I am producing cinnamon in the world.’12The righteous are compared to spices. Just as with cinnamon, as long as you fertilize it and hoe it,13Even when it is very old and appears to be beyond hope for further growth. it yields fruit; so it was [with Abraham,] when his blood had become sluggish, his evil inclination depleted, his desire dissipated, when his blood had thickened.14When he was least likely to father a child.  He said: ‘If circumcision is so dear [to God], why was it not given to Adam the first man?’15This is a truncated version of the discussion related in Bereshit Rabba 11:6.
[“He said to him: I am God Almighty [Shadai]” (Genesis 17:1)]. The Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham: ‘It is sufficient [dai] that you and I are in the world.16Only you have come to recognize My existence. It would be sufficient for Me if you were the only person in the world. If you do not accept upon yourself to be circumcised, My world [as it has existed] to this point is sufficient [dai] for Me.17If you do not accept the commandment of circumcision, the world can come to an end; it is sufficient for Me that it has lasted this long.  It is sufficient [dai] for the foreskin [to exist] until this point.18The time has now arrived for it to be removed. And it is sufficient [dai] for [the precept of] circumcision to have been forsaken until this point.’ He [Abraham] said: ‘Even before my circumcision, people would come and confront me [in battle]. Certainly after I am circumcised they will come and confront me.’19Because they will consider my circumcision to be an affront to them, or because they will see that I have become weakened. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Abraham, it is sufficient [dai] for you that I am your God, it is sufficient [dai] for you that I am your guardian.20You have nothing to fear from them. And not for you alone, but it is sufficient [dai] for My world that I am its God, it is sufficient [dai] for My world that I am its guardian.’ Rabbi Natan, Rabbi Aḥa, and Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: “I am God Almighty [Shadai]” – it is I who said to My world and to the heavens: ‘Enough [dai]’ [and] to the earth: ‘Enough [dai],’ as had I not said to them: ‘Enough,’ even now they would be continuously expanding. It is taught in the name of Rabbi Elazar ben Yaakov: [God said:] ‘It is I for whom the world and all its contents are not sufficient [dai] for My Godliness.’ Akilas translated [Shadai]: Eternal and powerful.21Akilas wrote a Greek translation of the Torah.
[“Walk before Me, and be faultless”] – Rabbi Levi said: This is analogous to a noblewoman to whom the king said: ‘Pass before me.’ She passed before him, and her face became flushed, [as] she said: ‘Perhaps there is some imperfection to be found in me.’ The king said to her: ‘The only imperfection you have is that the fingernail of your little finger is slightly long. Remove it and the imperfection will be eliminated.’ So, the Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham our patriarch: ‘Your only imperfection is this foreskin. Remove it and the imperfection will be eliminated.’  “I will establish My covenant between Me and you, and will multiply you exceedingly” (Genesis 17:2). “Walk before Me, and be faultless…I will establish My covenant between Me and you…” (Genesis 17:1–2). Rav Huna in the name of bar Kappara: Abraham sat and expounded a verbal analogy: “Orla is written regarding trees22The prohibition against eating the fruit of a tree the first three years after it has been planted is called orla (Leviticus 19:23). and “orla” is written regarding man;23Abraham was expounding a verbal analogy to ascertain what God meant by orla – in Genesis 17:11, God says: “You shall circumcise the flesh of your orla.” just as orla that is written regarding the tree is in the place that it produces fruit, so orla that is written regarding a person is in the place that he produces offspring.  Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pazi said to him [Rav Huna]: Were verbal analogies, then, transmitted to Abraham? That is a rhetorical question. The explanation is rather that He intimated an allusion to him: “I will establish My covenant between Me and you, and will multiply you exceedingly” – I will establish My covenant between Me and you in the place from which you procreate.
Rabbi Yishmael and Rabbi Akiva, Rabbi Yishmael says: Abraham was a High Priest, as it is stated: “The Lord has taken an oath and will not renounce it: You are a priest forever…” (Psalms 110:4),24This Psalm is often expounded as a reference to Abraham. and it is stated elsewhere: “You shall circumcise the flesh of your orla” (Genesis 17:11). [Abraham wondered,] from where should he become circumcised? If he would become circumcised from the ear,25Cutting off a piece of flesh near the ear. he would be unfit to perform sacrifices; if from the mouth, he would be unfit to perform sacrifices; if from the heart, he would be unfit to perform sacrifices. From where could he become circumcised and still be fit to sacrifice? You must say, it is the orla of the body.26The foreskin. Rabbi Akiva says: There are four kinds of orla [in the Scriptures]. Orla is stated regarding the ear: “Behold their ear is blocked [orla]” (Jeremiah 6:10). Orla is stated regarding the mouth: “I am a man of obstructed [aral] lips” (Exodus 6:30). Orla is stated regarding the heart: “The entire house of Israel is uncircumcised of heart [arelei lev]” (Jeremiah 9:25). And orla is stated regarding the body: “An uncircumcised [arel] male” (Genesis 17:14). It was said to him: “Walk before Me, and be faultless.” If he would become circumcised from the ear, he would not be faultless; if from the mouth, he would not be faultless; if from the heart, he would not be faultless. From where could he become circumcised and be faultless? You must say, it is from the orla of the body. Mikra27The name of a rabbi. In manuscripts: Nakra or Nagda. said: [It is written:] “One who is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every male throughout your generations” (Genesis 17:12). If he would become circumcised from the ear, he would not be able to hear; if from the mouth, he would not be able to speak; if from the heart, he would not be able to think. From where could he become circumcised and still be able to think [and speak and hear]? This is the orla of the body.  Rabbi Tanḥuma said: It is a logical inference from this verse: “An uncircumcised male” (Genesis 17:14). Is there such a thing as an uncircumcised female? It is, rather, [to teach you that] from the place where it is recognizable whether a person is male or female, it is there that one circumcises him.
“Abram fell upon his face and God spoke with him, saying” (Genesis 17:3). “Abram fell upon his face and God spoke with him, saying” – Rabbi Pinḥas in the name of Rabbi Levi: Falling on his face is written twice regarding Abraham.28Here and in Genesis 17:17. Corresponding to them, circumcision was twice withheld from his descendants – once in Egypt and once in the wilderness. In Egypt, Moses came and circumcised them;29To enable them to partake of the paschal sacrifice (see Exodus 12:48). in the wilderness, Joshua came and circumcised them.30See Joshua chapter 5.
“I, My covenant is hereby with you, and you will be the father of a multitude of nations” (Genesis 17:4). “I, My covenant is hereby with you” – Rabbi Abba, Rabbi Berekhya, and Rabbi Shmuel bar Ami were sitting and encountering difficulty in determining: From where in the Torah is the use of acronyms derived?31From where is it derived that this is an acceptable form of exegesis? It is as it is stated: “The father of a multitude of nations [Av hamon goyim]” – av ham, which is missing the letter reish.32Abraham is an acronym for av hamon. The reish of “Abraham” is a remnant from his original name, Abram.
“Your name will no longer be called Abram, but your name will be Abraham; for I have made you the father of a multitude of nations” (Genesis 17:5). “Your name will no longer be called Abram, but your name will be Abraham” – bar Kappara said: Anyone who calls Abraham Abram violates a prohibition. Rabbi Levi said: [He violates] a positive commandment, and a prohibition: “Your name will no longer be called Abram” – a prohibition; “but your name will be Abraham” – a positive commandment. But you see that the members of the Great Assembly called him Abram, as it is stated: “You are the Lord the God, who chose Abram, and took him out of Ur of the Chaldeans, and set his name as Abraham.” (Nehemiah 9:7)33The Sages at the beginning of the era of the building of the Second Temple were known as the Men of the Great Assembly, including Ezra, who is the speaker in this verse. That case is different, as [it means:] You chose him while he was still called Abram. Similarly, does one who calls Sarah Sarai violate a positive commandment?34“God said to Abraham: Sarai your wife, you shall not call her name Sarai, as Sarah is her name” (Genesis 17:15). It was [only] he [Abraham] who was commanded regarding her. Similarly, does one who calls Israel Jacob violate a positive commandment? It is taught: [God’s intent was] not that the name Jacob should be uprooted from its place, but rather, “[Your name is Jacob]…rather, Israel shall be your name” (Genesis 35:10) – Israel is to be the primary name, and Jacob the secondary name. Rabbi Zavda in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: In any case, “your name is Jacob…rather, Israel” – Jacob is the primary name, and Israel is in addition to it.
“I will give to you, and to your descendants after you, the land of your sojourning, the entire land of Canaan for an eternal holding, and I will be their God” (Genesis 17:8). “I will give to you, and to your descendants after you, the land of your sojourning” – Rabbi Yudan said five things:35The passage alludes to five covenants contingent one upon the other. If your descendants accept My Godliness upon themselves, I will be God and patron for them; if not, I will not be God and patron for them. If your descendants enter the land, they will be able to accept My Godliness, but if not, they will not be able to accept it.36One who does not dwell in the land of Israel is lacking in his realization of God’s mastery )see Ketubot 110b). If your descendants fulfill the precept of circumcision, they will enter the land; but if not, they will not enter the land. If your descendants accept the Shabbat they will enter the land;37Shabbat, like circumcision, is referred to as “an eternal covenant for your generations” (Genesis 17:7, Exodus 31:16). but if not, they will not enter the land. “God said to Abraham: And you, you shall observe My covenant, you, and your descendants after you, throughout their generations” (Genesis 17:9). Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Ḥelbo in the name of Rabbi Avun ben Rabbi Yosei: It is written: “This is the matter [hadavar] that Joshua circumcised” (Joshua 5:4) – Joshua made a statement [davar] to them and circumcised them. He said to them: ‘What do you think, that you will enter the land uncircumcised? So the Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham our patriarch: “I will give to you and to your descendants after you, [the land of your sojourning],” with the provision that: “And you, you shall observe My covenant.”’ “And you, you shall observe My covenant” – Rabbi Huna and Rabbi Yoḥanan, Rabbi Huna said: “And you” – from here we learn that the circumciser must himself be circumcised. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: “You shall surely circumcise [himol yimol]” (Genesis 17:13) – from here38From the double expression himol yimol. we learn that the circumciser must himself be circumcised. It is taught: An uncircumcised Israelite may not be a circumciser; all the more so, an uncircumcised idolater.
“You shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin and it shall be a mark of a covenant between Me and you” (Genesis 17:11). “You shall circumcise [nemaltem] the flesh of your foreskin” – it is hanging from the body like a mole [nomi].39Nemaltem is an acronym for nomi maltem – you cut off a mole. There was once an incident involving King Monabaz and Izates, sons of King Ptolemy, who were sitting and reading the book of Genesis. When they reached the verse: “You shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin,” one of them turned his face to the wall and began weeping, and the other one [also] turned his face to the wall and began weeping. Both of them [individually] went and became circumcised. Several days later, they were sitting and reading the book of Genesis. When they reached the verse: “You shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin,” one said to the other: ‘Woe unto you, my brother.’ He said to him: ‘Woe unto you, there is no woe for me.’40Neither realized that the other had become circumcised. They revealed the matter to one another. When their mother realized what had transpired, she went and said to their father: ‘A mole grew in the flesh of your sons, and the doctor ordered that they be circumcised.’ He said to her: ‘Let them be circumcised.’ How did the Holy One blessed be He repay him [Ptolemy]? Rabbi Pinḥas said: When he went out to war, [his enemies] laid an ambush against him, and an angel descended and rescued him.
“One who is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every male throughout your generations, born in the house, or purchased with silver from any foreigner, who is not of your descendants” (Genesis 17:12). “One who is eight days old shall be circumcised among you” – it is taught: One who purchases the fetus of an idolater’s maidservant, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: He should be circumcised on the eighth day.41As opposed to one who purchases an already-living baby as a slave; he requires circumcision on the day he is bought, even if it is before he is eight days old (see Shabbat 135a).  And Rabbi Ḥama bar Yosei [also] taught: He should be circumcised on the eighth day. Shmuel taught the same, as Shmuel said: “For a son and for a daughter” (Leviticus 12:6) – in all cases.42That passage mentions the circumcision of a baby on his eighth day (Leviticus 12:3). 
“You shall surely circumcise those born in your house, or those purchased with your silver, and My covenant shall be in your flesh for an eternal covenant” (Genesis 17:13). “You shall surely circumcise [himol yimol]” – this43The double expression himol yimol. refers to circumcision and the uncovering,44Uncovering the head of the corona by peeling back the membrane under the foreskin. [moreover,] it refers to circumcision and removal of the shreds.45Shreds of skin that may remain after the circumcision. [Moreover,] himol yimol – from here we learn that the circumciser must himself be circumcised. [Moreover,] himol yimol – this is to include one who was born circumcised.46Although he obviously cannot undergo circumcision, he must have a drop of blood drawn from the place where the foreskin would have been. This is called covenantal blood. It is taught: Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel did not dispute that one must draw covenantal blood from one who is born circumcised, because it is a compressed foreskin.47Although it is not visible as a separate piece of flesh, there is an undeveloped foreskin compressed to the skin. Regarding what do they disagree? Regarding a proselyte who converted when [already] circumcised, as Beit Shammai say: One must draw covenantal blood from him and Beit Hillel say: One need not do so.  Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says: Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel did not disagree, neither regarding this case nor regarding that case, [but agree] that one must draw the covenantal blood. Regarding what do they disagree? Regarding one who was born circumcised, when his eighth day coincides with Shabbat, as Beit Shammai say: One must draw the covenantal blood from him,48Even though this would involve Shabbat desecration. and Beit Hillel say: One need not do so.49That is, it is forbidden to desecrate Shabbat for such drawing of blood, and it should be postponed to the following day. Rabbi Yitzḥak said in the name of Rabbi Hoshaya: The halakha is in accordance with the statement of the disciple.50Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar.
“And the uncircumcised male who shall not circumcise the flesh of his foreskin, that soul shall be excised from his people; he has breached My covenant” (Genesis 17:14). “And the uncircumcised male” – Rabbi Ḥagai said: Is there such a thing as an uncircumcised female? The meaning is, rather, [to teach] that one is circumcised at the place on the body where it is recognizable whether he is male or female.  “He has breached My covenant” – this refers to one whose foreskin was drawn out.51After circumcision, the skin was drawn out, creating the impression that he is uncircumcised.                                                                                                      It is taught: One whose foreskin is drawn out need not be circumcised. Rabbi Yehuda said: He should not be circumcised, because it is like a compressed foreskin.52Cutting off this flesh would cause injury to the person, rendering him infertile. They said before Rabbi Yehuda: But is it not so that there were many people in the days of ben Koziva,53Also known as Bar Kokhva. They were forced by the Roman oppressors to draw out their flesh to appear uncircumcised. and all of them had children even though they were re-circumcised?54So it is clear that there is no danger of infertility from a repeat circumcision. That is what is written: “Himol yimol” – even four or five times. “He has breached My covenant” – this refers to one whose foreskin was drawn out.55And did not re-circumcise himself.

=== 47 | 47 ===
“God said to Abraham: Sarai your wife, you shall not call her name Sarai, as Sarah is her name” (Genesis 17:15). “God said to Abraham: Sarai your wife…” – it is written: “A woman of valor is her husband’s crown” (Proverbs 12:4). Rabbi Aḥa said: Her [Sarah’s] husband was crowned with her, but she was not crowned with her husband.1Rather, Sarah had status independent of the fact that she was Abraham’s wife. The Rabbis say: She was her husband’s superior. Everywhere the man gives the orders; here, however, “Everything that Sarah says to you, heed her voice” (Genesis 21:12). Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa said: The yod  that the Holy One blessed be He took from Sarai2When the name Sarai was changed to Sarah, a yod was removed and a heh inserted in its place. was divided – half for Sarah and half for Abraham.3The numerical value of yod is ten. Half is five, represented by the letter heh, which is the letter that was added to the names of both Abraham and Sarah.  Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: The yod that the Holy One blessed be He took from Sarai soared and flew up before the throne of the Holy One blessed be He. It said before Him: ‘Master of the universe: Because I am the smallest of the letters, You have removed me from the righteous Sarah?’ The Holy One blessed be He said to it: ‘In the past, you were part of the name of a female and at the end of the letters; now I shall place you into the name of a male and at the beginning of the letters, as it is stated: “Moses called Hoshea son of Nun, Joshua [Yehoshua]” (Numbers 13:16).4The yod added at the beginning changed the name from Hoshea to Yehoshua. Rabbi Mana said: In the past she was a princess for her people.5Sarai is the singular possessive. Now she will be a princess for all the inhabitants of the world.
“I will bless her, and I will also give you a son from her; I will bless her, and she shall become nations; kings of peoples will be from her” (Genesis 17:16). “I will bless her, and I will also give you a son from her; [I will bless her…]”6The verse indicates that God gave her two blessings. – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: I will bless her by giving her a son, and I will bless her with the blessing of milk.7The blessing was that despite her old age she would be able to nurse her son. Rabbi Neḥemya said to him: Was she already given tidings regarding milk? Why, she was not even pregnant yet. Rather, it teaches that the Holy One blessed be He restored her body to the days of her youth. Rabbi Abahu in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina: [God said:] ‘I will impose fear of her over all the idolaters so that they will not torment her and call her the barren woman.’ Rabbi Yudan in the name of Reish Lakish: She did not even have a womb, and the Holy One blessed be He now carved out a womb for her. “Kings of peoples will be from her” – Rabbi Ḥama ben Rabbi Ḥanina said: From here Abraham expounded when he remarried Ketura.8The midrash identifies Ketura as Hagar. Sarah had said that she regarded Hagar’s children as her own (Genesis 16:2). This verse foretells that Sarah would become the forebear of “Kings of peoples,” and it was to fulfill this prophecy that Abraham remarried Ketura-Hagar and fathered six children from her (Genesis 25:1–2).
“Abraham fell upon his face, and he laughed. He said in his heart: Shall a child be born to one who is one hundred years old? And shall Sarah, a ninety-year-old woman, give birth?” (Genesis 17:17). “Abraham fell upon his face, and he laughed” – Abraham fell on his face twice,9In this verse and in Genesis 17:3. and corresponding to them, circumcision was twice withheld from his descendants – once in Egypt and once in the wilderness. In Egypt, Moses came and circumcised them;10To enable them to partake of the paschal sacrifice (see Exodus 12:48). in the wilderness, Joshua came and circumcised them.11See Joshua chapter 5. “He said in his heart: Shall a child be born to one who is one hundred years old?” Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Azarya, Rabbi Yudan said: “Shall a child be born to one who is one hundred years old” – why?12Why did Abraham express such wonderment over this? Why should a very old man be unable to father children? Because “Shall Sarah, a ninety-year-old woman, give birth?” A man does not grow old,13That is, he does not lose his fertility with old age. but a woman grows old. Rabbi Azarya said: Regarding this, too, it was not necessary,14Abraham need not have expressed wonder about Sarah either. as Sarah at ninety years old had not grown old. What is an old woman? It is one whom they call: Mother So-and so,15The title Mother was used to refer to old ladies. and she does not mind.
“Abraham said to God: Would that Ishmael might live before You” (Genesis 17:18). “God said: But Sarah your wife will bear you a son, and you shall call his name Isaac, and I will keep My covenant with him for an eternal covenant, for his descendants after him” (Genesis 17:19). “Would that Ishmael might live before You” – Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon: This is analogous to a friend of the king, to whom he would provide a stipend. The king said to him: ‘I wish to double your stipend.’ He said to him: ‘Do not seek to provide me such great satisfaction; would that you not revoke the previous one.’ So, [Abraham said:] “Would that Ishmael might live before You.” “God said: But Sarah your wife.”
“And regarding Ishmael, I have heard you; behold, I have blessed him. I will make him fruitful, and I will multiply him exceedingly; twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation” (Genesis 17:20). “And regarding Ishmael, I have heard you” – Rabbi Yoḥanan in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Ḥanina: The son of the maidservant may be derived from the son of the mistress.16The translation follows the reading of Matnot Kehuna. “Behold, I have blessed him” – this refers to Isaac. “I will make him fruitful” – this refers to Isaac. “I will multiply him” – this refers to Isaac.17All the blessings of this verse were directed at Isaac, who was mentioned in the previous verse.  “And regarding Ishmael” – I have already heard him [and blessed him] through an angel.18The angel who blessed Yishmael when speaking with Hagar (see Genesis 16:10). I have already blessed Yishmael with all these blessings that I now pronounce upon Isaac. “But My covenant I will keep with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear you at this designated time next year” (Genesis 17:21). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana in the name of Rabbi Beiri: Here, the son of the mistress may be derived from the son of the maidservant. “Behold, I have blessed him” – this refers to Ishmael. “I will make him fruitful” – this refers to Ishmael. “I will multiply him” – this refers to Ishmael, and all the more so: “But My covenant I will keep with Isaac.”19The blessings of this verse were directed at Yishmael, but it may be inferred that they are all the more so applicable to Isaac, the son of Hagar’s mistress. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: “All these are the tribes of Israel, twelve” (Genesis 49:28) – these are the descendants of the mistress, but Ishmael would produce only those twelve nesi’im,20As verse 20 states: “Twelve princes [nesi’im] shall he beget.” just as it says: “Clouds [nesi’im], wind, but no rain (Proverbs 25:14).21They are ephemeral and pass by like clouds. But these are tribes [matot], just as it says: “The oaths to the tribes [matot], an enduring word” (Habakkuk 3:9). “But My covenant I will keep with Isaac, [whom Sarah shall bear you at this designated time [lamo’ed] next year]” – Rabbi Huna in the name of Rabbi Idi – that year was a leap year.22The verse is expounded to mean that Sarah will bear Isaac at the next festival [mo’ed]. The longest interval between festivals is the six months between Sukkot and Passover, but that is not enough time for a pregnancy to come to term. The Midrash explains that that year was a leap year, so there was a seven-month interval between those holidays, long enough for a viable pregnancy.
“He concluded speaking with him, and God ascended from upon Abraham” (Genesis 17:22). It is taught: One who departs from another person, whether of greater or lesser stature, must take his leave from him. From whom do you derive this? From Abraham. On one occasion,23Genesis 18:1–3. Abraham was speaking with the Holy One blessed be He, when the ministering angels came to speak with him. He said to them: ‘Let me first take my leave from the Divine Presence, which is of greater stature than you, then I will speak with you.’ When he finished saying to the Holy One blessed be He all that he needed [to say], he said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, I must speak [with the angels].’ He said: ‘You may leave in peace.’24From this incident we learn that one must take his leave when departing from someone of greater stature. That is what is written: “[He concluded speaking with him,] and God ascended from upon Abraham.”25The Midrash interprets this to mean that God bade farewell to Abraham before leaving him. From this we learn that one should take his leave even from someone of lesser stature. Reish Lakish said: The patriarchs are themselves the divine chariot,26God’s presence rests directly upon them, as one rides upon a chariot. as it is stated: “God ascended from upon Abraham,” “God ascended from upon him,” (Genesis 35:13) “And behold, the Lord stood upon him” (Genesis 28:13).27God is described as being “upon” the Patriarchs.
“Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all those born in his house, and all those purchased with his money, every male among the people of Abraham’s household, and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskin on that very day, as God had spoken with him” (Genesis 17:23). “Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all those born in his house” – Rabbi Aivu said: When Abraham circumcised [the foreskins of] all those born in his house, he stacked them into a mound of foreskins. When the sun shone upon them, they became wormy,28They began to rot. and their odor rose before the Holy One blessed be He like the incense of the spices, and like a burnt offering that is given over completely into the [altar’s] fire.29And is referred to as “a pleasing aroma to the Lord” (Exodus 29:41). The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘When the descendants of this man will come to commit transgressions and evil deeds, I will remember this aroma and become filled with mercy for them, and I will take pity on them.’
“Abraham was ninety-nine years old when he circumcised the flesh of his foreskin” (Genesis 17:24). “And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin” (Genesis 17:25). “Abraham was ninety-nine [years] old…” – here, [regarding Abraham], it says: “The flesh of his foreskin [besar orlato].” But there, [regarding Yishmael], it says: “The flesh of his foreskin [et besar orlato].”30The addition of the word et indicates that something extra is being included. The explanation is that regarding Abraham, because his organ had been softened by means of a woman,31Through sexual relations. it is written: “Besar orlato.”32It was necessary to remove only the foreskin, but it was not necessary to tear the remaining membrane. Regarding Ishmael, whose organ had not been softened by means of a woman, it is written: “Et besar orlato.”33It was necessary to remove the remaining membrane as well.
“On that very day, Abraham was circumcised, and Ishmael his son” (Genesis 17:26). “On that very day, Abraham was circumcised” – Rabbi Berekhya said: [God said:] “From the beginning, I did not speak in secret” (Isaiah 48:16). The Holy One blessed be He said: Had Abraham circumcised himself at night, all the people of his generation would have said: ‘We declare, had we seen him, we would have not allowed him to circumcise himself.’ However, it was “on that very day, [Abraham was circumcised]”34In broad daylight. – if someone is bothered by it, let him speak up. “Abraham was circumcised” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: He ached and suffered pain, so that the Holy One blessed be He could double his reward.35This is expounded from the fact that the Torah uses a reflexive verb, emphasizing the effect on Abraham. Rabbi Levi said: “Abraham circumcised himself” is not written here, but rather, “was circumcised.” He examined himself and discovered that he was [miraculously] circumcised.36He felt nothing at all during his circumcision. At that moment, Rabbi Abba bar Kahana disparaged Rabbi Levi. He said to him: ‘You are a fabricator and a falsifier. It is, rather, that he ached and suffered pain, so that the Holy One blessed be He could double his reward.’
“And all the men of his household, born in the house or purchased with money from a foreigner, were circumcised with him” (Genesis 17:27). “And all the men of his household, born in the house or purchased with money” – it is taught: One may go to an idolatrous fair,37A fair where some of the proceedings go towards idol worship. [even] during the intermediate days of the Festival, to purchase from them houses, fields, vineyards,38Although attending idolatrous fairs is usually forbidden, the transfer of property in the land of Israel from idolaters to Jews is important enough to outweigh the prohibition. slaves and maidservants. Rabbi Ami said in the name of Reish Lakish; It is not only for circumcised slaves39That is, slaves that had been owned by Jews and converted to Judaism. It is certainly of great urgency to redeem such a slave from the possession of idolaters, under whose mastery he would not be able to practice his religion. that it is permitted for him, but even for uncircumcised ones, because he brings them under the wings of the Divine Presence.40Even if they had not been converted beforehand, the Jewish buyer would have an opportunity to do so now. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi asked before Reish Lakish, saying to him: ‘What is the ruling regarding the purchase of slaves from idolaters?’ He said to him: ‘Regarding when are you asking me, on a Festival? It is taught: Even on Shabbat. Likewise, if one purchases a courtyard41From an idolater. in the Land of Israel [on Shabbat], he says to him: I offer such and such a price, to be paid tomorrow.’42Although the deal may be completed on Shabbat, he may not pay the money on Shabbat. It is because the Land of Israel is so beloved that it is permitted for him to say so. Ḥizkiya taught: “[…to build siegeworks against the city that makes war with you,] until it is subdued” (Deuteronomy 20:20) – even on Shabbat,43One may wage war to conquer a city in the Land of Israel even on Shabbat. as we find that Jericho was conquered only on Shabbat.44It was conquered on “the seventh day” (Joshua 6:15). There are three [idolatrous] fairs: The Gaza fair, the Akko fair, and the Botnan fair, and the most obvious one of all is the Botnan fair.45It is obvious that it is dedicated to idol worship. Abraham said: ‘Before I was circumcised, passersby would come in to me. Perhaps now that I am circumcised they will no longer come in to me.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Before you were circumcised, people would come to you. Now, I, in My glory, am coming and revealing Myself to you.’ That is what is written: “The Lord appeared to him in the plains of Mamre” (Genesis 18:1).

=== 48 | 48 ===
“The Lord appeared to him in the plains of Mamre, and he was sitting at the entrance of the tent in the heat of the day” (Genesis 18:1). “The Lord appeared to him in the plains of Mamre, and he was sitting at the entrance of the tent.” It is written: “You have given me the shield of Your salvation, and Your right hand has supported me; Your humility has made me great” (Psalms 18:36). “You have given me the shield of Your salvation” – this refers to Abraham.1As it is written: “The word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision, saying: Fear not Abram, I am a shield for you” (Genesis 15:1). Your right hand has supported me – in the fiery furnace, in famine, and against the kings. “Your humility has rendered me great” – with what humility did the Holy One blessed be He render Abraham great? It is that he was sitting and the Divine Presence was standing [over him]. That is what is written: “The Lord appeared to him.”
“After my skin, this was struck [nikfu], and from my flesh I will view God” (Job 19:26) – Abraham said: After I circumcised myself, many proselytes came to attach themselves2Nikfu is related to mukaf, meaning attached to. to this covenant. “And from my flesh I will view God” – had I not done this, on what basis would the Holy One blessed be He have appeared to me? “The Lord appeared to him.”
Rabbi Isi began: “If I reject justice for my servant and my maidservant when they quarrel with me, what would I do when God arises, and when He makes His reckoning; what would I answer Him?” (Job 31:13–14). Rabbi Yosei’s wife was once quarreling with his maidservant.3In manuscripts: With her maidservant. He contradicted her [his wife] in her presence. She said to him: ‘Why are you contradicting me in front of my maidservant?’ He said to her: ‘Did Job not say this: “If I reject justice for my servant [and my maidservant…]”?’  Another interpretation, “If I reject justice [mishpat]…” – this refers to Abraham: “Abraham took Ishmael his son [and all those born in his house…and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskin]” (Genesis 17:23).4Mishpat can also mean law. Abraham did not withhold the fulfillment of the law of circumcision from Yishmael, who was considered Abraham’s servant. He said: ‘Had I not done so, on what basis would the Holy One blessed be He have appeared to me?’ “The Lord appeared to him in the plains of Mamre, and he was sitting.”
Rabbi Yitzḥak began: “You shall make for Me an altar of earth…[I will come to you and I will bless you]” (Exodus 20:21). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: [God said:] ‘If, regarding this person who built an altar in My name, I will reveal Myself to him and bless him, Abraham, who circumcised himself in my name, all the more so.’ “The Lord appeared to him in the plains of Mamre.”
Rabbi Levi began: “And a bull and a ram as peace offerings, to slaughter before the Lord…[for today the Lord appears to you]” (Leviticus 9:4). He [God] said: ‘If, regarding this person who sacrificed a bull and a ram to My name, I will reveal Myself to him and bless him, Abraham, who circumcised himself in my name, all the more so.’ “The Lord appeared to him in the plains of Mamre.”
It is written: “[Hear, you distant ones, what I have done….] Sinners were frightened in Zion, [trembling seized the falsifiers [ḥanefim]: Who among us can live with the consuming fire? Who among us can live with eternal conflagrations?]” (Isaiah 33:13–14) – Rabbi Yirmeya ben Elazar said: This is analogous to two children who ran away from school. One of them was flogged and the other one became frightened.5When he saw that his friend was punished for doing the same misdeed. Rabbi Yonatan said: In every instance where falsification [ḥanufa] is stated in the Bible, the verse is referring to heresy. The paradigm of them all is: “Sinners were frightened in Zion, trembling seized the falsifiers [ḥanefim].” Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Simon said: This is analogous to the head of a band of robbers who rebelled against the king. The king said: ‘Anyone who apprehends him, I will give him an advancement in status.’ Someone arose and apprehended him. The king said [to his guards]: ‘Guard both of them until morning.’ This one was concerned, and the other one was concerned. This one was concerned, saying: ‘What advancement will the king give me?’6Perhaps it will not be as much as I thought. That one was concerned, saying: ‘With what sentence will the king sentence me?’ So, in the future, Israel will be concerned and the idol worshippers will be concerned. Israel will be concerned: “They will be fearful for the Lord and for His goodness at the end of days” (Hosea 3:5). The idol worshippers will be concerned: “Sinners were frightened in Zion.” Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Simon said: Why does he [Isaiah] call them: “Eternal conflagrations”? (Isaiah 33:14). It is because were He to allow them, they would burn the entire world along with its inhabitants in a brief moment. “One who walks righteously” (Isaiah 33:15) – this refers to Abraham, [as it is written regarding him:] “[I have known him, so that he may command his children and his household after him] that they should observe the way of the Lord, to perform righteousness and justice” (Genesis 18:19). “And one who speaks uprightly” (Isaiah 33:15) – “the upright loved you” (Song of Songs 1:4).7This is seen as a reference to the Patriarchs. “He who spurns the profit of extortion” (Isaiah 33:15) – “[Abram said to the king of Sodom…] neither a thread nor a shoelace, [I shall take nothing from you]” (Genesis 14:22–23); “He who keeps his hands clean of grasping bribery” (Isaiah 33:15) – “I have raised my hand to the Lord, God Most High […neither a thread nor a shoelace, I shall take nothing from you].”  “He will dwell On High” (Isaiah 33:16) – Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Simon in the name of Rabbi Ḥanin in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: He [God] took him above the dome of the heavens. That is what is written: “Look [habet] now at the heavens” (Genesis 15:5) – it is relevant to say habet only about looking from above to below. “Rocky citadels are his stronghold” (Isaiah 33:16) – these are the clouds of glory.8The clouds that Abraham saw hovering over Mount Moriah (see Bereshit Rabba 56:1). “His bread is granted, his water is assured” (Isaiah 33:16) – “let some water be brought” (Genesis 18:4). “Your eyes will behold a king in his beauty” (Isaiah 33:17) – “the Lord appeared to him in the plains of Mamre.”
“He was sitting [yoshev] at the entrance of the tent in the heat of the day” (Genesis 18:1) – Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Yoshev is written without a vav.9So that it can also be read yeshev, he shall sit. He sought to stand, but the Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Sit. You are a model for your descendants; just as you sit and the Divine Presence stands, so your descendants will sit with the Divine Presence standing over them, when the people of Israel enter synagogues and study halls and recite the Shema. They sit in honor of Me, and I am over them,’ as it is stated: “God stands [nitzav] in the assembly of the Almighty” (Psalms 82:1). Rabbi Ḥagai said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: Omed is not written here, but nitzav – indicating being at the ready to act, just as it says: “You shall stand [venitzavta] on the rock” (Exodus 33:21). It is written: “It will be that even before they call out I will answer” (Isaiah 65:24).10This verse shows that God is always at the ready to answer Israel’s prayers. Rabbi Shmuel bar Ḥiyya and Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: For each and every praise that Israel praises the Holy One blessed be He, He rests His Divine Presence upon them. What is the source? “You are holy, enthroned in the praises of Israel” (Psalms 22:4).
“At the entrance [petaḥ] of the tent [ohel]” – [God said to Abraham:] ‘You opened a good opening [petaḥ] for passersby, you opened a good opening for proselytes. [Moreover,] were it not for you, I would not have created heaven and earth, as it is stated regarding them: “He stretched them like a tent for dwelling” (Isaiah 40:22).11Abraham provided the opening [petaḥ] that allowed God to create heaven and earth, which are referred to as tents. Were it not for you, I would not have created the orb of the sun, as it is stated: “In a tent within, He placed the sun” (Psalms 19:5). Were it not for you, I would not have created the moon, as it is stated: “Behold, even the moon does not shine [yaahil]”’ (Job 25:5). Rabbi Levi said: In the future, Abraham will sit at the entrance of Gehenna and will not allow any circumcised person of Israel to descend into it. But those who sinned greatly,12And rightfully deserve to go to Gehenna. what does he do to them? He removes the foreskin from babies who died before they were circumcised, and he places it upon them,13Making them appear uncircumcised. and sends them down to Gehenna. That is what is written: “He raised his arms against his comrades, violating his covenant” (Psalms 55:21).14"Covenant” referring to the covenant of circumcision. “In the heat of the day” – when that day will come in whose regard it is written: “For, behold, the day is coming, burning like an oven” (Malachi 3:19). “In the heat of the day” – Rabbi Yishmael taught: “In the heat of the day” – this is speaking of the sixth hour [of the day.] How then do I explain [the verse regarding the manna]: “The sun grew hot and it melted”? (Exodus 16:21).15The implication is that it was hot only in the sun, but not in the shade. It is at the fourth hour. You say that it is the fourth hour, but perhaps it is really at the sixth hour? When it says: “In the heat of the day” – that [expression] is speaking of the sixth hour. Or, perhaps it is the reverse, “in the heat of the day” refers to the fourth hour, and “the sun grew hot and it melted” refers to the sixth hour. You must admit, however: How can you explain “in the heat of the day” to be the fourth hour? Is it not so that at the fourth hour, the heat is only in a place where the sun shines? At the fourth hour, the shade is cool while the sun is hot. At the sixth hour, the shade and the sun are equally hot. Therefore, you should not say in accordance with the second formulation, but rather like the first formulation: “In the heat of the day” refers to the sixth hour, and “the sun grew hot and it melted” refers to the fourth hour, as only in the place where the sun shone did it melt. Rabbi Tanḥuma says: It [the sixth hour] is at a time when people do not have a shadow at the bottom of them.16The sixth hour is at noon, when one’s shadow cannot be seen, as the sun is directly overhead. Rabbi Yanai said: He pierced a hole from Gehenna and heated up the entire world along with its inhabitants for a brief moment, for the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘The righteous are suffering and the world is comfortable?’17God unleashed the heat of Gehenna for Abraham’s benefit, even though it was inconvenient for the rest of the world. This teaches that heat is effective for a wound.
“He lifted his eyes and he saw, and, behold, three men were standing over him; he saw and ran toward them from the entrance of the tent, and prostrated himself to the ground” (Genesis 18:2). He [Abraham] said: ‘Before I was circumcised, passersby would come in to me.’18Abraham was concerned that perhaps he would no longer have visitors (see Bereshit Rabba 47:10). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Before you were circumcised, uncircumcised people would come to you. Now, I and the members of my entourage are revealing ourselves to you.’ That is what is written: “He lifted his eyes and saw, and, behold, three men were standing near him; [he saw…].” “He saw” – the Divine Presence; “he saw” –the angels. Rabbi Ḥanina said: The names of the months19Nisan, Iyar, etc. ascended from Babylon.20Before the Jews were exiled to Babylonia, the months were referred to as first month, second month, etc., and had no proper names. These names are mentioned only in the post-exilic books of the Bible. Reish Lakish said: The names of the angels, Mikhael, Refael, and Gavriel, as well.21Before the Babylonian exile, personal names for angels were never used. They first appear in the book of Daniel. Rabbi Levi said: One appeared to him in the image of a Saracen, one in the image of a Nabatean, and one in the image of an Arab. He [Abraham] said: ‘If I see that the Divine Presence waits for them, I will know that they are prominent people. If I see that they act respectfully towards to one another, I will know that they are reputable people.’22This explains why it says: “He saw” twice in the verse. When he saw them acting respectfully towards one another, he knew that they were reputable people. Rabbi Abahu said: The main tent of our patriarch Abraham was open on both sides, like a large plaza. He said: ‘If I see them, that they turn off from their way to approach this way, I will know that they are coming to me.’ When he saw that they had turned off the road, he immediately “ran toward them from the entrance of the tent, and prostrated himself to the ground.”
“He said: My Lord, please, if I have found favor in Your eyes, please do not depart from upon your servant” (Genesis 18:3). “He said: My lords [adonai],23The midrash interprets the term adonai not as a reference to God, but rather to the three angels, adonai being in the plural. That raises the question: Why is the rest of the verse in the singular? The midrash responds that he directed his request to their senior member. please, if I have found favor in your eyes” – Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great taught: He said this to the senior one of them, that is Mikhael. “Please, let a little water be taken, and wash your feet, and recline beneath the tree” (Genesis 18:4). “Please, let a little water be taken” – Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Simai: The Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham: ‘You said: “Please, let a little water be taken.” By your life, I will repay your descendants in the wilderness, in inhabited land,24After they have entered the Land of Israel. and in the future.’ That is what is written: “Then Israel sang this song: Rise, well; call out to it” (Numbers 21:17). That was in the wilderness. In the land of Canaan, from where is it derived? “A land of streams of water, of springs and depths, emerging in the valley and on the mountain” (Deuteronomy 8:7). In the future, from where is it derived? The verse states: “On that day, spring water will emerge from Jerusalem” (Zechariah 14:8). [God said:] ‘You said: “And wash your feet.” By your life, I will repay your descendants in the wilderness, in inhabited land, and in the future.’ In the wilderness, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “I bathed you in water” (Ezekiel 16:9). In inhabited land, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “Wash, purify yourselves” (Isaiah 1:16). In the future, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “When the Lord will have washed the filth of the daughters of Zion” (Isaiah 4:4). [God said:] ‘You said: “And recline beneath the tree.” By your life, I will repay your descendants in the wilderness, etc.,’ as it is stated: “He spread a cloud like a curtain” (Psalms 105:39). That was in the wilderness. In the Land of Israel, from where is it derived? “You shall dwell in booths seven days” (Leviticus 23:42). In the future, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “It will be a shelter for shade by day” (Isaiah 4:6). [God said:] ‘You said: “And I will take a piece of bread” (Genesis 18:5). By your life, I will repay your descendants,’ etc. “The Lord said to Moses: Behold, I am raining food for you from the heavens” (Exodus 16:4). That was in the wilderness. In the Land, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “A land of wheat and barley” (Deuteronomy 8:8). In the future, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “There will be an abundance of grain in the Land” (Psalms 72:16). So, it is written: “Abraham ran to the herd [and took a young bull, tender and good]” (Genesis 18:7). [God said:] ‘By your life, I will repay your descendants,’ etc.: “A wind went from the Lord, and brought over quails from the sea” (Numbers 11:31). That was in the wilderness. In the Land, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “The children of Reuben…had much livestock” (Numbers 32:1). In the future, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “It will be on that day, each man will maintain [a heifer and two sheep]” (Isaiah 7:21). So, it is written: “He was standing over them” (Genesis 18:8). [God said:] ‘By your life, I will repay your descendants,’ etc. “The Lord was going before them by day in a pillar of cloud, to guide them on the way” (Exodus 13:21). That was in the wilderness. In the Land, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “God stands in the assembly of the Almighty” (Psalms 82:1). In the future, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “The one who breaches goes before them…[and the Lord is at their head]” (Micah 2:13).
“And I will take a piece of bread, and you will sustain your heart, then depart, inasmuch as you have passed by your servant. They said: Do so, as you have said” (Genesis 18:5). “And I will take a piece of bread, and you will sustain your heart, then depart” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: In the Torah, in the Prophets, and in the Writings, we have found that bread is the sustenance of the heart. In the Torah, from where is it derived? “And I will take a piece of bread, and you will sustain your heart.” In the Prophets – “Sustain your heart with a piece of bread” (Judges 19:5). In the writings – “And bread sustains man’s heart” (Psalms 104:15). Rav Aḥa said: “Sustain your heart [levavkhem]” is not written here, but rather, “sustain your heart [libekhem].” This teaches that the evil inclination has no authority over angels.25The word “heart” can be spelled with one bet (lev) or two (levav). When it is spelled with two bets it means to include both man’s good inclination and his evil inclination (Mishna Berachot 9:5). Here it is spelled with just one bet, indicating that angels have no evil inclination. That is in accordance to the opinion of Rabbi Ḥiyya, as Rabbi Ḥiyya said: “Direct your heart [levavkhem] to its rampart” is not written here, but rather, “libekhem” (Psalms 48:14). That is what is said: the evil inclination will have no authority in the future.26As that verse is speaking of Messianic times. “Inasmuch as [al ken] you have passed by your servant” – Rabbi Yehoshua said: [Abraham said:] ‘From the day that the Holy One blessed be He created His world, you were foreordained to come to me,’ “inasmuch [al ken] as you have passed.”27The word ken appears numerous times in the account of creation: Vayehi khen, “and it was so.” This is as it says [in Pharaoh’s response to Moses]: “So [khen], may the Lord be with you” (Exodus 10:10).28There, too, Pharaoh meant: If it is preordained that your people should leave Egypt, so be it. He, of course, believed that it was not so. “They said: Do [ta’aseh] so, as you have said” – they [the angels] said: ‘Eating and drinking do not apply to us, but you, for whom eating and drinking do apply, you shall do [ta’aseh] so for yourself; may it be His will that you should merit to prepare another feast for your male offspring that will be born to you.’29As recorded in Genesis 21:8.
“Abraham hurried to the tent, to Sarah, and said: Quickly prepare three se’a of high quality flour, knead and make cakes” (Genesis 18:6). “Abraham hurried to the tent, to Sarah, and said: Quickly [prepare three se’a of high quality flour, knead and make cakes]” – Rabbi Evyatar said: She baked nine se’a – three for cakes, three for dumplings, and three for various pastries. The Rabbis said: There were three [se’a altogether] – one for cakes, one for dumplings, and one for pastries. “Knead and make cakes [ugot]” – that teaches that it was the onset of Passover.30As it is written: “They baked the dough that they had taken out of Egypt into unleavened cakes [ugot]” (Exodus 12:39). Rabbi Yona in the name of Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina: The wilderness of Sin31Where the manna began to fall for the Israelites (Exodus chapter 16). and the wilderness of Alush32Mentioned as one of the stations of the Israelites in the wilderness (Numbers 33:13). are one and the same. By what merit were the people of Israel privileged to eat manna in the wilderness? It was by the merit of Abraham, who said: “Knead [lushi] and make cakes.”
“Abraham ran to the herd and took a young bull, tender and good, and gave it to the lad and he hurried to prepare it” (Genesis 18:7). “Abraham ran to the herd” – Rabbi Levi said: He ran for the advancement of that nation in whose regard it is written: “Ephraim is a trained calf that loves to thresh” (Hosea 10:11).33”Ephraim” is often used as a name to denote all of Israel. As expounded before this, Abraham’s actions here provided merit from which the people of Israel benefitted later in history. “And took a young bull” – one could think that it was large.34A grown bull, whose meat is tough. The verse therefore states: “Tender.” If it was “tender,” one could think that it was inferior. The verse therefore states: “And good.” “And gave it to the lad” – this was Ishmael. [Abraham delegated the task to him] in order to train him in mitzvot.
“He took butter and milk, and the young bull that he had prepared, and placed it before them; he was standing over them beneath the tree, and they ate” (Genesis 18:8). “He took butter and milk” – Rabbi Ḥanina said: The highest quality [butter] is one-sixtieth of the milk,35The best butter is made from the creamiest one-sixtieth part of the milk. the intermediate quality is one-fortieth, and the lowest quality is one-twentieth. Rabbi Yona said: The highest quality [butter] is one-hundredth of the milk, the intermediate quality is one-sixtieth, and the lowest quality is one-twentieth.36Abraham gave them butter with whole milk, from which only a small percentage of the fat had been made into high quality butter. And where was the bread?37Abraham told Sarah to prepare three se’a of flour for bread and cakes. Why does it not mention here that it was served to them? Efrayim Makshaa, a student of Rabbi Meir, said in the name of Rabbi Meir: She began to menstruate [just then] and the dough became ritually impure. The Rabbis say: He did bring the bread before them as well. If he brought these items, which he did not mention [earlier], all the more so did he bring the items that he did mention.38The bread is not mentioned here because it goes without saying that it was served along with the meat and butter. “He was standing over them” – here it says: “He was standing over them,” but elsewhere it says: “[behold, three men] were standing over him” (Genesis 18:2). The explanation is that before he satisfied his obligation to them, they were standing over him.39He felt an obligation towards them, so it was as if they were standing over him. Once he satisfied his obligation to them, he was standing over them.40They were awed by Abraham’s actions.  Awe of him overcame them: Mikhael was trembling, Gavriel was trembling. Rabbi Tanḥuma in the name of Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Avun in the name of Rabbi Meir: The parable says: When you enter a city, follow its customs.41As in the English saying: ‘When in Rome, do as the Romans do.’ On High, where there is no eating and drinking, when Moses ascended on High he did not eat, as it is stated: “I remained on the mountain forty days and forty nights; bread I did not eat and water I did not drink” (Deuteronomy 9:9). But below, where there is eating and drinking: “He was standing over them beneath the tree, and they ate.” Were they actually eating? No, they appeared as though they were eating, the morsels disappearing one by one.
“They said to him: Where is Sarah your wife? He said: Behold, in the tent” (Genesis 18:9). “They said to him [elav]: Where is Sarah your wife?” The letters alef, yod, vav are dotted;42These three letters in the word elav have dots placed over them in the Torah. lamed is not dotted. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar said: Wherever you find the number of undotted letters greater than the number of dotted letters, one expounds the undotted letters. If the number of dotted letters is greater than the number of undotted letters, one expounds the dotted letters. Here, where the number of dotted letters is greater than the number of undotted letters, one expounds the dotted letters, [which spell out]: ‘Where is he [ayo] – Abraham?’ Rabbi Azarya said: Just as they said [to Abraham]: “Where is Sarah?” so they said to Sarah: ‘Where is Abraham?’ “He said: Behold, in the tent” – that is what is written: “Blessed beyond women is Yael, wife of Ḥever the Kenite; beyond the women in the tent, she shall be blessed” (Judges 5:24). Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman, Rabbi Elazar said: Beyond the women of the generation of the wilderness, who dwelled in tents, as it is stated: “Each man at the entrance of his tent” (Numbers 11:10). Why should she be more blessed than they were? They bore children and kept the world going, but what use would it have been? Were it not for her, they would have been eradicated. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Beyond the matriarchs.43Sarah (here), Rebecca (Genesis 24:67), and Leah and Rachel (Genesis 31:33), are all mentioned in connection with tents. They bore children, etc., but were it not for her, they would have been eradicated.
“He said: I will return to you at this time next year and, behold, a son for Sarah your wife. And Sarah was listening at the entrance of the tent, and it was behind him” (Genesis 18:10). “He said: I will return to you at this time next year…and it was behind him” – this is Ishmael. “And it was behind him” – because of seclusion.44Yishmael would stand at the entrance of the tent in order to ensure that men would not enter it when Sarah was alone, to avoid the seclusion of a man and a woman, which is forbidden.  “And it was behind him” – this refers to the angel, who looked behind him, sensing that light was coming from behind him.45Sarah’s body virtually glowed from her righteousness. “Abraham and Sarah were old, advanced in years; it had ceased to be with Sarah the manner of women” (Genesis 18:11). “Abraham and Sarah were old” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It was already stated: “Abraham and Sarah were old,” why does the verse state [again]: “Abraham was old”? (Genesis 24:1).46That verse is referring to a time forty years later than our verse. The explanation is that the Holy One blessed be He restored him to the days of his youth;47When the angels came to him he became reinvigorated. Consequently, he had to go through the ageing process again. therefore, it was necessary to write a second time: Abraham was old. Rabbi Ami said: Here it refers to old age with vitality, and there it refers to old age without vitality. “It had ceased [ḥadal] to be with Sarah the manner of women” – just as it says: “If you refrain [teḥdal] from vowing” (Deuteronomy 23:23), [meaning that] it had ceased, just as it says: “And he refrained [veḥadal] from offering the Paschal lamb” (Numbers 9:13).
“Sarah laughed to herself, saying: After my languishing, shall I have youth [edna], and my husband is old?” (Genesis 18:12). “Sarah laughed to herself [bekirba] saying” – this is one of the instances that they emended for King Ptolemy:48When a group of seventy sages translated the Torah for King Ptolemy, they altered the wording of several verses in order to avoid some difficulty. “Sarah laughed among her relatives [bikroveha].”49This was to avoid the difficulty: Why, when Abraham laughed (Genesis 17:17), was there no reaction, whereas Sarah was reprimanded? This emendation attributes her reprimand to the fact that she shared her skepticism with others. “And my husband is old” – a woman, as long as she is young, wears fine jewelry, [while old women do not],50A young woman wears jewelry to make herself attractive to her husband. Older women do not generally do so. but I, even after my languishing, I wear jewelry [edna],51I am once again donning jewelry, like a young woman. as it says: “I decked you with ornaments [edi]” (Ezekiel 16:11). A woman, as long as she is young, has menstrual cycles, [while old women do not,] but I, even after my languishing, I have edna, meaning set times [idanin]. A woman, as long as she is young, has pregnancies [iduyim], [while old women do not,] but I, even after my languishing, I have edna – it is my time. However, “my husband is old” – Rav Yehuda said: He grinds but does not discharge.52We engage in intercourse but he does not discharge semen. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Each of you considers yourself young, and your counterpart old, but am I too old53This is an interpretation of the words “and I have grown old” in the following verse. God is asking, have I grown old, as it were, and lost My ability to perform miracles? to perform miracles?’
“The Lord said to Abraham: Why is it that Sarah laughed, saying: Shall I indeed bear a child, and I have grown old?” (Genesis 18:13). “The Lord said to Abraham: Why is it that Sarah laughed, saying: [Shall I indeed bear a child, and I have grown old?]” – bar Kappara said: Peace [between spouses] is a great thing, as even Scripture spoke untruths in order to establish peace between Abraham and Sarah. “Sarah laughed to herself, saying: After my languishing, shall I have youth, and my husband is old?” But He did not say this to Abraham, but rather, “Why is it that Sarah laughed, saying: Shall I indeed bear a child, and I have grown old?” The verse does not say as Sarah said: “My husband is old,”54So that Abraham should not feel that Sarah had slighted him. but rather, “I have grown old.”
“Is any matter beyond the Lord? At the time, I will return to you; at this time next year, Sarah will have a son” (Genesis 18:14). “Is any matter beyond the Lord?” Rabbi Yudan ben Rabbi Simon said: This is analogous to one who had two chains in his hand. He went to the blacksmith and said to him: ‘Can you repair them for me?’ He said to him: ‘I can make them in the first place, should I not be able to repair them?’ So, here, [God said:] ‘I am able to create them in the first place, should I not be able to restore them to the days of their youth?’
“Sarah denied, saying: I did not laugh, for she was afraid. He said: No, but you did laugh” (Genesis 18:15). “Sarah denied, saying: I did not” – Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: The Holy One blessed be He never deigned to speak with a woman, except for that righteous woman [Sarah], and that, too, was out of necessity. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said in the name of Rabbi Idi: See how much He spoke in a roundabout manner in order to speak with her: “No, but you did laugh.”55Instead of saying: “Yes, you laughed,” He said it in an indirect manner. Rabbi Eliezer says: But is it not written: “She [Hagar] called the name of the Lord who spoke to her”? (Genesis 16:13). Rabbi Neḥemya said in the name of Rabbi Idi: That was through an angel. But is it not written [regarding Rebecca]: “The Lord said to her”? (Genesis 25:23). Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina bar Ḥama: That was through an angel. Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Yosei ben Zimra: It was through Shem son of Noah.56Rebecca had gone to consult Shem, who was a spiritual leader at the time. “The men arose from there and looked toward Sodom, and Abraham was walking with them to see them off” (Genesis 18:16). “The men arose from there and looked toward Sodom, and Abraham was walking with them to see them off” – the parable says: You fed them, you gave them to drink, accompany them. So, “Abraham was walking with them to see them off.”
Rabbi Eleazar wondered: But it is written, "And she [Hagar] called the name of the Lord who spoke with her, etc." (Gen. 16:13)? Rabbi Yehoshua said in Rabbi Nechemiah's name in Rabbi Idi's name: That was through an angel. But it is written, "And the Lord said to her [Rebecca]" (Gen. 25:23)? Rabbi Levi maintained: That was through an angel. Rabbi Eleazar says in the name of Rabbi Yose b. Zimra: That was through Shem son of Noah.

=== 49 | 49 ===
“The Lord said: Shall I conceal from Abraham what I am doing?” (Genesis 18:17). “And Abraham will become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him” (Genesis 18:18). “The Lord said: Shall I conceal from Abraham […and Abraham will become a great and mighty nation]” – Rabbi Yitzḥak began: “The memory of the righteous is for a blessing, and the name of the wicked will rot” (Proverbs 10:7). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Anyone who mentions a righteous man and does not pronounce a blessing for him, has violated a positive mitzva. What is the source? “The memory of the righteous is for a blessing.” And anyone who mentions a wicked man and does not pronounce a curse for him violates a positive mitzva. What is the source? “And the name of the wicked will rot.” Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: The names of the wicked are similar to weaving implements. Just as these weaving implements, as long as you use them, they are taut, while if you leave them, they slacken, so, too, have you ever, in all your days, heard a person call his son Pharaoh, Sisera, Sennacherib?1These names fell into disuse and rot away. It is, rather, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Reuben, and Simeon. Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Ḥelbo in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: Rabbi Yonatan, when he would reach this verse: “Who had been exiled from Jerusalem with the exile [that was exiled with Yekhonya king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon exiled]” (Esther 2:6), he would say: ‘Nebuchadnezzar, may his bones be crushed.’2In fulfillment of the verse: “The name of the wicked will rot.” And why did he not do so [when mentioning Nebuchadnezzar] in Jeremiah? It is because every time Nebuchadnezzar is written in Jeremiah, he was still alive;3The curse “may his bones be crushed” was not appropriate while he was still alive.  here, however, he was dead. Rav, when he would come to Haman on Purim, would say: ‘Cursed is Haman and cursed are his sons,’ in order to realize what is stated: “And the name of the wicked will rot.” Rabbi Pinḥas said: Ḥarvona is remembered for good.4This is what he said when reading Ḥarvona’s name. Ḥarvona was the one who suggested that Haman be hanged. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: We find that when the Holy One blessed be He mentions the name of Israel, He blesses them, as it is stated: “The Lord who remembers us, blesses” (Psalms 115:12). Rav Huna said in the name of Rav Aḥa: I know [from that verse] only that it is so regarding six hundred thousand,5An allusion to the nation of Israel as a whole (see Exodus 12:37). from where is it derived regarding each and every member of Israel, that when the Holy One blessed be He mentions his name He blesses him? It is as it is stated: “Shall I conceal from Abraham what I am doing? And Abraham will become a great and mighty nation.” The verse need only have said: “The Lord said: Because the outcry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great” (Genesis 18:20).6The Torah could have skipped verses 18 and 19, which praise Abraham, altogether, proceeding directly to verse 20. However, the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘I have mentioned the righteous man, shall I not bless him? “Abraham will become a great nation.”’
It is written: “The secret of the Lord is [revealed] to those who fear Him, and His covenant to inform them” (Psalms 25:14). What is “the secret of the Lord”? This is circumcision,7Often referred to as brit, the covenant. as He did not reveal it from Adam the first man until twenty generations, until Abraham arose, and He gave it to him, as it is stated: “I will establish My covenant between Me and you” (Genesis 17:2). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘If you become circumcised, you will receive the secret [sod] of the Lord.’ What is the secret of the Lord? Samekh is sixty, vav is six, dalet is four, yielding seventy. Due to the merit of circumcision, I will bring forth out of you seventy, as it is stated: “With seventy people, your ancestors descended” (Deuteronomy 10:22). I will bring forth from them seventy elders, as it is stated: “Gather to Me seventy men of the elders of Israel” (Numbers 11:16). I will bring forth from them Moses, who pronounced the Torah in seventy languages, as it is stated: “Moses undertook to expound [be’er]8The midrash interprets be’er as being as explicit as possible, i.e. saying it in all languages. [this Torah]” (Deuteronomy 1:5). By whose merit? It is by the merit of circumcision, as it is stated: “The secret [sod] of the Lord is [revealed] to those who fear Him.”  The Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham: ‘It is sufficient for the disciple to be similar to his master.’9This is a new interpretation of: “The secret [sod] of the Lord is [revealed] to those who fear Him, and His covenant to inform them,” interpreting sod as inner circle. Through circumcision, Abraham became part of God’s inner circle, as it were.  He [Abraham] said before Him: ‘Who will circumcise me?’ He said: ‘You, yourself.’ Thereupon, Abraham took a knife and held his foreskin, and he was about to cut, but he was afraid, because he was so old. What did the Holy One blessed be He do? He extended his hand and held it with him as Abraham was cutting, as it is stated: “You are the Lord the God, who chose Abram […and made the covenant with him]” (Nehemiah 9:7–8). “And He made the covenant to him” is not written here, but rather, “made with him.” This teaches that the Holy One blessed be He was holding on to him. Another matter, “the secret of the Lord is [revealed] to those who fear Him.” At first, “the secret of the Lord” was [revealed] to those who fear Him. Then it was [revealed] to the upright: “And his secret is to the upright (Proverbs 3:32). Then it was to the prophets: “For the Lord God will do nothing without revealing His secret to His servants, the prophets” (Amos 3:7).10At first, in succeeding generations, “the secret of the Lord,” meaning His plans for the future, was available to all who feared Him; subsequently, it was restricted to those who were on the higher level of uprightness, and then finally to the prophets alone. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘This Abraham is God fearing, as it is stated: “For now I know that you are God fearing” (Genesis 22:12). This Abraham is the most upright of the upright, as it is stated: “The upright love you” (Song of Songs 1:4).11This verse is a reference to the Patriarchs. This Abraham is a prophet, as it is stated: “Now, restore the man's wife, as he is a prophet” (Genesis 20:7). Shall I, then, not reveal to him [what I am about to do]?’ Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: This is analogous to a king who gave an estate to his friend. Some time later, the king sought to chop down five non-fruit-bearing trees from inside it. The king said: ‘Even if I had asked [to cut down trees] from his own ancestral property, he would not have refused. So what of it?’12What would be wrong if I cut down those trees without his permission? [Nevertheless,] he consulted with him [first]. So, the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘I have already granted the land to Abraham as a gift, as it is stated: “To your descendants I have given this land” (Genesis 15:18), and these five cities belong to him. Even if I had I sought to do so [to destroy areas] from his own ancestral property he would not have refused. So what of it?’ [Nevertheless,] He consulted with him first. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: This is analogous to a king who had three close friends, and he would never do anything without their knowledge. One time he wanted to do something without their knowledge. He took the first one and banished him and expelled him from the palace. The second one he incarcerated in a prison cell and placed his royal seal upon it. Regarding the third, who was exceedingly beloved to him, he said: ‘I will not do anything without consulting him.’ So, too, Adam the first man – “He banished the man” (Genesis 3:24); Noah, “the Lord shut him in” (Genesis 7:16). Regarding Abraham, who was exceedingly beloved to him, he said: ‘Could I do anything without his knowledge?’ Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: This is analogous to a king who had a senior adviser, and he would not do anything without his knowledge. The king said: ‘Did I not appoint him as my adviser specifically so that I would not to do anything without his knowledge?’  Rabbi Yudan said: The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘His brother’s son, Lot, is there; shall I not reveal it to him?’ The Rabbis say: [God said:] ‘I have already called him their father, as it is stated: “For I have rendered you the father of a multitude of nations” (Genesis 17:5).13Including Sodom and Gomorrah. Does one judge a son without [notifying] the father? I revealed the giving of the Torah to him. I revealed Gehenna to him.14See Bereshit Rabba 44:21. The sentence of Sodom is tomorrow, shall I not reveal it to him?’ Rabbi Aḥa said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman in the name of Rabbi Natan: Abraham knew even the laws of the joining of courtyards [on Shabbat].15Even though they are of rabbinic, not biblical origin. Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel: He knew even the new name that the Holy One blessed be He is destined to call Jerusalem, as it is stated: “At that time, they will call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord” (Jeremiah 3:17). Rabbi Berekhya, Rabbi Ḥiyya, and the Rabbis from over there16In Babylon. in the name of Rabbi Yehuda: There is not a single day that the Holy One blessed be He does not introduce a new halakha in the supernal court. What is its source? “Hear the fury of His voice, the sound [hegeh] that emerges from His mouth” (Job 37:2). Hegeh is nothing other than Torah, as it is stated: “You shall speak of [vehagita] it day and night” (Joshua 1:8). Even those laws Abraham knew.
“Abraham will become.” Rabbi Tanḥum in the name of Rabbi Berekhya: He informed him that the world would have no less than thirty righteous men like Abraham.17He derived this from the verse: “So shall be [yihye] your seed” (Genesis 15:5), yihye alluding to thirty, as the Midrash goes on to explain (Tanḥuma, Vayera 13). Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Aḥa in the name of Rabbi Alexandri cite it from here: “Abraham will become [hayo yihye].” Yod is ten, heh is five, yod is ten, heh is five.18The numerical value of yihye is thirty.
“For I love him, so that he will command his children and his household after him, that they observe the way of the Lord, to perform righteousness and justice, so that the Lord will bring upon Abraham what He spoke concerning him” (Genesis 18:19). “For I love him, so that he will command [his children…to perform righteousness and justice]” – Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Alexandri: This refers to providing the first meal to mourners after a burial. The Rabbis say: It refers to visiting the ill. Rabbi Azarya in the name of Rabbi Yehuda: Righteousness at first, and ultimately justice. How so? Abraham would take in passersby. After they ate and drink, he said to them: ‘Recite a blessing.’ They said: ‘What should we say?’ He said to them: ‘Say: Blessed is God, the Most High, whose food we have eaten.’ If he agreed to recite the blessing, he would eat, drink and go. But if he would not agree to recite the blessing, he [Abraham] would say to him: ‘Give me what you owe.’ He would say: ‘What do I owe you?’ He would say to him: ‘A cup of wine costs ten polars, a pound of meat costs ten polars, and a loaf of bread costs ten polars. [After all,] who can provide you with wine in the wilderness? Who can provide you with meat in the wilderness? Who can provide you a loaf of bread in the wilderness?’ When he [the guest] would see the trouble that he was causing him, he would say: ‘Blessed is God, the Most High, whose food we have eaten.’ That is what we have written: Righteousness at first, and ultimately justice. “So that the Lord will bring upon Abraham…” – It is taught: Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says: Anyone who leaves behind a son who toils in Torah, it is as though he did not die, as it is stated: “So that the Lord will bring upon Abraham”; “what He spoke to him”19If it had been written this way, it could have been interpreted to mean that God will grant Abraham everything He had spoken to him concerning his descendants. is not stated, but rather, “what He spoke concerning him.”20God will bring reward to Abraham himself, in accordance with what He had spoken concerning Abraham himself, even after his death.
“The Lord said: Because the outcry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great and because their sin is very heavy” (Genesis 18:20). “The Lord said: Because the outcry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great [raba]” – Rabbi Ḥanina said: It was growing continuously greater.21The word raba should be understood in the present tense, “becoming greater.” Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: We have heard regarding the generation of the Flood that they were sentenced with water, and regarding the Sodomites that they were sentenced with fire. From where can it be derived to apply what is stated regarding each to the other?22Both the generation of the Flood and the people of Sodom were punished with both water and fire. The verse states: Raba [here, and] raba [there]23“The wickedness of man was great [raba]” (Genesis 6:5). for a verbal analogy.
“I will descend now and see, if they have acted in accordance with her outcry that has reached me, destruction, and if not, I will know” (Genesis 18:21). “I will descend now” – Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: This is one of the ten descents [of God] that are stated in the Torah.  Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: This teaches that the Omnipresent opened for them an opening for repentance,24The sinfulness of the people of Sodom was already an established fact; God did not have to “go down” and investigate it. The verse means that God here was offering them a chance to repent from their evilness. as it is stated: “I will descend now and see, if they have acted in accordance with her outcry that has reached me,25And they do not repent. destruction” – they have incurred liability to be destroyed. “And if not,26If they repent. I will know” – I will let them know about the attribute of justice in the world.27They will not be punished by total destruction, but with some other form of punishment to expiate their sins. Rabbi Levi said: [God said:] ‘Even if I would want to keep silent, the plight of a certain girl does not allow me to be silent.’ There was an incident involving two girls who went down to drink and to draw water. One said to the other: ‘Why is your face so sickly?’ She said to her: ‘Her28She was referring to herself. food supply is depleted and she is close to death [from starvation].’ What did she [the other girl] do? She filled her jug with flour and exchanged that jug for the jug that was in the hand of the other. When they realized what she had done, they took her and burned her.29Charity was considered a great evil in Sodom. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Even if I would want to keep silent, the plight of that girl does not allow me to be silent.’ That is what is written: “In accordance with her outcry.”30Haketzaakata can mean “its outcry,” or “her outcry.” It does not say: “In accordance with their outcry,”31Referring to the people of Sodom in general. but rather, her outcry. Which is that? The plight of that girl. Rabbi Yirmeya ben Elazar said: The main period of tranquility of Sodom was only fifty-two years, twenty-five years of which the Holy One blessed be He caused the mountains to thunder over them, and brought quakes upon them, so that they would repent. But they did not do so. That is what is written: “He who moves mountains and they do not know” (Job 9:5), and ultimately, “who overturns them in His wrath” (Job 9:5).
“The men turned from there and went to Sodom, and Abraham was still standing before the Lord” (Genesis 18:22). “The men turned from there” – this teaches that angels do not have backs to their heads.32The Midrash interprets the verse to mean that the angels were still facing Abraham, even though they were already walking away from him. “And went to Sodom, and Abraham was still standing before the Lord” – Rabbi Simon said: This is a scribal emendation, as it was [actually] the Divine Presence that was waiting for Abraham.
Abraham approached, and he said: Would You even destroy the righteous with the wicked?” (Genesis 18:23). “Abraham approached, and he said…” – Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Neḥemya, and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yehuda says: The term approaching means for battle33To argue against God. – “Yoav and the people who were with him approached Aram to battle” (I Chronicles 19:14). Rabbi Neḥemya said: Approaching means for conciliation, as it says: “The children of Judah approached Joshua” (Joshua 14:6). The Rabbis said: Approaching is for prayer, as it says: “It was at the time of offering up the afternoon offering that Elijah the prophet approached, and he said: Lord, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, let it be known today that You are God in Israel…” (I Kings 18:36). Rabbi Elazar interpreted it: [Abraham said:] ‘If it entails battle, I am coming; if it entails conciliation, I am coming; if it entails prayer, I am coming.’34Abraham’s intent was to engage in all three activities if necessary. Rabbi Pinḥas, Rabbi Levi, and Rabbi Yoḥanan: When one passes before the ark,35To lead the prayers. one should not say to him [when inviting him to lead the prayers]: ‘Go and perform,’ or ‘Go and do battle,’ or ‘Go and wage the battle of the congregation,’ but rather, ‘Go and do battle in prayer.’36This includes the notion: Draw near for battle, conciliation, and prayer. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: Why did they institute fifteen blessings37In the daily Amida prayer. before [the blessing] “Who hears prayer”? It is corresponding to the fifteen mentions of God’s name in: “Give to the Lord, sons of the mighty” (Psalms 29:1) until: “The Lord sat enthroned at the flood” (Psalms 29:10), indicating that He eradicates calamities from coming to the world.38After the Flood, God promised there would be no more such disasters. Rav Huna in the name of Rav Aḥa: “Would You even [ha’af] destroy [tispe]” – [Abraham said:] ‘You control [tispe] wrath [af]; wrath does not control You.’39Instead of translating ha’af tispe as: “Will You even destroy” the Midrash interprets it: You control wrath. You are not carried away by wrath, as a human may be; You can overcome Your anger and forgive them. Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya said: [Abraham said:] ‘With the wrath [af] that You bring to Your world, You eradicate the righteous and the wicked. Not only do You not suspend punishment for the wicked in the merit of the righteous, but You are even [af] eradicating the righteous with the wicked.’ Rabbi and Rabbi Yonatan, Rabbi says: A mortal human being, fury overcomes him, but the Holy One blessed be He overcomes fury, as it is stated: “The Lord is vengeful and Master of fury” (Nahum 1:2). Rabbi Yonatan said: A mortal human being, zealotry overcomes him, but the Holy One blessed be He overcomes zealotry, as it is stated: “The Lord is Master of zealousness and vengeful” (Nahum 1:2). Rabbi Simlai asked Rabbi Yonatan: What is it that is written: “Some are punished [nispe] without justice”? (Proverbs 13:23). He said to him: It means without the judgment of his place of residence. There was an incident involving someone who was sent to collect taxes from the residents of Tiberias and the residents of Tzippori. While he was collecting in Tiberias, he saw someone from Tzippori. He arose and took hold of him. He said to him: ‘I am from Tzippori.’ He said to him: ‘I have written orders regarding Tzippori, to collect from it [as well].’ By the time he had finished collecting from the people of Tiberias, a reprieve was issued for Tzippori. It turns out that this man was punished without the judgment of his place.40If he had remained in Tzippori he would not have had to pay the tax. It emerges, then, that his payment was not in accordance with the judgment intended for his place.  Rabbi Levi said: This41The phenomenon that sometimes the righteous perish along with the wicked. is analogous to a she-bear that used to maul beasts. It could not find a beast to maul, so it mauled its own offspring. Rabbi Simon said: It is analogous to a scythe that is cutting thorns, but it was not sufficient for it, [so it cut] a rose bush, and it was not sufficient for it.42The scythe cuts indiscriminately every growth that is in the path of its blade. If there are roses among the thorns, they, too, are cut.
“Far be it from You to do something like this, to kill the righteous with the wicked, and the righteous will be as the wicked. Far be it from You; shall the Judge of all the earth not practice justice?” (Genesis 18:25). “Far be it [ḥalila] from You” – Rabbi Yudan said: It is profane for You,43Ḥalila is related to ḥol, meaning that which is unholy. it is foreign to You. Rabbi Aḥa said: Ḥalila ḥalila, twice – this entails profaning [ḥilul] the name of Heaven.44People will say that Your ways are unjust. Rabbi Abba said: “From doing this thing” is not written here, but rather, “to do something like this” – neither it, nor something similar to it, nor something lesser than it.45Even allowing the righteous to suffer a bitter fate other than death on account of the wicked seems unjust. Rabbi Levi said: Two people said the same thing, Abraham and Job. Abraham said: “Far be it from You to do something like this, to kill the righteous with the wicked.” Job said: “One matter, therefore, I say: The faultless and the wicked He destroys” (Job 9:22). Abraham received a reward for it, yet Job was punished for it. Abraham said it as a mature thought;46Literally, like a ripe fruit. Abraham’s argument was the result of well thought-out reasoning. Job said it as an immature thought47Literally, like an unripe fruit. Job spoke from emotion, without carefully contemplating his thoughts. – “One matter, therefore, I say: The faultless and the wicked He destroys.” Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: There is an intermingling of arguments48Abraham’s argument and God’s counter-argument are intermingled in this verse. here. Abraham said: “Far be it from You to do something like this, to kill the righteous with the wicked.” The Holy One blessed be He said: “And the righteous will be as the wicked.” [You think:] Let Him suspend punishment for the wicked in the merit of the righteous? If only they were [truly] righteous. But these are nothing other than righteous men of inferior quality,49The midrash uses the term nivlei – which means dates that fall off the tree before they ripen. They only pretended to be righteous, but inside they were rotten. Therefore they could not supply any merit to save the wicked. as Rabbi Yoḥanan said: In all instances of the words righteous men [tzadikim] which were stated regarding Sodom, tzadikim is written without a yod.50This is an indication that their righteousness was inferior. This is the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan [elsewhere as well], as Rabbi Yoḥanan said [regarding the Givonites]: “Our elders [zekenenu] and all the inhabitants of our land” (Joshua 9:11) – zekenenu is written without a yod, indicating sinful elders, shameful elders. “Perhaps there are fifty righteous men in the city; would You destroy it and not spare the place for the fifty righteous men that are in it?” (Genesis 18:24) Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Abraham said:51God had said He would not destroy the five cities (Sodom, Gomorrah, Adma, Tzevoim, Tzoar – see Genesis 14:2) if He found fifty righteous men there, ten for each city. The Midrash explains how Abraham’s plea went from fifty to forty-five (see Genesis 18:28). ‘Incorporate my righteous deeds and let them be included in the tally of fifty.’52If there are only nine people in each city, forty-five in all, let my righteousness take the place of the tenth man of each place. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: [Abraham said:] ‘Are You not the righteous One of the world? Incorporate Yourself with them so they reach the tally of fifty.’ Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: This is what Abraham said to Him: ‘With a mortal king, one can suspend his ruling by means of an appeal from commander to prefect, from prefect to governor. But You, because you have no one who can be used to suspend judgment for an appeal, will You not perform justice?’53This is what Abraham meant when he said: “Shall the Judge of all the earth not practice justice?” Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: [Abraham said:] ‘When You sought to impose judgment on Your world,54By creating the Roman empire, which ruled over virtually all the world. You delivered it into the hand of two people: Remus and Romulus,55The legendary founders of Rome. so that if one of them sought to perform an action the other could prevent him from doing so.56In the Roman system of government, there was always a senior official who could restrain the absolute power of the ruler. But You, because You have no one to prevent You from doing anything, will You not perform justice?’  Rav Ada said: [Abraham said:] ‘You took an oath that You would not bring a flood to the world. Are You seeking to evade Your oath? [Do You argue that You swore that] You would not bring a flood of water, but You may bring a flood of fire? If so, You have not fulfilled your oath.’ Rabbi Levi said: [Abraham said:] ‘“Shall the Judge of all the earth not practice justice?” If You wish to have a world, there can be no strict justice, and if You wish to have strict justice, there can be no world. You seek to hold the rope from both ends; You wish to have the world and You wish to have strict justice. If You do not concede somewhat, the world will be unable to endure.’ The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Abraham, “You love righteousness [tzedek] and abhor wickedness” (Psalms 45:8) – you love to vindicate [letzadek] My creations. “And abhor wickedness” – you refuse to condemn them. “Because of this, God your God, has anointed you over your counterparts with the oil of joy” (Psalms 45:8). What is “over your counterparts”? From Noah until you there were ten generations, and from among all of them, I did not speak with any of them except for you: “God said to Abram: Go you”’ (Genesis 12:1).
“The Lord said: If I find in Sodom fifty righteous people within the city, I will forgive the entire place for their sake” (Genesis 18:26). “The Lord said: If I find in Sodom” – Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: “For [I speak] of God who said: I have forgiven; I will not bring harm” (Job 34:31). This refers to what is written: “I will forgive [venasati] the entire place for their sake.” “I will not bring harm [eḥbol]” – [God said:] ‘I will not take collateral from them,57To secure payment for their sins. as it is written: “If you take…as collateral [taḥbol]” (Exodus 22:25). Yet they pile up [ḥovelim] allegations against Me, saying: He does not judge properly.’ “What I do not see [biladai eḥeze]” (Job 34:32) – if something is beyond Me,58This is the interpretation of biladai. If there is something that I have not seen, leading me to false judgment… go and examine My judgment.59This is the interpretation of eḥeze. If I am mistaken, “you teach me” (Job 34:32). “If I have performed injustice” (Job 34:32) with the former generations, “I will not continue” (Job 34:32) with the latter ones. “I am silent for him with his claims [badav]” (Job 41:4) – [God said to Abraham:] ‘For you and for the branches [badim] that emerge from you,60For your descendants. I will be silent.’61Despite the harsh words that you and they speak before Me, I will remain silent.  For Abraham, who said: “Far be it from You to do something like this”; for Moses, who said: “Why, Lord, will Your wrath be enflamed against your people?” (Exodus 32:11); for Joshua, who said: “Why did You take this people across…?” (Joshua 7:7); and for David, who said: “Why do You stand far off, Lord? Why do You hide Yourself in times of trouble?” (Psalms 10:1). “And his strident speech, and the elegance [ḥin] of his presentation” (Job 41:4) – grace [ḥen] was granted [to him] for the presentation of his lips, when he asked for mercy for the Sodomites.
“Abraham responded and said: Behold now, I have presumed to speak to my Lord, and I am dust and ashes” (Genesis 18:27). “Behold now, I have presumed […and I am dust and ashes]” – he said: ‘Had Amrafel killed me, would I not be dust now? Had Nimrod burned me, would I not be ashes now?’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘By your life, you said: “I am dust and ashes,” by your life, I will provide atonement to your descendants through them,’ as it is stated: “They shall take for the impure from the dust of the burning of the purification” (Numbers 19:17), “a pure man shall gather the ashes of the heifer” (Numbers 19:9). We learned: What is the procedure for fast days? They take out the ark to the city square and place burnt ashes upon the ark.62Mishna Taanit 2:1. After this, all those gathered in the square would place ashes on their heads (Mishna Taanit 2:1). Rabbi Yudan bar Menashe and Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman, one of them said: ‘[This was to recall] the merit of Abraham,’ and one said: ‘The merit of Isaac.’63The ashes, as it were, of his being sacrificed on Mount Moriah. According to the one who says the merit of Abraham, [he said:] “I am dust and ashes.”64So that either dust or ashes may be used in this ritual. According to the one who says the merit of Isaac: Ashes only. The statement of Rabbi Yudan is in disagreement with this.65With the latter opinion, that only ashes may be used. As Rabbi Yehuda ben Pazi66Earlier called Rabbi Yudan, for short. would proclaim in public and say: ‘Anyone to whom the public attendant did not come to place ashes on his head, let him take dirt67Translation follows emendation of Yefe Toar. and place it on his head.’ The statement of Rabbi Yehuda ben Pazi shows that dust is the same as ashes.
“Perhaps the fifty righteous people will lack five; will You destroy the entire city for the five? He said: I will not destroy, if I find there forty-five” (Genesis 18:28). “Perhaps the fifty righteous people will lack five” – Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: Abraham sought to go down directly from fifty to five.68The verse should thus be translated: “Perhaps the fifty righteous people will be lacking, so that there will be only five.” The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Back up.’69Lower your request by smaller increments. Rabbi Levi said: This is analogous to a water clock.70Similar to an hourglass, but uses water instead of sand. It was used to limit the amount of time given to an advocate in court. As long as it is filled with water, the advocate pleads his case. Sometimes, when the judge wishes him to continue pleading his case, he says: Add water to it.71By adding water, the advocate would have more time to plead his case. God here intimated to Abraham: ‘Go on with your pleas, just use smaller increments.’
“He said: Please, let my Lord not be incensed, and I will speak only this time. Perhaps ten will be found there. He said: I will not destroy for the ten” (Genesis 18:32). “He said: Please, let my Lord not be incensed…perhaps ten will be found there” – why ten?72Why did Abraham not continue to lower the number beyond ten? That would constitute an assembly for all of them together.73If ten righteous people were to be found among the five cities, that would be enough to convene an assembly if they all came together. A group of people is called an assembly only if it consists of ten individuals. Another explanation: Why ten? In the generation of the Flood, eight people remained,74Noah, his three sons, and their four wives. and it [judgment] was not deferred for the [rest of the] world due to their merit. Another explanation: Why ten? It is because he believed that there were ten there: Lot, his wife, his four daughters, and his four sons-in-law. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon and Rabbi Ḥanin in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Here [regarding Sodom] ten [righteous people were needed to save it], but regarding Jerusalem, it was even one. That is what it is written: “Wander through the streets of Jerusalem…[if you will find [timtze’u] a man, if there is a performer of justice, a seeker of faithfulness, I will forgive it]” (Jeremiah 5:1), and likewise it says: “One for one to find a tally” (Ecclesiastes 7:27). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: How much is the minimum [mitzui] amount for one city?75Jerusalem. It is even one.76That is what is meant by “one for one.” If even one is found in the entire city, justice would be deferred in his merit.
“The Lord went when He concluded to speak to Abraham, and Abraham returned to his place” (Genesis 18:33). “The Lord went when He concluded to speak to Abraham” – the judge, as long as the advocate is pleading his case, he waits. When the advocate becomes silent, the judge stands up [to leave]. So, “the Lord went when He concluded to speak to Abraham.” An advocate, as long as the judge shows him a receptive look, he pleads his case. When the judge stands up, the advocate goes silent. So, “the Lord went when He concluded to speak to Abraham,” and it is written: “And Abraham returned to his place.” A prosecutor, as long as the advocate is pleading his case and the judge shows him a receptive look, he waits. When the judge stands, the advocate goes silent, and the prosecutor77Who is also executioner. goes to implement his mission. So, “the Lord went” and it is written: “The two angels came to Sodom in the evening” (Genesis 19:1). 

=== 50 | 50 ===
“The two angels came to Sodom in the evening and Lot was sitting at the gate of Sodom; Lot saw them, and rose to meet them, and he prostrated himself with his face to the ground” (Genesis 19:1). “The two angels came to Sodom in the evening…” – “the ḥayot1A kind of angel. were darting to [ratzo] and fro like the appearance of a flash” (Ezekiel 1:14). Rabbi Aivu said: Ratzot2The usual form of the verb, meaning running or darting. is not written here, but rather, ratzo3Which can also mean to desire. – they had a desire to perform their mission. “Like the appearance of a flash [habazak]” – Rabbi Yehuda in the name of Rabbi Simon in the name of Rabbi Levi bar Parta: Like one who scatters [bozek] olive pomace4Which ignites easily. in an oven. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: [The ḥayot moved] as wind drives an [empty] wineskin. The Rabbis say: As wind drives the clouds. They [the angels] took their leave from Abraham at six hours and arrived in Sodom only in the evening?5Since they move so swiftly, they should have arrived there in a matter of seconds. The explanation is that they were angels of mercy, and they were tarrying, in the belief that perhaps He might find some merit for them.6As a result of Abraham’s intercessions. When He did not find any merit for them – “the two angels came to Sodom in the evening.”
“He acts through one, and who can respond to Him? His soul desires and He performs” (Job 23:13) – it is taught: One angel does not perform two missions, and two angels do not perform one mission. Yet you say: “[The] two [angels came to Sodom]”? The explanation is that Mikhael gave his tidings7To Abraham and Sarah, regarding the birth of a son. This was Mikhael’s mission, and after performing it he departed, leaving two angels. and departed, Gavriel was dispatched to overturn Sodom, and Refael, to rescue Lot. “The two angels came to Sodom” – here it says “angels,” but elsewhere,8When they first came to Abraham. it characterizes them as “people” (Genesis 18:2). The explanation is that there, when the Divine Presence was over them, they were characterized as “people.”9They were overshadowed by the aura of the presence of God. Once the Divine Presence departed from over them, they assumed the manifestation of angels. Rabbi Tanḥuma said that Rabbi Levi said: To Abraham, whose power was great, they appeared in the image of men; to Lot, whose strength was inferior, they appeared in the image of angels. Rabbi Ḥanina said: Before they performed their mission, they are characterized as people; after performing their mission, as angels. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: This is analogous to one who assumed a position of local government from the king. Until he reached his seat of authority, he walked about as a commoner. Once he reached the seat of his authority, he walked about as a nobleman. So, until they performed their mission, they are characterized as people, after performing their mission, they are characterized as angels.
“To Sodom [sedoma]” – it is taught in the name of Rabbi Neḥemya: Every word that requires a lamed at the beginning,10Indicating the preposition “to.” give it a heh at the end:11A heh at the end of a word (as in Sedoma) can be used in place of a lamed at the beginning of the word. Sedoma, Se’ira, Mitzraima, Ḥarana.12To Sodom, to Se’ir, to Egypt, to Ḥaran. But is it not written: “The wicked will return to the netherworld [lishola]”?13It has both a lamed prefix and a heh suffix. If both affixes have the same meaning, how can both be used in the same word? (Psalms 9:18). Rabbi Abba bar Zavda said: It means to the lowest depths in the netherworld. “In the evening [ba’erev]” – the evening of Sodom arrived [ba arba]; its sun had set, and its sentence was sealed. Rabbi Levi said: The Holy One blessed be He judges the nations of the world only at night, when they are sleeping,14And not engaged in sin. and judges Israel only during the day, when they are engaged in mitzvot. That is what is written: “He will judge the world in righteousness. [He will administer fair judgment to the nations]” (Psalms 9:9). “And Lot was sitting [yoshev]” – yashav is written.15Meaning: He assumed his seat. It was on that day that they appointed him the chief justice. There were five major judges in Sodom: Ketz Sheker, Rav Sheker, Rav Masteidin, Rav Naval, and Klepander.16The meanings of these names are, respectively: Ultimate in Lies, Chief of Lies, Chief Perverter of Justice, Chief Scoundrel, Abductor. Lot was the chief justice of them all. When he would tell them things that were agreeable to them, they would say to him: “Gesh hala” (Genesis 19:9) – rise to the top. But when he would tell them things that were disagreeable to them, they would say to him: “This one came to sojourn, and he sits in judgment?” (Genesis 19:9).
“He said: Behold now my lords; please turn aside to your servant’s house, stay the night, and wash your feet, and you can awaken early and go on your way. They said: No; rather, we will spend the night in the street” (Genesis 19:2). “Lot saw them, and rose to meet them…He said: Behold now my lords; [please turn aside]” – Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Huna, Rabbi Yudan said: [Lot was saying:] “Please turn aside” – even if I am not worthy, diverge from the ordinary practice.17The ordinary practice is that men of high stature do not lodge in the houses of unworthy people.  Rabbi Huna said: [Lot was saying:] Take a circuitous route to me, so you will not be seen coming to me. “To your servant’s house, stay the night, and wash your feet” – Abraham mentioned washing [feet] before staying the night,18Genesis 18:4. but Lot mentioned staying the night before washing [feet]. The explanation is that Abraham was strict regarding the dirt of idol worship;19Abraham thought they were idolaters, and was concerned that some of the dirt on their feet had been picked up from an idolatrous shrine, therefore he requested that they wash their feet before entering his premises. therefore, he mentioned washing first. Lot was not strict regarding the dirt of idol worship. But some say that this, too, he did with virtuous intent, so they would emerge, and they [the people of Sodom] would see dust on their feet,20Lot’s suggestion was that they wash their feet only after leaving his house, as they were about to resume their journey. and they would not say: ‘Where did they stay the night?’ “They said: No; rather, we will spend the night in the street” – one refuses [an offer from] an individual of low stature, but does not refuse an individual of higher status.21When Abraham invited them they did not refuse (Genesis 18:5). “He was intensely persistent towards them, and they turned aside to him, and entered his house. He prepared a feast for them; he baked unleavened bread, and they ate” (Genesis 19:3). “He was intensely persistent [vayiftzar]22The noun form of this word is haftzara. towards them” – he evoked anger [af] and anxiety [tzara] in them. “They turned aside to him, and entered his house” – this supports what Rav Huna said, [that Lot said to them:] ‘Take a circuitous route to me, so you will not be seen coming to me.’ “He prepared a feast for them” – he had spent time in the house of our forefather Abraham, who would welcome passersby. [“He baked unleavened bread [matzot].”] Rabbi Yitzḥak said: A great quarrel [matzut] arose over the salt. He said to her [his wife]: ‘Give these guests a little salt.’ She said to him: ‘Do you seek to promulgate this despicable and evil custom here, as well?’23‘Not only do you offer them lodging, but you wish to pamper them as well?’ It was because of this that Lot’s wife later became a pillar of salt (Genesis 19:26).
“Before they lay down, the men of the city, the men of Sodom, surrounded the house, from young to old, all the people from every quarter” (Genesis 19:4). “Before they lay down” they began asking him questions, saying to him: ‘The residents of the city, what [kind of people] are they?’ He said to them: ‘In every place there are good and wicked people; however, here they are mostly wicked.’  “The men of the city, the men of Sodom, surrounded the house […all the people from every quarter]” – there was no one among them who sought to hinder them. “They called to Lot, and said to him: Where are the men who came to you tonight? Take them out to us, and we will be intimate with them” (Genesis 19:5). “They called to Lot, and said to him” – Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said in the name of Rabbi Pedaya: All that night, Lot was pleading for mercy on their behalf, and they were receptive towards him. But once they said to him: “Take them out to us, and we will be intimate with them” – for sexual relations, they said to him: “Who else do you have here [po]?” (Genesis 19:12) – read it as: “What else could you [possibly] have to say [peh]?24Peh means mouth. Until now, you were permitted to advocate on their behalf, from now on, you are no longer permitted to advocate on their behalf.
“Lot went out to them to the entrance, and he closed the door behind him” (Genesis 19:6). “He said: Please, my brethren, do not do evil” (Genesis 19:7). “Here now, I have two daughters who have not been intimate with a man; I will now bring them out to you, and you may do to them as is fit in your eyes; only to these men do nothing, inasmuch as they came under the shelter of my roof” (Genesis 19:8). “Lot went out to them to the entrance…please, my brethren, do not…Here now, I have two daughters…only to these [hael] men” – these terrible acts.25This is expounded: Just to the men, do not do these terrible [hael] sins. Another interpretation, they are godly,26El means godly or mighty. they are powerful. “Inasmuch as they came under the shelter of my roof” – not due to my merit, but due to the merit of Abraham.27Abraham is described as Lot’s sheltering roof, as it was his merit that protected him from harm (see Genesis 19:29). Another interpretation, “inasmuch as they came under the shelter of my roof” – this teaches that she [Lot’s wife] moved them [the angels] to the side of the house. She said to him: ‘If you want to receive them, receive them in your portion [of the house].’28This why Lot said: “my roof” – mine, but not my wife’s.
“They said: Move aside. And they said: This one came to sojourn, and he sits in judgment? Now we will treat you worse than them. They were intensely persistent towards the man, Lot, and approached to break the door” (Genesis 19:9). “They said: Move aside [gesh hala]” – move over, go far away.  “They said: This one came to sojourn, and he sits in judgment?”29The literal translation is: He judges judgment. You are coming to destroy the law that was legislated by our predecessors.30You seek to pass judgment on our system of justice. Rabbi Menaḥama in the name of Rabbi Beivai: This is what the residents of Sodom stipulated among themselves, they said: ‘Any guest who comes here, we will have sexual relations with them and take their possessions. Even the one in whose regard it is written: “[For I love him, so that he will command his children and his household after him] that they observe the path of the Lord [to perform righteousness and justice]” (Genesis 18:19), we would have sexual relations with him and take his possessions.’31Even if Abraham himself would come to Sodom we would do this to him.
“The men extended their hands, and brought Lot to them, to the house, and closed the door” (Genesis 19:10). “They struck the men who were at the entrance of the house with blindness, from small to great; and they were unable to find the entrance” (Genesis 19:11). “The men extended their hands, and brought Lot to them, to the house…the men who were at the entrance of the house” – the one who initiated the transgression, the punishment began with him, as it is stated: “The people of Sodom…[from young to old]”; therefore, “they struck…with blindness, from small to great.” Similarly, “He obliterated all existence that was on the face of the earth, [from man, to animal]” (Genesis 7:23) – the one who initiated the transgression, the punishment began with him.32It says: “The Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great on the earth” (Genesis 6:5). Similarly, “On the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt…[from man to animal]” (Numbers 3:13) – the one who initiated the transgression, the punishment began with him. Similarly, “Her belly will distend and her thigh shall fall” (Numbers 5:27) – the part of the body that initiated the transgression, the punishment began with it.33In engaging in intercourse, she sinned with her belly and her thigh. They were stricken first, and then the rest of her body. Similarly, “You shall smite the inhabitants of that city by sword…[and its animals by sword]” (Deuteronomy 13:16) – the one who initiated the transgression, the punishment began with him. “And they were unable [vayilu] to find the entrance.” They grew weary [ilun], as it says: “It will be when it appears that Moav has wearied [nila]” (Isaiah 16:12). They became angry, as it says: “I am too irritated [nileiti] to bear” (Isaiah 1:14). They went mad, as it says: “For My people is foolish [ehvil]” (Jeremiah 4:22).
“For we are destroying this place, as their outcry has become great before the Lord, and the Lord has sent us to destroy it” (Genesis 19:13). “For we are destroying” – Rabbi Levi in the name of Rav Naḥman: The ministering angels, because they revealed the secret of the Holy One blessed be He,34That He was about to destroy Sodom. they were expelled from their stations [in heaven] for one hundred and thirty-eight years.35Jacob dreamt that he saw angels ascending from earth to heaven (Genesis 28:12). The Midrash asserts that these were the same angels who saved Lot, who were banished from heaven and forced to stay on earth until Jacob’s dream, which took place one hundred thirty-eight year later. Rabbi Tanḥuma attributed it [their banishment] to a subtle [improper] expression, [as] Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: It is because they were arrogant and said: “For we are destroying this place.”36They should have said “God is destroying” instead of “we are destroying.” “Lot came out and spoke to his sons-in-law, those who had wed his daughters, and said: Arise, depart from this place, as the Lord is destroying the city. He was as a jester in the eyes of his sons-in-law” (Genesis 19:14). “And spoke to his sons-in-law, [those who had wed his daughters]…” – he had four daughters,37The Midrash explains that the two expressions “sons-in-law” and “those who had wed his daughters” refer to two separate groups of people. two who were betrothed and two who were married. “Who had wed [lekuḥei] his daughters” is not written here, but rather, “who were wedding [lokeḥei] his daughters.”38But they had not yet married them. “He was as a jester in the eyes of his sons-in-law” – they said to him: ‘Harps and flutes are in the province, and the province is about to be overturned?’39The city is full of gaiety and merrymaking, and shows no indication of facing imminent doom. 
“And it was as dawn broke, the angels urged Lot, saying: Arise; take your wife, and your two daughters who are present, lest you be destroyed in the iniquity of the city” (Genesis 19:15). “And it was as dawn broke, the angels urged Lot, saying” – Rabbi Ḥanina said: [During the interval] from the first gleam of dawn until the illumination of the [entire] eastern horizon,40Referred to generally as the break of dawn. a person can walk four mil; from the illumination of the eastern horizon until sunrise, [he can likewise walk] four mil, as it is stated: “As dawn broke, [the angels urged Lot]” and it is written: “The sun emerged upon the earth [as Lot arrived in Tzo’ar]” (Genesis 19:23). Now, was it really four mil from Sodom to Tzo’ar?41The distance between the two places is actually five mil. Rabbi Ze’eira said: The angel was leveling the way before them.42Thus they were able to travel five mil in the time that one would normally walk four mil. From where is it derived that from the first gleam of dawn until the illumination of the eastern horizon43Translation follows the emendation of Nezer Hakodesh and Etz Yosef. a person can walk four mil? “As [kemo],” “and it was as [ukhmo]”44The verse could have said just kemo, but instead it stated ukhemo, adding a vav. – one period is equal to the other period.45The extra vav indicates that the two time periods, the period from the first gleam to the illumination of the east, and the period from the illumination of the east until sunrise, are equal. Rabbi Yosei bar Avin said: If a person says to you that the morning star is the first gleam of dawn he is saying an untruth. Sometimes it occurs in less time46The morning star sometimes appears before the first gleam of dawn. and sometimes it occurs in more time. It is,47The first gleam of dawn. rather, like two rays of light that ascend in the east and illuminate the world.  “And your two daughters who are present [nimtzaot]…” – Rabbi Toviya bar Rabbi Yitzḥak: Two [great] finds [metziot] [would emerge from his daughters] – Ruth the Moavitess and Naama the Amonitess.48Solomon’s principal wife. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: “I found David My servant” (Psalms 89:21) – where did I find him? It was in Sodom.49David was descended from Ruth.
“He hesitated and the men grasped his hand, and the hand of his wife, and the hand of his two daughters; out of the compassion of the Lord for him, they took him out, and placed him outside the city” (Genesis 19:16). “It was as they took them out, he said: Flee for your life; do not look behind and do not stay in the entire plain; flee to the mountain, lest you be destroyed” (Genesis 19:17). “He hesitated [vayitmama]” (Genesis 19:16) – [he expressed] wonderment [timahon] after wonderment;50This is expounded from the fact that it says vayitmama and not vayitma. he said: ‘What a great a loss of silver, gold, gems, and jewels.’ That is what is written: “Wealth is accrued for its owner to his detriment” (Ecclesiastes 5:12)51Lot’s great wealth caused him to hesitate to leave the city, thus endangering his life. – Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: This refers to Lot. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: It refers to Koraḥ.52See Numbers 16. Koraḥ’s wealth led him to become haughty and to challenge Moses, which led to his downfall. Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: This is Navot.53See I Kings 21. Navot’s refusal to part with his inherited property led to his death. Rabbi Levi said: This is Haman.54His wealth led him to haughtiness and, ultimately, death. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: This is the tribe of Reuben and Gad.55See Numbers 32. Their great cattle holdings caused them to choose a remote, outlying area as their territory, and they ended up being exiled before the other tribes. The Rabbis said: This is Job, who was wealthy, became poor,56His wealth was lost as an atonement for his sins. and was restored to what he had been.  “The men grasped his hand, and the hand of his wife and the hand of his two daughters…” (Genesis 19:16) – who was this? It was Refael. They raised an objection: Is it not written: “They took him out, and they placed him outside the city” (Genesis 19:16), and it is written: “It was as they took them out”? (Genesis 19:17).57These are all stated in the plural. How can you say that the verse speaks of one angel? He said to them: Read what is written thereafter: “They said: Flee for your life” is not written, but rather, “he said: Flee for your life.” “Flee to the mountain, lest you be destroyed” – [“to the mountain” means] by the merit of Abraham,58The angels told Lot to flee to Abraham, whose merit would protect him. who is called a mountain: “Leaping on the mountains” (Song of Songs 2:8),59In this verse and the next, the mountains are a metaphor for Israel’s three patriarchs. and it says: “Hear, mountains…” (Micah 6:2). “Lot said to them: Please, no, my lords” (Genesis 19:18). “Please, behold, your servant has found favor in your eyes, and you have increased your kindness that you have done with me to save my life, but I will not be able to flee to the mountain, lest the evil overtake me, and I will die” (Genesis 19:19). “Lot said to them: Please, no, my lords. Please, behold, your servant has found favor in your eyes…” – Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina:60In explaining why Lot refused to go to the mountain, which was a metaphor for Abraham. Two people expressed the same idea – Lot and the woman from Tzarefat. The woman from Tzarefat said [to Elijah]: ‘Until you came to me, the Holy One blessed be He would see my deeds and the deeds of the residents of my city. My deeds were greater than those of the residents of my city, and I was considered a righteous woman in their midst. Now that you have come to me, [and my good deeds are nothing compared to yours]: “Did you come to me to evoke my sin and to kill my son?”’ (I Kings 17:18). Lot said [as well]: ‘Before I go to Abraham, the Holy One blessed be He would see my deeds and the deeds of the residents of my city, and I was considered a righteous man in their midst. Now, if I would go to Abraham, whose good actions are greater than my own, I would not be able to survive in his environs.’  “But I will not be able” – Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Levi: From where do we learn: Just as a bad locale61Where the weather and other conditions are not comfortable. is challenging, so a good locale can be challenging? It is from here: “But I will not be able to flee to the mountain, lest [the evil] overtake me.” Sodom is located in the valley, and that is why he says: “But I will not be able to flee to the mountain.” He was living in the valley and they said to him: ‘Go to the mountain,’62Where the air is better than in the valley. and yet this is what he said. This teaches that even when going from a bad locale to a good locale, the good locale can be challenging.63Even though mountain air is healthier and more pleasant, the change from the atmosphere to which one is accustomed can endanger one’s health. “Here now, this city is near to flee there, and it is small; please, I will escape there. Is it not small, and my life will be saved” (Genesis 19:20). “He said to him: Behold, I have shown you favor for this matter as well, not to overturn the city of which you spoke” (Genesis 19:21). “Here now, this city is near to flee there…He said to him: Behold, I have shown you favor for this matter as well” – Rabbi Ḥalafta of Caesarea said: [God said:] ‘If Lot, because he [merely] hosted the angel, was shown favor by him, shall I not show you [Israel] favor because of you and because of your ancestors’ – “the Lord will show you favor” (Numbers 6:26).
“Hurry; escape there, as I will not be able to do anything until your arrival there. Therefore, he called the name of the city Tzoar” (Genesis 19:22). “Hurry; escape there, as I will not be able to do anything until your arrival there…” – Rabbi Levi said: This is analogous to a province that had two patrons,64Spokesmen who were appointed to advocate on behalf of the province before the king. one a country-dweller and the other a nobleman. The king became angry at them [the people of the province] and sought to punish them. The king said: ‘If I punish them in the presence of the nobleman, they would then say: Had the country-dweller been here, he would have protected us. And if it would be [that I punish them] in the presence of the country-dweller, they would then say: Had the nobleman been here, he would have protected us.’ So, too, because some of the Sodomites worshipped the sun and some of them worshipped the moon, the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘If I punish them during the day, they would then say: Had the moon been there, it would have protected us. If I punish them at night, they would then say: Has the sun been there, it would have protected us.’ Rather, he punished them on the sixteenth of Nisan,65Near the vernal equinox, when day and night are equal in duration. at a time when both the sun and the moon were present in the heavens. That is what is written: “The sun rose upon the earth and Lot came to Tzoar…” (Genesis 19:23).66At daybreak, when both the sun and the moon are visible.

=== 51 | 51 ===
“And the Lord rained down brimstone and fire upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah from the Lord, from the heavens” (Genesis 19:24). “And the Lord rained down brimstone and fire upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah…” – it is written: “Let them be like snails that melt away as they go along, like a nefel mole [eshet],1A kind of subterranean animal. which has never seen the sun…” (Psalms 58:9). Like this kilei-silei, a snail, like a slug that dissolves into refuse, like a mole that does not have a chance to see the sun before it returns to the earth, like a married woman [eshet ish] who committed adultery, who is ashamed to show her fetus and casts it away at night before it sees the sun. That is what is written: “The sun rose upon the earth and Lot came to Tzoar” (Genesis 19:23).2The people of Sodom also did not see the sun, but were annihilated at sunrise.
“And the Lord rained down…upon Sodom…” – this is analogous to two provinces that rebelled against the king. The king said: ‘Let one of them3The province whose rebellion was less severe. be burned down at its own expense, and let the other one be burned at the expense of the royal treasury.’4The province that rebelled more severely. The king was so anxious to destroy it that he wanted to do it at state expense. So, elsewhere [regarding Edom]: “Its streams will turn into pitch, and its dust into sulfur, [and its land will become burning pitch]” (Isaiah 34:9).5The Edomites were less sinful than the people of Sodom, and their fire of punishment came from their own streams and dirt. But here, “and the Lord rained down…upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah from the Lord, from the heavens….”6God punished the people of Sodom from His own resources, namely, fire and brimstone from heaven. Rabbi Avun said: This is analogous to a maidservant who was removing a loaf of bread from the oven. Her mistress’s son came along, and she removed a loaf and gave it to him. Her own grandson came along, and she removed coals and gave them to him. So, elsewhere, [regarding Israel]: “The Lord said to Moses: Behold, I am raining down food for you from the heavens” (Exodus 16:4). But here, “and the Lord rained down brimstone and fire upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah.”7Heaven is like the maidservant of God. When God’s child, Israel, comes along, heaven provides it with bread. When heaven’s own children come along, alluding to the people of Sodom, who worshiped the heavenly bodies, heaven provides them with fire and brimstone. Rabbi Ḥelbo ben Rabbi Ḥilfi bar Simkai in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Simon: “and the Lord rained down…upon Sodom” – this refers to Gavriel. “From the Lord from the heavens” – this is the Holy One blessed be He.8The Midrash is explaining the unusual wording of the verse: “And the Lord rained down brimstone… from the Lord,” rather than “from Himself.” The first mention of “the Lord” refers to the angel Gavriel. Rabbi Elazar said: Every place that “and the Lord” is stated, it refers to Him and His heavenly court.9And that is why “and the Lord” can be interpreted to refer to Gavriel. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: In the Torah, in the Prophets, and in the Writings, we find that an ordinary person mentions his name twice in one verse.10Instead of using the pronoun ‘me’ or ‘my’ to refer to himself, he says his name.  In the Torah: “Lemekh said to his wives: […wives of Lemekh, hear my words…]” (Genesis 4:23). “My wives” is not written here, but rather: “Wives of Lemekh, hear…” (Genesis 4:23). In the Prophets: “The king said to them: Take with you the servants of your lord, mount Solomon my son upon my mule…” (I Kings 1:33). “The king’s son” is not written here, but rather, “Solomon my son.”11Many commentators emend the Midrash: “Take with you my servants” is not written here, but rather: “Take with you the servants of your lord.” In the Writings: “[King Aḥashverosh said…] as a document that is written in the name of the king and sealed with the ring of the king may not be revoked” (Esther 8:7–8). And you wonder that the Holy One blessed be He mentions His name twice in one verse?12Even ordinary people speak like this, so we should not be surprised that the verse speaks this way regarding God: “And the Lord rained down brimstone…from the Lord.” 
“Brimstone and fire” – that is what is written: “He will rain upon the wicked burning coal [paḥim], fire and brimstone…” (Psalms 11:6). “Paḥim” – [this means both] coals and traps. “Fire and brimstone” – why is it that when a person smells brimstone his soul becomes unsettled? It is because it knows that it will be sentenced with it in the future, as it is stated: “[Fire and brimstone…] will be their lot [menat kosam]” (Psalms 11:6). Rabbi Yishmael bar Naḥman in the name of Rabbi Yonatan: Like a cup [kos] of herbal drink [that one drinks] after attending the bathhouse.13This drink was drunk with much eagerness, enjoyed to the last drop. So, too, the wicked will drink their cup of punishment to the last drop. Rabbi Ḥanina [ben Pazi] said: Nothing bad ever descends from on High. They raised an objection: But is it not written: “Fire and hail, snow and vapor”? (Psalms 148:8). He said to them: It is the “storm wind” that “performs His word” (Psalms 148:8).14When they first descend from heaven, they are not harmful. It is the storm wind that renders them harmful. A statement of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish disagrees with what Rabbi Ḥanina ben Pazi said, [as Rabbi Shimon said]: “The Lord will open for you His storehouse of goodness” (Deuteronomy 28:12) – from here we learn that He has other storehouses.15Storehouses that contain things other than “goodness.” “From the Lord from the heavens”16The verse states that it was from the heavens, why was it necessary to state also “from the Lord”? – like something hurled by a mighty man.
“He overturned those cities, and the entire plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and the vegetation of the earth” (Genesis 19:25). “He overturned those cities” – Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: These five cities were situated on a single rock, and the angel extended his hand and overturned them. That is what is written: “He extends his hand to the flinty rock [ḥalamish]; he overturns mountains from the root” (Job 28:9). Two amora’im disagreed: One said: With one-fifth [ḥomesh] of the hand, and one said: With one-fifth of the little finger. Rabbi Yehoshua said: “And the vegetation of the earth” – even the plants that were in the earth were stricken. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: To this day, if a person collects rain from the airspace of Sodom and places it in a furrow, it will not facilitate growth.
“His wife looked behind him, and she became a pillar of salt” (Genesis 19:26). “His wife looked behind him, [and she became a pillar of salt]” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: This was because she sinned with salt on that night that the angels came to Lot. What did she do? She went to all her neighbors and said to them: ‘Give me salt, as we have guests,’ and her intention was that the residents of the city should become aware of them. That is why “she became a pillar of salt.”
It was when God destroyed the cities of the plain, God remembered Abraham, and He sent Lot from the midst of the upheaval, as He overturned the cities in which Lot lived” (Genesis 19:29). “It was when God destroyed the cities of the plain, God remembered Abraham, and He sent Lot” – what memory did He remember on his [Lot’s] behalf? It was the silence that he had maintained when Abraham said regarding Sarah his wife: “She is my sister” (Genesis 12:18) – He knew [this was not true], but he remained silent. “From the midst of the upheaval [as He overturned the cities in which Lot lived]” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: He dwelled in [all of] them.17He spent time in all five cities. The Rabbis say: He would lend them money with usury.18In that sense Lot “lived” in all five cities. He earned his livelihood by moneylending to the residents of all of them.
“Lot ascended from Tzoar and settled on the mountain, and his two daughters with him, because he feared to live in Tzoar. He lived in a cave, he and his two daughters” (Genesis 19:30). “Lot ascended from Tzoar and settled on the mountain” – that is what is written: “For the chief musician, al tashḥet, an instruction by David, when he was in the cave when he fled from Saul” (Psalms 57:1). He [David] said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, before I entered the cave, You performed acts of kindness for others on my behalf;19You spared Lot, as my forbearer, Moav, was born from him and his elder daughter. now that I am situated in the cave, may it be Your will that “You will not destroy [al tashḥet].”’
“The elder said to the younger: Our father is old, and there is no man on the earth to consort with us in the way of the world” (Genesis 19:31). “The elder said to the younger: Our father is old, [and there is no man on the earth]…” – because they believed that the entire world had come to an end, as in the generation of the Flood. “Let us give our father wine to drink, and we will lie with him, and we will give life to offspring from our father” (Genesis 19:32). “Let us give our father wine to drink…” – Rabbi Tanḥuma in the name of Rabbi Shmuel: “We will give life to offspring from our father.” “We will give life to a child from our father” is not written here, but rather, “we will give life to offspring from our father” – that offspring that will come from another place. Which is that? The messianic king.20The Messiah, scion of David, will be a distant descendant of Lot, through Moav and Ruth. “They gave their father wine to drink that night. The elder came and lay with her father and he was not aware when she lay and when she arose” (Genesis 19:33). “They gave their father wine…[and when she arose [uvkuma]]” – there is a dot over the vav of uvkuma, [intimating] that when she lay he was not aware, but when she arose he was aware. “It was the next day, and the elder said to the younger: Behold, I lay last night with my father. Let us give him wine to drink tonight as well and come and lie with him, and we will give life to offspring from our father” (Genesis 19:34). “It was the next day and the elder said to the younger…. [Let us give him wine]” – from where did they get wine in the cave? Because they [the people of Sodom] had a preponderance of wine, they would hide it away in caves. Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: Something resembling a sample of the World to Come was provided for them,21It came there miraculously, so that Lot’s daughters could intoxicate him and have children through him, from whom David would descend. just as it says: “It will be on that day,22In Messianic times. that the mountains will drip with juice” (Joel 4:18).
“Lot’s two daughters conceived from their father” (Genesis 19:36). “Lot’s two daughters conceived from their father” – Rabbi Elazar said: A woman never conceives from her initial act of intercourse. But is it not written: “Lot’s two daughters conceived from their father”? (Genesis 19:36). Rabbi Tanḥuma said: They manipulated themselves, broke their hymen, and conceived as though it were from a second act of intercourse. Rav Naḥman bar Ḥanin said: Anyone who has a ravenous appetite for sexual relations will ultimately be fed his own flesh.23A metaphor for incest. Rabbi Yudan of Gaul and Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman, both in the name of Rabbi Elyehoeini: We do not know whether Lot lusted after his daughters or his daughters lusted after him. From what is written: “The isolated one24Lot, who was isolated from Abraham. seeks lust” (Proverbs 18:1), we see that Lot lusted after his daughters, but his daughters did not lust after him. Rabbi Tanḥuma bar Rabbi Ḥiyya in the name of Rabbi Hoshaya the interpreter: There is no Shabbat on which one does not read the passage about Lot.25In those days there was apparently a practice to recite the passage about Lot every Shabbat, to warn people not to overindulge in wine. What is the source for this? “The isolated one seeks lust, with all tushiya26Tushiya is a reference to Torah (see Sanhedrin 26a). he will be exposed”27The shame of Lot is exposed for all to reflect upon. (Proverbs 18:1). Rabbi Aḥa said: “They will be exposed” is not written here, but rather, “he will be exposed” – the men [of Amon and Moav] were distanced, but the women were drawn near.28The shame of Lot is preserved for all time, in that the Torah prohibits Moavite and Amonite men from marrying Israelite women (Deuteronomy 23:4). The shame of Lot’s daughters is not preserved, however, because Moavite and Amonite women may marry Israelite men.
That is what is written [concerning Moav]: “I know its fury, the utterance of the Lord, and its lies [badav] are unfounded [lo khen]” (Jeremiah 48:30). Rabbi Huna bar Pappa and Rabbi Simon, Rabbi Huna said: At the beginning of Moav’s conception, it was not for the sake of licentiousness, but rather, for the sake of Heaven.29Lot’s daughters acted out of noble motives, as they thought there was no other way to repopulate the world (see section 8). Thus it is stated: His offshoots [badav] are not like that [lo khen]. They [Moav’s descendants] did not act for the sake of Heaven, but for the sake of licentiousness, as it is stated: “Israel was residing in Shitim, and the people began to engage in licentiousness [with the daughters of Moav]” (Numbers 25:1).30Those Moavites, unlike their forebear, Lot’s daughter, acted out of immoral motivations.  Rabbi Simon said: From the beginning of Moav’s conception it was not for the sake of Heaven, but rather, for the sake of licentiousness, as it is stated: “Its fury [evrato]31The Midrash interprets evrato to be related to ibur, conception.…its lies [badav] are unfounded [lo khen]”– his offshoots [badav]32Badav can mean either lies or offshoots. did not act this way [lo khen] – [they did not act] for the sake of licentiousness, but for the sake of Heaven, as it is stated: “She33Ruth the Moavite. went down to the threshing floor, and acted in accordance with everything that her mother-in-law had commanded her” (Ruth 3:6).34By lying down next to Boaz as he slept.  Rabbi Levi said: If Moav’s beginning was for the sake of licentiousness, his later act was also for the sake of licentiousness, [and the verse is to be interpreted:] Did his offshoots [badav] not do so as well [lo khen]? “Israel was residing in Shitim…” And if the beginning of his conception was for the sake of Heaven, his end was also for the sake of Heaven, [and the verse is to be interpreted:] Did his offshoots [badav] not do so as well [lo khen]? “She went down to the threshing floor.”
“The elder gave birth to a son, and called his name Moav; he is the ancestor of the Moavites to this day” (Genesis 19:37). “The younger too gave birth to a son, and called his name Ben-Ami, he is the ancestor of Benei Amon to this day” (Genesis 19:38). “The elder gave birth to a son…” – Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Aivu: The elder daughter, because she demeaned her father’s honor and called his [her son’s] name Moav, meaning from father,35By calling her son Moav she made the act of incest public, which demeaned her father’s honor. the verse said: “Do not besiege Moav, and do not provoke war with them” (Deuteronomy 2:9) – you may not wage war with them, but you may breach their riverbeds, or burn their stacks of grain with fire.36You may intimidate them in other ways, as long as you do not wage war against them. But the younger daughter, because she spared her father’s honor and said: “And she called his name Ben-Ami” – meaning the son of the one who was together with me, the verse states: “Do not besiege them and do not provoke them” (Deuteronomy 2:19) – at all. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon and Rabbi Ḥanin said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Lot’s daughters were going to violate a transgression,37This opinion maintains that Lot’s daughters acted immorally. yet they were remembered favorably [by God].38God granted them pregnancies and great nations emerged from them. By what merit? It was due to the merit of Moav – the one who [mi] is the father [av], as it is stated in Abraham’s regard: “For I have made you the father of a multitude of nations” (Genesis 17:5).

=== 52 | 52 ===
“Abraham traveled from there to the region of the south; he lived between Kadesh and Shur, and he resided in Gerar” (Genesis 20:1). “Abraham traveled from there to the region of the south” – Rabbi Avun began: “Indeed, a falling mountain crumbles, and a rock moves away from its place” (Job 14:18). “Indeed, a falling mountain”1This could also be translated: “One who falls from a mountain.” – this is Lot, who had his downfall on a mountain.2He experienced a great spiritual downfall due to what transpired between him and his daughters on a mountain. “And a rock” – this is Abraham.3See Isaiah 51:1–2. “Moves away from its place” – he vacated his place of abode. This was because the area of Sodom had been destroyed and travelers to and from [that area] ceased. He said: ‘What, shall I allow the practice of benevolence to cease from my house?’ So he went and pitched a tent for himself in Gerar. That is what is written: “Abraham traveled from there.”
“A treacherous brother goes from a fortified city” (Proverbs 18:19). “A brother” – this refers to Lot, who was the son of Abraham’s brother. “Treacherous…goes from a fortified city” – you betrayed Abraham,4Abraham is the “fortified city” that had protected Lot when he was with him. you denied him, you were false to him.5By moving to the evil city of Sodom, thus turning against Abraham’s righteous way of life. And what did it cause to you? “Ordinances like the bars of a palace” (Proverbs 18:19) – he brought ordinances upon himself like the bars of the Temple. Just as [it is stated] elsewhere, [regarding the Temple]: “Anyone impure may not enter” (II Chronicles 23:19), so, too, here: “An Amonite or a Moavite shall not enter into the assembly of the Lord…forever” (Deuteronomy 23:4).6Lot’s abandonment of Abraham’s ways ultimately led to his fathering Amon and Moav, who were locked out of intermarrying with the assembly of the Lord.
Another matter, “Abraham traveled from there” – “the wise-hearted will take mitzvot” (Proverbs 10:8). “The wise-hearted” – this refers to Abraham. “Will take mitzvot” – because the area of Sodom had been destroyed and travelers to and from [that area] ceased, and he had no shortage [of food] in his storage house. He said: ‘What, shall I allow the practice of benevolence to cease from my house?’ He went and pitched a tent for himself in Gerar. “But one with foolish lips, he will be disgraced” (Proverbs 10:8) – this refers to Lot, who was foolish with his lips, as he should have said to his daughters: ‘Are we going to perform the very act for which the world was stricken?’7Sexual immorality. Instead, “he will be disgraced” – what did he cause to happen to himself? “He will be disgraced” – he brought upon himself disgrace upon disgrace. Just as it is stated elsewhere, [regarding the Temple,] “anyone impure may not enter” (II Chronicles 23:19), so, too, here: “An Amonite or a Moavite shall not enter into the assembly of the Lord” (Deuteronomy 23:4).
“Abraham traveled from there” – he turned away because of the stench,8The foul atmosphere of immorality that Lot had created for himself. as people were saying that Lot, the son of Abraham’s brother, had consorted with his two daughters. “To the region of the south” – it [the south] is called by seven names: Darom, negev, teiman (Joshua 12:3), ḥeder (Job 37:9), yam (Psalms 107:3), yamin (I Samuel 23:19), and seninim [variant reading: sinim (Isaiah 49:12)]. They raised an objection: But is it not written: “Nor from the wilderness in the harim”? (Psalms 75:7).9In that context, harim means the south. There is thus an eighth term used for south. He said to them: That, too, is the south.10Indeed, that is an eighth term for south. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: I was passing by the synagogue in Tzippori, and I heard the children sitting and reciting the verse: “Abraham traveled from there.” I said: ‘Great are the words of the Sages who said: [Warm yourself up by the fire of the Torah scholars,] but be cautious of their glowing coals so that you not be burned, as their bite is like the bite of a fox, and their hiss is like the hiss of a fiery serpent, and all their words are like fiery coals,11That is to say, their rebuke is harsh and enduring. as from the moment that Abraham separated from Lot,12When Abraham told him: “Please, part from me” (Genesis 13:9). his separation was an eternal separation.’13Even now, when Lot sought to go back to Abraham (see Bereshit Rabba 50:11), Abraham traveled away from him. “He resided in Gerar” – in Geradiki.  “Abraham said of Sarah his wife: She is my sister. Avimelekh, king of Gerar, sent and took Sarah” (Genesis 20:2). “Abraham said of [el]14Literally: To. Sarah his wife: She is my sister” – by force, against her will.15He said this to Sarah. He did not ask her, he told her. This is unlike during their journey to Egypt, when Abraham said to her: “Please say you are my sister” (Genesis 12:13), first soliciting her approval. 
“God came to Avimelekh in a dream at night, and He said to him: Behold, you will die because of the woman that you have taken, as she is married to a husband” (Genesis 20:3). “God came to Avimelekh in a dream at night” – Rabbi Yosei said: The Holy One blessed be He appears to the prophets of the nations of the world only at a time that people typically have taken their leave from one another. That is what is written: “In thoughts from visions of the night,” (Job 4:13) “a matter stealthily came to me” (Job 4:12). What is the difference between the prophets of Israel and the prophets of the nations of the world? Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa and the Rabbis, Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa said: This is analogous to a king who was situated with his friend in a great hall, with a curtain placed between them. Whenever he would seek to speak with his friend, he would draw the curtain back and speak with him. But for the prophets of the nations of the world, He does not draw it back, but, rather, he speaks to them from behind the curtain. The Rabbis say: It is analogous to a king who had a wife and a concubine. When he goes to his wife, he goes publicly, but when he goes to his maidservant [the concubine], he goes clandestinely. So, the Holy One blessed be He appears to those of the nations of the world only at night: “God came to Bilam at night” (Numbers 22:20); “God came to Laban the Aramean in a dream of the night” (Genesis 31:24); “God came to Avimelekh in a dream at night.” What is the difference between the prophets of Israel and the prophets of the nations of the world? Rabbi Ḥama ben Rabbi Ḥanina and Rabbi Yisakhar of Kefar Mandi, Rabbi Ḥama said: The Holy One blessed be He appears to the prophets of the nations of the world only with a truncated form of speech, as it says: “God happened [vayikar] upon Bilam” (Numbers 23:4).16The midrash views the word vayikar as a truncated version of the word vayikra – He called, which is what is typically employed with regard to the prophets of Israel. Rabbi Yisakhar of Kefar Mandi said: This expression vayikar is nothing other than an expression of impurity, just as it says: “If there will be among you a man who will not be pure due to an…incident [mikre]” (Deuteronomy 23:11). But to the prophets of Israel [He appears] with a complete form of speech, with an expression of endearment, with an expression of sanctity, with the expression with which the ministering angels laud Him, as it is stated: “And this one called to that one and said: Holy, …” (Isaiah 6:3). Rabbi Yosei ben Beiva said: “The Lord is far from the wicked” (Proverbs 15:29) – this refers to the prophets of the nations of the world; “and He hears the prayer of the righteous” (Proverbs 15:29) – this refers to the prophets of Israel. “God came to Avimelekh in a dream at night, and He said to him: Behold, you will die because of the woman…” – from here we learn that there is no forewarning [necessary] for Noahides.17Noahides are all people in the world other than Jews. God was going to punish Avimelekh even though he had not been forewarned that his actions were sinful. “And she is married to a husband [be’ulat baal]” – Rabbi Aḥa said:18He said this regarding the verse (Proverbs 12:4): “A woman of valor is her husband’s crown…” (see Bereshit Rabba 47:1). Her [Sarah’s] husband was crowned with her but she was not crowned with her husband.19Rather, Sarah had status independent of the fact that she was Abraham’s wife. The Rabbis say: She was her husband’s superior.20The Midrash interprets be’ulat baal as if it were pronounced ba’alat baal, the owner of a husband. Everywhere, the man gives the orders; here, however, “Everything that Sarah says to you, heed her voice” (Genesis 21:12).
“Avimelekh had not approached her; he said: My Lord, will You kill a nation that is also innocent?” (Genesis 20:4). “Avimelekh did not approach her…will You kill a nation even if it is innocent [tzadik]?” He said: If this is how You judged the generation of the Flood and the generation of the Dispersion, [perhaps] they [too] were innocent.21This explains why Avimelekh spoke of a "nation” being killed, despite the fact that it was he alone who was threatened. Rabbi Berekhya said: If you kill this nation,22According to this explanation, Avimelekh was referring to his own nation, who were all under threat (see Genesis 20:9). you would also kill a righteous man [tzadik].23Because I did nothing wrong. “Did he not say to me: She is my sister? And she, also she said: He is my brother. In the innocence of my heart and in the cleanliness of my hands I did this” (Genesis 20:5). “Did he not say to me: She is my sister? And she, also she…”24The words “also she” appear to be superfluous. – she, his donkey drivers, his camel drivers, the members of his household, and the members of her household, all of them said so.25The words “also she” mean: All these other people in addition to her. “In the innocence of my heart” – that is to say that there was touching of the hands.26Avimelekh protested that his hands acted in innocence, implying that there was some form of action.
“God said to him in the dream: I, too, knew that in the innocence of your heart you did this, and I also prevented you from sinning against Me. Therefore, I did not allow you to touch her” (Genesis 20:6). “God said to him in the dream: I, too, knew…and I also prevented you from sinning against Me [meḥato li]” – Rabbi Yitzḥak says: Meḥato li – your evil inclination [maḥaton] is Mine [li].27It is under My complete control. “Therefore, I did not allow you” – this is analogous to a warrior riding on a horse. The horse was running, and he [the warrior] saw a baby on the ground, and he diverted the horse and did not injure the baby. Whom does everyone laud, the horse or the rider? Is it not the rider? So, too, “therefore, I did not allow you to touch her” – your maḥaton is Mine, [meaning:] Your evil inclination, which causes you to sin [maḥti] that corrupts you, is given over into My hand. It is I who prevented you from sinning. I drew you away from sin. The praise is Mine and not yours.
“Now, return the man's wife, as he is a prophet, and he will pray on your behalf and you will live, and if you do not return her, know you that you will die, you, and all that is yours” (Genesis 20:7). “Now, return the man's wife, as he is a prophet” – he said to Him: ‘Who will placate him and assure him that I did not touch her?’ He said to him: “As he is a prophet.” He said to him: ‘Who will inform everyone else?’ He said to him: “And he will pray on your behalf and you will live.” “If you do not return her, know you that you shall die” – from here we learn that there is no forewarning for Noahides.28See earlier, section 5.
“Avimelekh rose early in the morning, and he called all his servants, and spoke all these matters in their ears, and the men were very frightened” (Genesis 20:8). “Avimelekh rose early in the morning…” – Rabbi Ḥanin said: Because they were seeing the smoke of Sodom rising like a fiery furnace, they said: ‘Perhaps those angels that were sent to Sodom came here.’ That is why: “The men were very frightened.”
“Avimelekh called Abraham, and said to him: What have you done to us, and by what have I sinned against you, that you have brought upon me and upon my kingdom a great sin? Deeds that should not be done, you have done to me” (Genesis 20:9). “Avimelekh called Abraham, and said to him” – “what have I sinned against you?” “What have you done to us?” – this is [referring to] what it says: “You will die because of the woman that you have taken…” (Genesis 20:3). “What have I sinned against you?” – [this is referring to what it says:] “If you do not return her, know you that you will die” (Genesis 20:7). “That you have brought upon me and upon my kingdom a great sin [ḥata’a]” – “for the Lord had obstructed all wombs of the house of Avimelekh” (Genesis 20:18).29The Midrash interprets ḥata’a to mean punishment (see Zechariah 14:19). “Deeds that should not be done” – Rabbi Ḥelbo said: [Avimelekh said to Abraham:] ‘Everywhere else [you went], prosperity used to go before you,30That is, it used to accompany you. but [when you came] here, famine goes before you.’31Situations that did not usually occur elsewhere in your travels, have occurred here.  ]That is what he meant by:] “Deeds that are not done [you have done to me].” [This paragraph is the explanation of the subsequent verse:] “Avimelekh said to Abraham: What did you see, that you did this matter?” (Genesis 20:10).
“Abraham said: Because I said: Surely there is no fear of God in this place, and they will kill me over the matter of my wife” (Genesis 20:11). “And also, indeed, she is my sister; the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother, and she became my wife” (Genesis 20:12). “Abraham said: Because I said: Surely there is no fear of God…and also, indeed, she is my sister; the daughter of my father…” – he answered them in accordance with their practice.32They permitted marrying one’s paternal sister but not one’s maternal sister. Thus, Abraham was explaining to them that his marriage to Sarah, according to the prevailing practice, was valid. “It was, when God caused me to wander from my father's house, I said to her: This is your kindness that you shall perform for me; at every place that we will come, say of me: He is my brother” (Genesis 20:13). “It was, when God caused me to wander [hitu] from my father’s house…” – Rabbi Ḥanin said: If only we could expound this verse in three ways and thereby satisfy our obligation.33The verse contains two difficulties. First, the fact that the verb hitu is plural, as if there were many gods commanding Abraham; second, the fact that hitu indicates that God corrupted him, as the root of that word, ta’a, can mean either to wander away or to become corrupt. By proposing these following three interpretations, my hope is that I have fulfilled my obligation to address these difficulties. [Abraham was saying:] When the nations of the world sought to fight against me while I was still in my father’s house, the Holy One blessed be He protected me.34The subject of the plural verb hitu, then is not God, but the nations of the world. The word God is expressing a separate thought; that God saved me from them. When the nations of the world sought to lead me astray [lehatot], the Holy One blessed be He revealed Himself to me and said to me: “Go, you” (Genesis 12:1). When the nations of the world sought to stray [litot] from the ways of the Holy One blessed be He, He appointed for them two prominent leaders from my father’s family, Shem and Ever, who would give them warning [to repent].
“Avimelekh took flocks and cattle and slaves and maidservants and gave them to Abraham, and returned Sarah his wife to him” (Genesis 20:14). “To Sarah he said: Behold, I have given your brother one thousand pieces of silver; behold, it is for you a covering of the eyes for all who are with you, and for all, it is proven” (Genesis 20:16). “Avimelekh took flocks and cattle…to Sarah he said: Behold, I have given your brother one thousand pieces of silver” – Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Ilai said: [Avimelekh said:] ‘You went to Egypt and gained financially from her [Sarah] there.35When Pharaoh took her for himself (Genesis 12:16). You came here and gained financially from her. If it is money that you seek, here is money for you, and [now,] conceal people’s eyes from her.’36Do not let any more people see her and desire her. “It is for you a covering of the eyes” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: [Avimelekh said to him:] ‘Make a covering for her,37With the money I have given you, buy her nice clothing, so as to distract people from her own beauty. so everyone would look at it and not at her beauty.’ “A covering of the eyes” – a covering made of many colors. Rabbi Berekhya said: He made her a noblewoman; [it was] a covering that rendered her [as if] obscured from sight.38Wearing the garb of nobility, no one would dare express a desire to take her. It would be as if people would not see her at all. Reish Lakish said: He sought to cause strife with her husband. [He was saying:] ‘All these years she has been with him, and he never did anything for her. But this one [myself], after one night, treated her accorded her such honor.’39He sought to have her cover her eyes from her husband.  Another interpretation, he said to them: ‘You obscured my eyes from seeing,40By lying to me about Sarah. [therefore] the son that you will produce will have his eyes covered.’41Isaac was blind (Genesis 27:1). This is what he meant by: “It is for you a covering of the eyes” – the covering of eyes will happen to you. “And for all, it is proven [venokhaḥat]” – he said to her: ‘The rebuke [tokhaḥa] of this man [myself],42The rebuke due to me for having deprived you of your husband for one night. is already in his possession,’ as it is taught: If a woman rebels against her husband,43By refusing to fulfill her marital duties. one deducts from her marriage contract seven dinars per week.44Ketubot 63a. Why seven dinars? It corresponds to the seven duties that a woman performs for her husband: She grinds, bakes, cooks, launders, nurses her child, makes his bed, and works wool [into thread]. That is why it is seven. One who rebels against his wife, one adds to her marriage contract three dinars per week.45Ketubot 63a. Why? It corresponds to the three matters that he is obligated to do for her: [Provide] food, clothing, and conjugal rights. That is why it is three. Say that she brought [into the marriage] servants and maidservants [to do all the work], so that she has no obligations toward him. Say that he declined to provide her food, clothing, and conjugal rights,46He made this stipulation, and she consented. so that he has no obligations toward her.47Since in this case neither spouse has any obligations toward the other, why is the women penalized more than the man for refusing to fulfill her marital (conjugal) duty? Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The suffering of the man48When deprived of conjugal relations. is greater than the suffering of the woman. That is what is written: “It was as she tormented him daily with her words and pressured him” (Judges 16:16) – [this means] that she would slip herself away from beneath him. “He became irritated to death” (Judges 16:16) – but she did not become irritated, as she would see to her needs elsewhere.
“Abraham prayed to God, and God healed Avimelekh and his wife and his maidservants, and they bore children” (Genesis 20:17). “For the Lord had obstructed all wombs of the house of Avimelekh over the matter of Sarah, Abraham’s wife” (Genesis 20:18). “Abraham prayed to God” – Rabbi Ḥama ben Rabbi Ḥanina said: From the beginning of this book until here, this expression49Prayer on behalf of another person. has not been used. Once Abraham prayed, this knot was untied.50From this point on, the gates of prayer were open. “For the Lord had obstructed [atzor atzar]” – atzira is stated regarding the mouth, atzira regarding the throat, atzira regarding the ear, atzira from above, atzira  from below.51All this is derived from the use of the double verb – atzor atzar. All bodily orifices were sealed and unable to discharge what they usually do. And everyone was saying: [This is] “over the matter of Sarah, Abraham’s wife.” Rabbi Berekhya said: All the insolent ones have come in to touch the noblewoman’s shoe.52This is a saying, referring to insolent behavior on the part of lowly people who dare to touch the princess’s shoes, and are severely punished. The Midrash applies this saying to the members of Avimelekh’s household who acted disrespectfully toward Sarah. Throughout that night Sarah was prostrated on her face and saying: ‘Master of the universe, Abraham departed [from our home country] with a promise,53Abraham was told by God that He would protect him. and I departed only on faith. Abraham departed outside the cage, but I am in the cage.’54I am here in the cage with all these [beasts] – Avimelekh and his servants. The Holy One blessed be He said to her: ‘Everything I do, I do on your behalf.’ And all of them were saying: [It is] “over the matter of Sarah, Abraham’s wife.” Rabbi Levi said: Throughout that night, an angel was standing with a rod in his hand. He was consulting with Sarah. If she said to him: ‘Strike,’ he would strike; if she said to him: ‘Cease,’ he would cease. Why [was Avimelekh punished] to such an extent? It is because she kept telling him: ‘I am a married woman,’ but he would not keep away from her.55“Over the matter of [al devar] Sarah, Abraham’s wife” is expounded to mean: “by the words of Sarah, who said that she was Abraham’s wife.”  Rabbi Elazar taught it in the name of Rabbi Eliezer: We have heard that Pharaoh was afflicted with leprosy56The word nega’im (Genesis 12:17), translated there as “afflictions,” often refers specifically to leprosy. and Avimelekh was afflicted with obstruction. From where is it derived to apply this [affliction] to there, and that [affliction] to here? It is from al devar, al devar57“The Lord afflicted Pharaoh and his household with great afflictions over the matter [al devar] of Sarai, Abram’s wife” (Genesis 12:17). for a verbal analogy.

=== 53 | 53 ===
“The Lord remembered Sarah as He had said, and the Lord did to Sarah as He had spoken” (Genesis 21:1). “The Lord remembered Sarah as He had said.” That is what the verse said: “All the trees of the field will know that I, the Lord, have lowered a high tree, elevated a lowly tree” (Ezekiel 17:24) – Rabbi Yudan said: Not like those who speak but do not act, but rather, “I, the Lord, have spoken and acted” (Ezekiel 17:24). Where did He speak? “At the prescribed time, I will return to you… and Sarah will have a son” (Genesis 18:14); and He acted. “All the trees of the field will know” – this refers to people, as it says: “For man is the tree of the field” (Deuteronomy 20:19). “That I, the Lord, have lowered a high tree” – this refers to Avimelekh. “Elevated a lowly tree” – this refers to Abraham. “Dried a moist tree” (Ezekiel 17:24) – this refers to Avimelekh’s wives. “Caused a dry tree to blossom” (Ezekiel 17:24) – this refers to Sarah. “I, the Lord, have spoken” – where [in Scripture] did He speak? “At the time, I will return to you.” “And acted” – that is what is written: “And the Lord did to Sarah as He had spoken.”
“Will a person be more just than God? Will a man be purer than his Maker? (Job 4:17). Is it possible for a person to be more just than God? “Will a man be purer than his Maker” – is it possible for a person to be purer than his Creator? What did Elisha say to the Shunamite woman? “At this very time next year, at this very time, you will embrace a son” (II Kings 4:16). She said to him: ‘“No, my lord, man of God, do not deceive your maidservant” (II Kings 4:16). Those angels who brought the tidings to Sarah said to her: “At the prescribed time, I will return to you; at this very time next year, Sarah will have a son” (Genesis 18:14). [Why, then, do you [Elisha] not likewise promise that you will return?]’ He said to her: ‘Those angels knew that they live and endure forever, so they said: “At the time, I will return to you.” But, I, who am flesh and blood, alive today and dead tomorrow, [say to you:] whether I am alive or dead, “at this very time, you will embrace a son.”’ What is written there? “The woman conceived and bore a son at that time the next year, at that very time that Elisha had spoken to her” (II Kings 4:17). If the words of flesh and blood are fulfilled, will the words of the Holy One blessed be He not be fulfilled? “The Lord remembered Sarah as He had said…”
“For the fig tree will not blossom and there is no fruit on the vines; the produce of the olive tree will fail and the fields will yield [no food]…” (Habakkuk 3:17). “For the fig tree will not blossom” – this refers to Abraham, just as it says: “Like a first fruit on the fig tree in its first season, I saw your fathers” (Hosea 9:10). “And there is no fruit on the vines” – this refers to Sarah, just as it says: “Your wife is like a fruitful vine…” (Psalms 128:3). “The produce of the olive tree will fail [kiḥesh]” – those angels who brought the tidings to Sarah illuminated her face like olive [oil]. Were they then lying [koḥashim]?1If "olive tree” is an allusion to the angels informing Sarah of her impending pregnancy, why does the verse refer to it as lying [kiḥesh]? However, [Sarah said:] “the fields [shedemot] will yield no food” – [Sarah said:] ‘These withered breasts [shedei mavet] have never produced food.’2That is what caused Sarah to doubt the veracity of their tidings (see Genesis 18:12). “The flock is severed from the fold” (Habakkuk 3:17) – [this refers to Israel,]3Sarah was afraid that Israel would not, in fact, descend from her, because she believed she was incurably barren. just as it says: “You, My flock, flock of My pasture, you are men” (Ezekiel 34:31). “There is no cattle in the barns” (Habakkuk 3:17) – [this refers to Israel,] just as it says: “Ephraim is a trained calf that loves to thresh” (Hosea 10:11). Sarah then relented and said: ‘Am I to lose faith in my Creator? Rather, “but I will rejoice in the Lord, I will exult in the God of my salvation”’ (Habakkuk 3:18). The Holy One blessed be He said to her: ‘You have not lost your hope, I, too, will not allow your hope to be lost.’ Rather, “the Lord remembered Sarah…” “The Lord remembered Sarah.” “The grass has withered, the flower has faded” (Isaiah 40:8) – the grass of Avimelekh has withered and his flower has faded. “But the word of our God will stand forever” (Isaiah 40:8) – “the Lord remembered Sarah as He had said.”
“Forever, Lord, Your word stands firm in the heavens” (Psalms 119:89) – is this to imply that it is not so on earth? It means, rather, that what You said to Abraham in the heavens [stands firm]: “At the prescribed time, I will return to you; at this very time next year, [Sarah will have a son]” (Genesis 18:14). Rabbi Naḥman of Yafo in the name of Rabbi Yaakov of Caesarea began: “God of hosts, please return. Look from heaven and see, and remember this vine” (Psalms 80:15) – return and perform what You said to Abraham: “Look now toward the heavens, and count the stars” (Genesis 15:5). “Remember this vine” – “the Lord remembered Sarah.”4The Psalmist was praying that God once again grant fertility and increase for Israel as He did for Abraham and Sarah. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman began: “God is not a man, that He would lie, or the son of man, that He would reconsider” (Numbers 23:19). Rabbi Shmuel said: This verse, its beginning does not correspond to its end, and its end does not correspond to its beginning. [The beginning states:] “God is not a man, that He would lie…[and the end states] He will say and not perform, speak and not fulfill” (Numbers 23:19). The explanation is that when the Holy One blessed be He decrees to bring something good upon the world, “God is not a man, that He would lie.” But when he decrees to bring something detrimental, [sometimes] “He will say and not perform, speak and not fulfill.” When He said to Abraham: “For it is through Isaac that descendants will be considered for you” (Genesis 21:12) – “God is not a man, that He would lie.” But when He said to him: “Take now your son, your only one […and offer him up]” (Genesis 22:2) – “He will say and not perform.” When the Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: “I have remembered you [and what has been done to you in Egypt, and I said: I shall bring you up from the affliction of Egypt] (Exodus 3:16–17) – “God is not a man, that He would lie.” When the Holy One blessed be He said to him: “Let Me be, and I shall destroy them” (Deuteronomy 9:14) – “He will say and not perform.” When the Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham: “And also that nation [whom they will serve, I shall judge]” (Genesis 15:14) – “God is not a man, that He would lie.” But when He said to him: “They will be enslaved to them and they will oppress them [four hundred years]” (Genesis 15:13) – “He will say and not perform.”5The period of subjugation in Egypt in fact lasted only two hundred and ten years. When the Holy One blessed be He said to him [Abraham]: “I will surely return to you […and, behold, a son for Sarah your wife]” (Genesis 18:10) – “God is not a man, that He would lie.” Rather, “the Lord remembered Sarah.”
“The Lord remembered Sarah.” “[Lord, God of Israel …] who upheld for Your servant David, my father, what You had spoken to him” (I Kings 8:23–24). “Who upheld for Your servant” – this refers to Abraham. “What You had spoken to him” – “at the prescribed time, I will return to you.” “You spoke with Your mouth, and You fulfilled it with Your hand, on this day” (I Kings 8:24) – “the Lord remembered Sarah […and Sarah conceived, and bore Abraham a son in his old age, at the appointed time that God had spoken to him]” (Genesis 21:1–2). “He sets the barren woman at home, the mother of children is joyful” (Psalms 113:9). “He sets the barren woman at home” – this refers to Sarah, “Sarah was barren” (Genesis 11:30). “The mother of children is joyful” – “Sarah would nurse children” (Genesis 21:7). “The Lord remembered Sarah as He had said, [and the Lord did to Sarah as He had spoken]”6The verse seems to be referring to two different promises made to Sarah, one being “said” to her and the other “spoken.” – what He Himself had said to her7Genesis 18:14. was communicated with saying.8The midrash is addressing the different verbs employed in the verse, said [amar], and spoke [diber]. “The Lord did to Sarah as He had spoken” – what He had spoken to her by means of an angel.9Genesis 18:10.  Rabbi Neḥemya said [the opposite]: “The Lord remembered Sarah as He had said” – what He had said to her by means of an angel was with saying. “The Lord did to Sarah as He had spoken” – what He Himself had spoken to her.  Rabbi Yehuda said: “As He had said” – to grant her a son. “As He had spoken” – to bless her with milk. Rabbi Neḥemya said to him: Was she given the tidings about milk?10Earlier (Bereshit Rabba 47:2), Rabbi Neḥemya had asserted that Sarah had never received tidings regarding her producing milk. Our verse here cannot be referring to a statement that was never made. Rather, it teaches that the Holy One blessed be He restored her to the days of her youth. Rabbi Abahu said: I will impose fear of her upon all the nations of the world, so they will not torment her and call her the barren woman.11This sentence, too, relates to the earlier passage discussed in Bereshit Rabba 47:2. See there. Rabbi Yehuda in the name of Reish Lakish: She did not even have a womb, and the Holy One blessed be He now carved out a womb for her. Rabbi Ada said: [God said:] ‘I am a keeper of deposits [pikdonot].12The Midrash is expounding the phrase: “The Lord remembered [pakad] Sarah.” Amalek deposited with Me bundles of thorns.’13By being an annoyance to Israel as a thorn. This was Amalek’s “deposit” to God. So the Holy One blessed be He returned bundles of thorns to them,14By treating them as thorns to be disposed of.  as it is stated: “I have remembered [pakadti] that which Amalek did to Israel” (I Samuel 15:2). ‘Sarah deposited with Me mitzvot and good deeds.’ The Holy One blessed be He returned to her mitzvot and good deeds – “the Lord remembered [pakad] Sarah.”15He granted her a son who would become a righteous person and perform mitzvot and good deeds.
“The Lord remembered Sarah” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: It is written [regarding an unfaithful wife]: “If the woman was not defiled, and is untainted, she will be absolved, and will conceive offspring” (Numbers 5:28). This one, who entered Pharaoh’s palace and Avimelekh’s palace and emerged untainted, is it not all the more logical that she should be remembered?16By being granted the ability to conceive. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: Although Rabbi Huna said it is an angel that is in charge of desire [and procreation], Sarah did not require such things, but rather, it was He Himself in His glory – “the Lord remembered Sarah.” “Sarah conceived, and bore Abraham a son in his old age, at the appointed time that God had spoken to him” (Genesis 21:2). “Sarah conceived, and bore Abraham a son in his old age” – it teaches that she did not steal semen from some other place [to impregnate herself]. “A son in his old age [zekunav]” – this teaches that his [Isaac’s] facial features [ziv ikonin] were similar to his. “At the appointed time [moed] that God had spoken to him” – Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Ḥama, Rabbi Yudan said: He was born at nine months [of pregnancy],17The pregnancy began a number of days after she had left Avimelekh. Nine months is “the appointed time that God had spoken” when setting up the laws of nature. so people should not say that he was scooped out of Avimelekh’s palace.18People would not say that Avimelekh had fathered Isaac during that night when Sarah was with him. Rabbi Ḥama said: At seven months [of pregnancy],19There was no need to negate Avimelekh’s paternity, because of Isaac’s strong resemblance to Abraham. which are nine incomplete ones.20One day at the end of one month, followed by seven full months, plus the first day of the next month adds up to seven months plus two partial months – nine months, counting partial months. A woman who gives birth after seven months of gestation is thus also, in a way, fulfilling God’s decree of nature that gestation should be nine months. Rabbi Huna in the name of Rabbi Ḥizkiya: He was born at noon. Moed is stated here and it is stated elsewhere: “]You shall slaughter the Passover offering] as the sun begins to set,21The time of the slaughtering of the Passover offering is at noon., which is the time at which the sun begins its descent from its highest point in the sky. the appointed time [mo’ed] of your exodus from Egypt” (Deuteronomy 16:6).
“Abraham called the name of his son who was born to him, whom Sarah bore to him, Isaac” (Genesis 21:3). “Abraham called the name of his son…Isaac [Yitzḥak]” – a portion has emerged [yatza ḥok] to the world, [meaning that] a gift has been given to the world.22Ḥok here refers to a portion given as a gift (see Genesis 47:22). A righteous person is a gift to the world, as the merit of his good deeds provides all mankind with sustenance.  Rabbi Yitzḥak Ḥipushit said: Yod is ten – corresponding to the Ten Commandments; tzadi is ninety – “shall a ninety-year-old woman give birth?” (Genesis 17:17); kof  is a hundred – “to one who is one hundred years old” (Genesis 17:17); ḥet [is eight] – corresponding to circumcision, that was given to be performed on the eighth day.23The letters yod, tzadi, ḥet, and kof spell Yitzḥak – Isaac.  “Abraham circumcised Isaac his son when he was eight days old, as God had commanded him” (Genesis 21:4). “Abraham circumcised Isaac…[when he was eight days old, as God had commanded him].” That is what is written: “One who is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every male throughout your generations” (Genesis 17:12).
“Sarah said: God has made laughter for me; everyone who hears will laugh for me” (Genesis 21:6). “Sarah said: God has made laughter for me” – Rabbi Berekhya ben Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon in the name of Rabbi Shmuel ben Rabbi Yitzḥak: When Reuben is rejoicing, why should Simeon care? So, Sarah was remembered, why should others care? The explanation is that when Sarah was remembered [by conceiving], many [other] barren women were remembered [they conceived] with her, many deaf people gained their hearing, many blind people had their eyes opened, many imbeciles gained intelligence. ‘Making’ is written here24“God has made laughter for me.” and ‘making’ is written elsewhere: “He made abatement for the provinces” (Esther 2:18). Just as with the ‘making’ stated there, gifts were given to the world, so, too, the ‘making’ stated here was a gift to the world. Rabbi Levi said: An addition was made to the [heavenly] lights.25The sun shone especially brightly on that day, as a sign of the birth of the great saint. ‘Making’ is stated here: “Has made…for me,” and elsewhere it is stated: “The Lord made the two lights” (Genesis 1:16).
“She said: Who would have announced to Abraham that Sarah would nurse children? Yet I bore a son for his old age” (Genesis 21:7). “She said: Who would have announced [milel] to Abraham that Sarah would nurse children” – Rabbi Pinḥas in the name of Rabbi Ḥilkiya: “Who would have said [amar]” or “who would have spoken [diber]” is not written here, but rather, “who would have announced [milel].” This is an allusion to the fact that he begot at the age of one hundred years, which is the numerical value of milel.26Milel is spelled mem – 40 + lamed – 30 + lamed – 30 = 100 Rabbi Pinḥas said: The wheat stalk of Abraham our patriarch had been all dried up, but [now] it became full of moist kernels [melilot].27A metaphor for the fact that Abraham had been incapable of fathering children, but now became productive. “Sarah would nurse children” – “nurse a child” is not written here. Our matriarch Sarah was extremely modest. Our patriarch Abraham said to her: ‘This is not the time for modesty. Instead, expose your breasts, so that everyone will know that the Holy One blessed be He has begun to perform miracles.’ She exposed her breasts and they were flowing with milk like two wellsprings. Noblewomen were coming and having their children nurse from her. They were saying: ‘We are not worthy of having our children nurse from this righteous woman.’ The Rabbis and Rabbi Aḥa, the Rabbis say: Anyone who came [to Sarah] for the sake of Heaven28With sincere motives. became God-fearing. Rabbi Aḥa said: Even one who did not come for the sake of Heaven, dominion in this world was granted to him. But once they [the nations of the world] distanced themselves [from God] at Sinai by not accepting the Torah, that dominion was taken from them.
“The child grew and was weaned. Abraham made a great feast on the day Isaac was weaned” (Genesis 21:8). “The child grew and was weaned” – Rabbi Hoshaya the Great said: He was weaned from the evil inclination. The Rabbis say: He was weaned from his milk. “Abraham made a great feast” – Rabbi Yuda ben Rabbi Simon said: [This means that] the Great One of all worlds was present there. Rabbi Yudan bar Masparta said: “The king made a great feast” (Esther 2:18) – the great leaders of the world were there. That is what is written: “As the Lord will return to rejoice over you for good” (Deuteronomy 30:9) – in the days of Mordekhai and Esther, “as He rejoiced over your fathers” (Deuteronomy 30:9) – in the days of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.  Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: “A great feast” – a feast of all the great people; Og and all the great men were there. They said to Og: ‘Did you not used to say: Abraham is a like barren mule and cannot beget a child?’ He said to them: ‘Now, what is his gift [Isaac], is it not puny? If I place my finger on him I could crush him.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Why are you disparaging his gift? By your life, you will [live to] see thousands upon thousands and myriads upon myriads emerging from his grandchildren, but that man [you, Og] will meet his end only by his hand,’ as it is stated: “The Lord said to Moses: Do not fear him, for I have delivered him into your hand…” (Numbers 21:34). It is as Rabbi Levi said: A cradle was rocked first only in the house of Abraham our patriarch.29Babies used to be born strong enough not to require a cradle. Isaac was the first child who required a cradle. That is why Og mocked his puniness. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Menaḥama said: Those sixty-two kings that Joshua killed, all of them were at the feast of Abraham our patriarch. But were they not thirty-one?30See Joshua 12:24. It is, rather, like what Rabbi Berekhya, Rabbi Ḥelbo, and Rabbi Parnakh said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: “The king of Jericho, one, [the king of Ai one, etc.]” (Joshua 12:9) — Why does the verse state: “One” [after each of the kings]? The explanation is that it refers to him and his viceroy.
“Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, whom she bore to Abraham, playing” (Genesis 21:9). “She said to Abraham: Banish this maidservant and her son, for the son of this maidservant will not inherit with my son, with Isaac” (Genesis 21:10). “Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian” – Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: Rabbi Akiva used to say something derogatory regarding this, but I say something complimentary regarding it. Rabbi Akiva expounded: “Sarah saw [the son of Hagar…playing [metzaḥek]]” – metzaḥek is nothing other than sexual immorality, just as it says: “The Hebrew slave whom you brought to us came to me to play with [letzaḥek] me” (Genesis 39:17). It teaches that our matriarch Sarah would see Ishmael force himself on women, trap married women, and violate them. It is taught: Rabbi Yishmael says: This expression of tzeḥok is nothing other than idol worship, as it is stated: “The people sat to eat and drink and they rose to revel [letzaḥek]” (Exodus 32:6). It teaches that our matriarch Sarah would see Ishmael building altars, trapping grasshoppers, and sacrificing [them] upon them. Rabbi Elazar son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says: This expression of tzeḥok is nothing other than an expression of bloodshed, as it says: “Let the lads rise now and play [visaḥaku] before us” (II Samuel 2:14). Rabbi Azarya said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Ishmael said to Isaac: ‘Let us go and see our portion in the field.’ Ishmael would then take a bow and arrows and shoot toward Isaac, conducting himself as though he was [just] playing. That is what is written: “Like the prankster who shoots firebrands, [arrows, and death], so is a man who deceives his friend, and says: Am I not joking?” (Proverbs 26:18–19). But I [Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai] say something complimentary regarding it. This expression of tzeḥok is nothing other than an expression of inheritance. When our patriarch Isaac was born, everyone was rejoicing. Ishmael said to them: ‘You are fools. I am the firstborn and I will inherit twice as much.’ From Sarah’s response to Abraham: “For the son of this maidservant will not inherit with my son, with Isaac,” you may learn this.31Sarah said that the reason she wanted Yishmael banished was connected to the issue of inheritance. “For…will not inherit with my son” – even if he were not Isaac, and “he will not inherit…with Isaac” – even if he were not my son; all the more so “with my son, with Isaac.”
“The matter was greatly distressing in Abraham’s eyes, regarding his son” (Genesis 21:11). “The matter was greatly distressing in Abraham’s eyes” – that is what is written: “And shuts his eyes from seeing evil” (Isaiah 33:15). “God said to Abraham: Do not be distressed about the lad and about your maidservant; everything that Sarah says to you, heed her voice; for through Isaac will be called your descendants” (Genesis 21:12). “God said to Abraham: Do not be distressed…[for through Isaac will be called your descendants]” – Rabbi Yudan said: “Isaac” is not written here, but rather, “through Isaac [beYitzḥak].”32Part, but not all, of Isaac, as Esau is not included. Rabbi Azarya in the name of bar Ḥatya: Beit is two – through the one who acknowledges the existence of two worlds. Rabbi Yudan ben Rabbi Shalom said: It is written: “Remember the wonders He has performed, His signs, and the judgments of His mouth” (Psalms 105:5). You [God] have provided a sign by what You have expressed with Your mouth:33Translation follows version of the text of Etz Yosef. Anyone who acknowledges two worlds “will be called your descendants,” and anyone who does not acknowledge two worlds will not be called your descendants.
“Abraham rose early in the morning, and took bread and a skin of water, and gave them to Hagar, he placed them her shoulder, and the child, and sent her away. She went and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba” (Genesis 21:14). “Abraham rose early in the morning, and took bread and a skin of water, and gave them to Hagar” – the people of the household of our patriarch Abraham were generous, as it is stated: “Abraham rose early […he placed them on her shoulder].”34The Midrash interprets “he placed on her shoulder” to mean that besides the bread and water, Abraham gave her other gifts as well. “And gave it to Hagar, [he placed them on her shoulder]” – as slaves typically would fill jugs of water on their shoulders.35Abraham wanted to demonstrate to people that Hagar was only a maidservant, not his full wife, and that Yishmael was not his heir. That is why he placed the water on her shoulder, in the manner of servants. “On her shoulder and the child” – he was twenty-seven years old36The Midrash understands that the feast made in honor of Isaac was for his Bar Mitzva, and Yishmael was fourteen years older than Isaac. and yet you say: “On her shoulder”? It teaches that Sarah introduced an evil eye into him and he was afflicted with fever and pain [and could not walk on his own]. Know that it is so, as it is written: “The water in the skin was finished” (Genesis 21:15), as a sick person typically drinks a lot and frequently. “The water in the bottle was finished, and she cast the child beneath one of the bushes” (Genesis 21:15). “She cast the child beneath one of the bushes” – Rabbi Meir said: [The bush was a broom tree,] as it is the nature of broom trees to grow in the wilderness. Rabbi Ami said: “Beneath one of the bushes [hasiḥim]” – [this word is used] because there the ministering angels conversed [hesiḥu] with her. “She went and sat herself opposite him, at a distance of about a bowshot, for she said: I will not see the death of the child. She sat opposite him, raised her voice, and wept” (Genesis 21:16). “She went and sat herself opposite him” – here it is stated: “She…sat herself opposite [mineged] him,” and elsewhere it says: “Opposite it [mineged], around the Tent of Meeting” (Numbers 2:2). “At a distance” – here it says: “At a distance of about a bowshot,” and elsewhere it says: “However, there shall be a distance of a measure of two thousand cubits between you” (Joshua 3:4). We derive neged from neged and raḥok from raḥok.37And we thus derive that the distance in all these instances is two thousand cubits. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: “About a bowshot [kintaḥavei keshet]” – two bowshots,38Kimtaḥavei is plural. which is one mil. Rabbi Berekhya said: [She protested her fate] like one who speaks impertinently [kemataḥat] toward the One on High. She said to Him: ‘Yesterday you said to me: “I will multiply your descendants…” (Genesis 16:10); now he is dying of thirst.’
That is what is written: “You have taken account of my wandering. Put my tears in Your flask [nodekha]” (Psalms 56:9) – [accept my tears] like that woman with the flask [Hagar]. Just as it is written in the book of Psalms: “Hear my prayer, Lord, and heed my cry; [do not be silent at my tears]” (Psalms 39:13) – [David said:] ‘To the tears of Hagar You were not silent, but to my tears You are silent? And if You will say: Because she was a stranger she was beloved, I, too, “for I am a stranger with You, a sojourner, like all my fathers”’ (Psalms 39:13). “God heard the voice of the lad; the angel of God called to Hagar from the heavens, and said to her: What is it with you, Hagar? Fear not, as God has heard the voice of the lad, as he is there” (Genesis 21:17). “The angel of God called to Hagar from the heavens” – due to the merit of Abraham. “As he is there” – due to his own merit; the prayer of an ill person himself is superior to all others. “As he is there” – Rabbi Simon said: The ministering angels leapt to condemn him before God]. They said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, a person who is destined to kill your children by thirst,39When being exiled by the Babylonians (see Eikha Rabba 2:4). will You produce a spring for him?’ He said to them: ‘What is he right now, righteous or wicked?’ They said to him: ‘He is righteous.’ He said to them: ‘I judge a person only at his present time. “Rise, lift the boy”’ (Genesis 21:18). “God opened her eyes and she saw a well of water. She went and filled the skin with water, and gave the lad to drink” (Genesis 21:19). “God opened her eyes” – Rabbi Binyamin said: Everyone has the presumptive status of being blind until the Holy One blessed be He opens their eyes.40A person does not see anything unless God wants them to see it. [This is derived] from here: “God opened her eyes.” “She went and filled the skin with water” – this teaches that she was lacking in faith.41She did not believe that God would continue to provide them with water.
“God was with [et] the lad, and he grew. He lived in the wilderness and became an archer” (Genesis 21:20). “God was with the lad [et hanaar], and he grew” – Rabbi Yishmael asked Rabbi Akiva, saying to him: ‘Because you studied under Naḥum of Gam Zo for twenty years, [who taught:] The words akh and rak are restrictive expressions, et and gam are inclusive expressions, [I ask you] what is the meaning of the et that is written here?’ He said to him: ‘Had it said: “God was the lad” that would have been difficult; instead, [the Torah writes] “with the lad.” He said to him: “For it is not an empty thing for you [mikem]” (Deuteronomy 32:47); if it appears empty, it is from you [mikem],42If you find something in the Torah that appears devoid of significance, it is because of your own ignorance. because you do not know how to expound. The correct explanation is, rather, “et hanaar” refers to him, his donkey drivers, his camel drivers, and the members of his household.’ “Became an archer [roveh kashat]” – he grew [rava] and his obstinacy [vekashyuto] remained with him. 43The difference between the two versions is whether the word imo is spelled with an ayin or with an alef. He grew [rava] and trained as an archer; he became greater [rava] than all the archers. “He lived in the wilderness of Paran and his mother took him a wife from the land of Egypt” (Genesis 21:21). “He lived in the wilderness of Paran” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Toss a stick into the air, and it will fall on its base.44This saying means that a person has a tendency to go back to his roots eventually. So, too, because it is written: “She had an Egyptian maidservant and her name was Hagar” (Genesis 16:1); “his mother took him a wife from the land of Egypt.”

=== 54 | 54 ===
“It was at that time, Avimelekh and Pikhol, the captain of his army, said to Abraham, saying: God is with you in everything that you do” (Genesis 21:22). “It was at that time, Avimelekh and Pikhol, the captain of his army, said” – “When the Lord is pleased with the ways of a man, He will cause even his enemies to make peace with him” (Proverbs 16:7). Rabbi Yoḥanan said: This refers to one’s wife, as it is stated: “The members of his household are a man’s enemy” (Micah 7:6). There was once an incident involving a woman who filed a complaint against her husband to the authorities and they beheaded him.1This is to illustrate how a man’s wife can be his enemy. Some say, they [subsequently] beheaded her, as well. Rabbi Shmuel said: It refers to a snake. It is taught: Rabbi Ḥalafta says: Snakes are keen for garlic. There was once an incident involving a snake that came down from the mountain into a house and found a bowl of garlic. It ate from it and emitted [some venom] into it. Another snake that was in the house was unable to stand up to it [to fend it off]. When that [mountain] snake departed, the house snake came out and filled [the bowl] with dirt.2In order to protect the members of the household, it brought dirt from the ground and spit it into the poisoned garlic so they would not eat it. The members of this house were apparently righteous, and so ‘the Lord was pleased with their ways.’ Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: It refers to the evil inclination. The usual way of the world is that if a person grows up with another person, two or three years in the same city, he develops a liking for him. But this one [the evil inclination] grows up with a person from his youth to his old age, and if it finds an opportunity within seventy years, it will bring him down,3By causing him to sin. [and even] within eighty years,4Even in his old age. it will bring him down. This is what David says: “All my bones will say: Lord, who is like You, who delivers the poor from those who are stronger, the poor and the needy from their despoiler?” (Psalms 35:10). Rabbi Aḥa said: Is there any greater despoiler than this [the evil inclination]?5So David was thanking God for delivering men from the clutches of their evil inclinations. Solomon said: “If your enemy6Alluding to the evil inclination, as above. is hungry, feed him bread; and if he is thirsty, give him water to drink” (Proverbs 25:21). [This means: Give him] from the bread of Torah, as it says, [referring to Torah wisdom]: “Come partake of my bread” (Proverbs 9:4), [and give himfrom the water of Torah, as it says [referring to the Torah]: “Ho, anyone thirsty, go to water” (Isaiah 55:1). Rabbi Berekhya said: [It doesn’t say only ] “his enemies,” [but] “even [gam] his enemies” (Proverbs 16:7) – this is to include the pests of one’s house, such as gnats, fleas, and flies.7“When the Lord is pleased with the ways of a man,” He shields him from such annoyances. Alternatively, “when the Lord is pleased with the ways of a man [ish]” – this refers to Abraham, who was called ish, as it is written in his regard: “The man [ish] of My counsel from a distant land” (Isaiah 46:11). “Even his enemies” – this refers to Avimelekh.
“It was at that time, Avimelekh and Pikhol…said” – Rabbi Yehuda said: Pikhol was his real name. Rabbi Neḥemya said: [It was an acronym:] The mouth [peh] of him whom all [shekol] his armies kiss on his mouth.8He was beloved by all his subordinates. “God is with you” – because the nations of the world had been saying: ‘Were he righteous, would he not have begotten a child?’ That was a rhetorical question. Once he begot a child, they said to him: “God is with you.” [They also used to say:] ‘Were he righteous, he would not have heeded his wife’s voice.’9To banish Ishmael. Once it was said to him: “Everything that Sarah says to you, heed her voice” (Genesis 21:12), they said to him: “God is with you.” [They also used to say:] ‘Were he righteous, would he have spurned his firstborn son?’ Once they saw his [Ishmael’s] behavior, they said: “God is with you in everything that you do.” “Now take an oath to me here, by God, that you will not deceive me, or my son, or my son’s son; like the kindness that I have performed with you, perform with me, and with the land in which you resided” (Genesis 21:23). Another interpretation, [they were impressed] because the sites of Sodom were destroyed, and passersby ceased [from traveling the road], yet his food storehouse lacked nothing,10Even though there were no longer any passing caravans from which to purchase food. that is why [they said:] “God is with you in everything that you do.” Now, since God is with you, “now take an oath to me here, by God.”  “That you will not deceive me, or my son, or my son’s son” – it is until this point that the compassion of a father extends to his descendants. Rabbi Abba said: It is until this point that brothers remain partners [in their inherited property]. Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: It is written: “My enemies are mighty with life” (Psalms 38:20). What was granted to Abraham after seven generations was granted to Avimelekh after three. Why? “God did not guide them via the land of the Philistines” (Exodus 13:17), because his [Avimelekh’s] grandson was still alive [at that time].11Moses was the seventh generation from Abraham, and he was not allowed to conquer the lands of the Philistines because Avimelekh’s third-generation descendant was still alive then. This shows the extraordinary longevity of Avimelekh’s line.  “Like the kindness that I have performed with you, perform with me.” What kindness did he perform with him? It is that he said to him: “Behold, my land is before you, [dwell wherever is good in your eyes]” (Genesis 20:15). Nevertheless, he did not accept [that offer].
“Abraham said: I will swear” (Genesis 21:24). “Abraham reprimanded Avimelekh regarding the well of water that Avimelekh's servants had stolen” (Genesis 21:25). “Abraham reprimanded Avimelekh…” – Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: Reprimand leads to love, as it is stated: “Rebuke a wise person, and he will love you” (Proverbs 9:8). This is consistent with [another] opinion of Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina, as he said: Any love that is not accompanied by reprimand is not [true] love.  Reish Lakish said: Reprimand leads to peace – “Abraham reprimanded Avimelekh.” This is consistent with [another] opinion of his, as he said: Any peace that is not accompanied by reprimand is not [true] peace.  “Regarding the well of water that Avimelekh’s servants had stolen [gazlu]” – what is a robber [gazlan]?12As opposed to a thief.  Bar Kappara said: It is one who steals something in public, as it says: “They robbed everyone who passed them on the road” (Judges 9:25) – just as the road is in public, so, too, robbery is in public. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai derived it from here: “You brought [as sacrifices] the stolen [gazul] [animal], the lame, and the ill” (Malachi 1:13) – just as lameness and illness are visible, so too, a robber [gazlan] is visible [when he steals]. Rabbi Abahu said in the name of Reish Lakish: [If one steals] in the presence of nine people, he is a thief; in the presence of ten people, he is a robber. Rabbi Tanḥuma in the name of Rabbi Huna: One is not considered a robber until he takes something out of someone’s hand, as it is stated: “He stole [vayigzol] the spear from the hand of the Egyptian” (II Samuel 23:21). “Avimelekh said: I did not know who did this matter, neither did you tell me, nor did I hear of it, other than today” (Genesis 21:26). “Avimelekh said: I did not know…neither did you tell me” – by means of a messenger, “nor did I hear of it, other than today.”
“Abraham took flocks and cattle, and gave them to Avimelekh, and the two of them established a covenant” (Genesis 21:27). “Abraham set aside seven ewes of the flock by themselves” (Genesis 21:28). “Avimelekh said to Abraham: What are these seven ewes that you have placed by themselves?” (Genesis 21:29). “Abraham took flocks and cattle, and gave them to Avimelekh…Avimelekh said to Abraham: What are these seven ewes?” – the Holy One blessed be He said to him [Abraham]: ‘You gave seven ewes against My wishes,13God was not pleased that Abraham was making a covenant with an idolater (see Exodus 23:32). by your life, I will delay the rejoicing of your descendants for seven generations.’14The Exodus from Egypt did not occur until seven generations after Abraham. ‘You gave him seven ewes against My wishes, by your life, they [the Philistines] will correspondingly kill seven righteous men of your descendants.’ They are: Ḥofni and Pinḥas,15The sons of Eli the priest (I Samuel 4:11). Samson, and Saul and his three sons. ‘You gave him seven ewes against My wishes, they [the Philistines] will correspondingly destroy seven Sanctuaries of your descendants.’ These are: The Tent of Meeting, Gilgal, Nov, Givon, Shilo, and the two eternal Temples [in Jerusalem]. ‘You gave him seven ewes against My wishes, My Ark will correspondingly circulate in the Philistine countryside for seven months.’ That is what is written: “He sent His strength into captivity, [and His splendor into the hand of the foe]” (Psalms 78:61) – this refers to the Ark of the Covenant. And it is written: “The Ark of the Lord was in the Philistine countryside seven months” (I Samuel 6:1). “And His splendor into the hand of the foe” – this refers to the priestly vestments, as it says: “You shall make holy vestments for Aaron…and for splendor” (Exodus 28:2). Rabbi Yirmeya in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Rav Yitzḥak in the name of Rabbi Abba: Why were the people of Beit Shemesh stricken down?16When the Ark, which had been seized by the Philistines, was returned to that town (see I Samuel 6:19). It is because they demeaned the Ark. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Had one of them lost a chicken, he would have gone around to many doors [of his neighbors] in order to recover it, yet My Ark was in the Philistine countryside for seven months, and you paid it no attention. Though you paid it no attention, I will pay attention to it.’ “His right hand and His holy arm have wrought salvation for Him” (Psalms 98:1).17This verse is taken as a reference to the retrieval of the Ark from the Philistines. That is what is written: “The cows18Who were pulling the wagon carrying the Ark from the Philistines to Beit Shemesh. went directly [vayisharna] on the road” (I Samuel 6:12) – they were walking in a straight path. [Alternatively,] they turned their faces toward the Ark19Out of respect for it. and sang a song of praise. That is what is written: “Vayisharna” – they sang a song of praise [shira] with their mouths.  What was the song that they sang? Rabbi Meir said: They recited the Song of the Sea. Here it is stated: “They went, lowing [vega’u] as they went” (I Samuel 6:12), and there [in the Song of the Sea] it is stated: “As He is greatly exalted [gao gaa]” (Exodus 15:1). Rabbi Yoḥanan said: [They sang:] “Sing to the Lord a new song” (Psalms 98:1). The Rabbis say: [They sang:] “The Lord reigns; let the earth rejoice” (Psalms 97:1). Rabbi Yirmeya said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Yitzḥak: [They sang] three [songs:] “Sing to the Lord a new song” (Psalms 98:1); “Sing to the Lord all the earth” (Psalms 96:1); “The Lord reigns; peoples tremble” (Psalms 99:1). Eliyahu taught: [This was their song:] ‘Rise, acacia wood,20The Ark was made of acacia wood (Exodus 25:10). soar in your abundant glory, decorated with golden embroidery, extolled in the innermost Sanctuary of the palace, adorned between two cherubs.’  Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said [of those cows]: How many exertions did [Moses,] the son of Amram, expend until he taught the art of song to the Levites, and you [the cows] recite song on your own? May your strength be true.
“He said: It is so that you shall take the seven ewes from me, so that it will be for me as a testament, that I dug this well” (Genesis 21:30). “He said: It is so that you shall take the seven ewes…” – the Rabbis and Rabbi Yitzḥak ben Ḥakora, the Rabbis say: Abraham’s herdsmen were arguing with Avimelekh’s herdsmen. Abraham’s herdsman were saying: ‘The well is ours,’ and the others were saying: ‘The well is ours.’ Abraham’s herdsman said to them: ‘For whichever of us the water rises by itself to water his flock, the well is his.’ When the water saw Abraham’s flock, it rose immediately. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You are a model for your descendants. Just as with you, once the water saw your flock it immediately rose, your descendants, too, when the well sees them it will immediately rise.’ That is what is written: “Then Israel sang this song: [Rise up, well]…” (Numbers 21:17). Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Ḥakora said to them: This21The lesson that the water would rise again for Israel in the future. is not lacking from this place:22You do not need to derive it from elsewhere; it can be derived from this very verse. “So that it was for me as a testament” is not written here, but rather, “so that it will be for me as a testament.”
“He planted a tamarisk in Beersheba, and he proclaimed there the name of the Lord, God of the universe” (Genesis 21:33). “He planted a tamarisk [eshel] in Beersheba” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: Eshel is an orchard. [It means:] Request [she’al] whatever you would like to request – figs, grapes, and pomegranates. Rabbi Neḥemya said: Eshel is an inn. [It means:] Request [she’al] whatever you would like to request; a loaf of bread, meat, wine, eggs. Rabbi Azarya in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon: Eshel is Sanhedrin,23Abraham set up a Sanhedrin in Beersheba. just as it says: “Saul was sitting [in judgment] in Giva under the tamarisk [eshel] in Rama” (I Samuel 22:6). According to the opinion of Rabbi Neḥemya, who said eshel is an inn, Abraham would receive passersby. After they had eaten and drunk, he would say to them: ‘Say a blessing.’ They would say to him: ‘What shall we say?’ He would say to them: ‘Blessed is the God of the universe, whose food we have eaten.’ That is what is written: “He proclaimed there the name of the Lord, God of the universe.” “Abraham resided in the land of the Philistines many years” (Genesis 21:34). “Abraham resided in the land of the Philistines many years” – more years than he stayed in Hebron. In Hebron he stayed twenty-five years,24He was seventy-five years old when he arrived in the land of Canaan (Genesis 12:4), and settled in Hebron (Genesis 13:18). Up until the time of the upheaval of Sodom, when he was one hundred years old, the Torah does not mention anything about him moving away from there.  and here he stayed twenty-six years.25Since our verse states that he resided “many years” in the land of the Philistines, the implication is that he lived there for longer than his twenty-five-year stay in Hebron. Since the verse does not specify how many years more, the assumption is that he was there just one year more than he resided in Hebron.

=== 55 | 55 ===
“It was after these matters, God tested Abraham and said to him: Abraham, and he said: Here I am” (Genesis 22:1). “He said: Please take your son, your only one, whom you love, Isaac, and go you to the land of Moriah, and offer him up there as a burnt offering upon one of the mountains that I will tell you” (Genesis 22:2). “It was after these matters, God tested Abraham.” It is written: “You have given those who fear You a banner [nes] to wave [lehitnoses], because of truth [koshet], Selah” (Psalms 60:6) – test [nisayon] after test,1This accounts for the double expression nes lehitnoses. Abraham, alluded to here as “those who fear You,” was subjected to test after test.  elevation after elevation,2Each time Abraham successfully passed one of these tests he became further elevated. in order to test them in [the eyes of] the world, and in order to exalt them in [the eyes of] the world, like an ensign [nes] on a ship. Why to such an extent? It is because of truth [koshet] – so that God’s attribute of justice would be proven true in the world. If a person says to you: ‘He [God] makes wealthy whom He wishes to make wealthy, he makes poor whom he wishes, and he crowns as king whom he wishes, [all arbitrarily]; when He wished, He crowned Abraham king, when He wished, He made him wealthy,’ you can respond and say to him: ‘Are you able to do what Abraham our patriarch did?’ And when he says: ‘What did he do?’ You tell him: ‘“Abraham was one hundred years old when [his son Isaac] was born to him” (Genesis 21:5), and after all that suffering, it was said to him: “Take now your son, your only one,” yet he did not hesitate.’ That is, “You have given those who fear You a banner to wave.”
“The Lord tests the righteous, but He hates the wicked and the lover of injustice” (Psalms 11:5) – Rabbi Yonatan said: A linen producer, when his flax is inferior, he does not beat it extensively because it would break, but when his flax is of high quality, he beats it exceedingly, because it continually improves [through this process]. So, the Holy One blessed be He does not test the wicked. Why? Because they would be unable to withstand it, as it is written: “But the wicked are like the stormy sea” (Isaiah 57:20).3When the wicked suffer they lash out against God. Whom does He test? It is the righteous, as it is stated: “The Lord tests the righteous,” [such as in this incident:] “It was after these matters that his master's wife [cast her eyes upon Joseph]” (Genesis 39:7).  “It was after these matters” – Rabbi Yonatan said: A potter, when he wants to evaluate [the products of] his kiln, he does not test the fragile vessels. Why? It is because he would not be able to knock on one of them even once without breaking it. What does he test? The sturdy vessels, as even if he knocks on one of them several times, he will not break it. So, the Holy One blessed be He does not test the wicked, but rather, the righteous, as it is stated: “The Lord tests the righteous.” Rabbi Elazar said: This is analogous to a homeowner who had two cows, one strong and one feeble. Upon which one does he place the yoke? Is it not upon the one that is strong? So, the Holy One blessed be He tests only the righteous, as it is stated: “The Lord tests the righteous.”
Another matter, “the Lord tests the righteous” – this refers to Abraham.4As opposed to righteous people in general. “It was after these matters, God tested Abraham.” Rabbi Avun began: “Since governance is by the king’s word, and who can say to him: What are you doing?” (Ecclesiastes 8:4). Rabbi Avin said: This is analogous to a master who commands his disciple and says to him: “You shall not distort judgment” (Deuteronomy 16:19), but he himself distorts judgment; “you shall not show preference” (Deuteronomy 16:19), but he himself shows preference; “you shall not take a bribe” (Deuteronomy 16:19), but he himself takes a bribe; do not lend with usury, but he himself lends with usury. His disciple said to him: ‘My master, you say to me: Do not lend with usury, yet you lend with usury.5And similarly regarding the other apparent improprieties committed by the master. Is it permitted for you and prohibited for me?’ He said to him: ‘I am telling you: Do not lend with usury to an Israelite, but you may lend with usury to an idolater, as it is written: “To a stranger you may lend with interest but to your brother do not lend with interest”’ (Deuteronomy 23:21).6And similarly regarding the other actions of the master. In each case there was a logical explanation for his deeds. So, Israel said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘Master of the universe, You wrote in Your Torah: “You shall not take revenge and you shall not bear a grudge” (Leviticus 19:18), yet You take revenge and You bear a grudge, as it is stated: “The Lord is vengeful and full of wrath; the Lord is vengeful to His foes, and bears a grudge against His enemies”’ (Nahum 1:2). The Holy One blessed be He said to them: ‘I wrote in the Torah: “You shall not take revenge and you shall not bear a grudge against the members of your people” (Leviticus 19:18), but I take revenge and I bear a grudge against idolaters: “Take the vengeance of the children of Israel [upon the Midyanites]” (Numbers 31:2). [Similarly, it is stated:] “You shall not test the Lord your God” (Deuteronomy 6:16) – yet “God tested Abraham.”
“After these matters [devarim]” – after the words [devarim] that were being contemplated there. Who contemplated [these words]? Abraham contemplated and said: ‘I rejoiced and caused everyone else to rejoice,7When Isaac was born (see Genesis 21:8). but I did not set aside anything [from my feast] for the Holy One blessed be He, neither a bull nor a ram.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘[I do not require your gifts. I know that] even if I would make a condition with you requiring that you sacrifice your son you would not refuse.’ According to the opinion of Rabbi Elazar,8Bereshit Rabba 51:2. who said: [When, instead of] “God,” [it is written] “and God” – it refers to Him and His court,9God acting in concert with the angels. the ministering angels had said: ‘This Abraham rejoiced and caused everyone else to rejoice, but he did not set aside anything for the Holy One blessed be He, neither a bull nor a ram.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to them: ‘[I do not require his gifts. I know that] even if I would make a condition with him requiring that he sacrifice his son, he would not refuse.’ [Another interpretation,] Isaac and Ishmael were arguing with one another. This one [Yishmael] was saying: ‘I am more beloved [to God] than you are, as I was circumcised at the age of thirteen years.’ And the other one [Isaac] was saying: ‘I am more beloved [to God] than you are, as I was circumcised at eight days.’ Ishmael said to him: ‘I am more beloved because I had the ability to protest, but I did not protest.’ At that moment, Isaac said: ‘If only the Holy One blessed be He would appear to me and say to me that I should sever one of my limbs, I would not refuse.’ After this, “God tested Abraham.” <variant reading: ishmael said to him: ‘i am more beloved than you, as i was circumcised at age thirteen years, but you were circumcised when you were little, when it was impossible to protest.’ isaac said to him: ‘everything that you gave over10Literally, lent. to the Holy One blessed be He amounted to three drops of blood. I, though, am thirty-seven years old now, and if He were to ask me to be slaughtered, I would not refuse.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘The hour has come.’ After this, “God tested Abraham.”>
“With what shall I approach the Lord, and bow to God on High? […Shall I offer up my firstborn son for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?]” (Micah 6:6). Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Although these words are [apparently] alluding to Meisha king of Moav, who took action and actually offered his son up as a burnt offering,11See II Kings 3:27. in fact it is alluding only to Isaac, as it is stated: “With what shall I approach the Lord, and bow to God on High? …Does the Lord desire thousands of rams, with tens thousands streams of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression? (Micah 6:6–7). Regarding Isaac, even though no action was actually performed, He accepted it as though the deed were completed. Regarding Meisha, [though he actually performed the act,] it was not accepted before Him.
God tested [nisa] Abraham” – Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says: He exalted him like the ensign [nes] on a ship. Rabbi Akiva says: He tested him in the literal sense, so that people should not say: He stunned him and confused him and he did not know what to do.12That is why the journey to Mount Moriah took three days, to give Abraham time to consider whether or not to sacrifice his son.  “He said: Here I am” – Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa said: In two places Moses likened himself to Abraham.13“God called out to him from amidst the bush and said: Moses, Moses. And he said: Here I am” (Exodus 3:4). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: “Do not glorify yourself before a king, and in the place of the great do not stand” (Proverbs 25:6).14Do not presume to compare yourself to Abraham. Abraham said: “Here I am” – here I am [ready] for priesthood, here I am [ready] for kingship. And he in fact merited priesthood and merited kingship. He merited priesthood, [as it is stated regarding Abraham] – “The Lord has sworn, and He will not renounce it; you are a priest forever (Psalms 110:4); [and] kingship [as the Hittites said to Abraham] – “you are a prince of God in our midst” (Genesis 23:6). Moses [also] said: “Here I am” (Exodus 3:4) – here I am [ready] for priesthood, here I am [ready] for kingship. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: “Do not approach [tikrav] here [halom]” (Exodus 3:5). Kerav is specifically a reference to the priesthood, just as it says: “The stranger who approaches [karev] shall be put to death” (Numbers 1:51). Halom is specifically a reference to kingship, just as it is stated [that David said]: “That You have brought me to here [halom]” (II Samuel 7:18).15But in fact Moses received neither priesthood not kingship. The Midrash elaborates on only one of the two ways in which Moses compared himself to Abraham. For the other, see Devarim Rabba 2:7.
“He said: Please take your son…” – He said to him: ‘I plead with you, “please take your son.”’ He said to Him: ‘I have two sons, which son?’ He said to him: “Your only one.” He said to him: ‘This one is the only one to his mother, and the other one is the only one to his mother.’ He said to him: “Whom you love” (Genesis 22:2). He said to him: ‘Are there partitions in one’s innards?’16Is there any limit to a father’s love for all his sons? He said to him: “Isaac” (Genesis 22:2). Why did He not reveal it [His intention] to him immediately? It was to endear it [God’s command] in his eyes, and [also] to give him reward for each and every statement. This is like the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan, as Rabbi Yoḥanan said: “Go you [from your land]” (Genesis 12:1) – meaning your district; “from your birthplace” (Genesis 12:1) – meaning your neighborhood; “from your father’s house” (Genesis 12:1) – meaning your father’s house; “to the land that I will show you” (Genesis 12:1). Why did He not reveal it [His intention] to him immediately? It was to endear it [God’s command] in his eyes and to give him reward for each and every statement and for each and every step. Rabbi Levi bar Ḥaita said: “Go you” is written twice,17Once here, and once when God commanded Abraham to leave his homeland and go to Canaan (Genesis 12:1). but we do not know which was more beloved [to God], the first or the second. From what is written [here]: “Go you to the land of Moriah,” we see that the second was more beloved than the first.18Because the second time, God told him where he would be going. “Go you to the land of Moriah” – Rabbi Ḥiyya Rabba and Rabbi Yanai, one said: To the place from which instruction [horaa] emerges to the world,19The seat of the Sanhedrin was in the Temple, on Mount Moriah. and the other said: To the place from which fear [yira] emerges to the world.20The idolaters will one day be instilled with fear for not having worshiped God at the Temple. Similarly, the Holy of Holies [devir] – Rabbi Ḥiyya and Rabbi Yanai, one said: The place from which commandments [diberot] emerge to the world,21God gave the commandments to Moses from inside the Holy of Holies (see Exodus 25:22). and one said: The place from which domination [dibur] emerges to the world.22God’s authority over the nations emanates from there. Similarly, the Ark [aron], Rabbi Ḥiyya and Rabbi Yanai, one said: [This refers] to the place from which light [ora] emerges to the world, and one said: [It refers] to the place from which fear [yira] emerges to the world.  Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: [It is called Moriah] because it is from there that the Holy One blessed be He shoots [moreh] at the nations of the world and dispatches them down to Gehenna.23For not accepting His dominion. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: [God was telling Abraham to go] to the place that is aligned [ra’ui] corresponding to the heavenly Temple. Rabbi Pinḥas said: To the place of dominion [maruta] over the world. The Rabbis say: To the place where incense is offered, just as it says: “I will go to the mountain of myrrh [mor], and to the hill of frankincense” (Song of Songs 4:6). “Offer him up there as a burnt offering” – Rabbi Yudan bar Simon said: He [Abraham] said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, can there be an offering without a priest?’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘I have already appointed you a priest.’ That is what is written [regarding Abraham]: “You are a priest forever” (Psalms 110:4). “Upon one of the mountains that I will tell you” – Rabbi Huna said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili: The Holy One blessed be He [at first] causes the righteous to be perplexed, and to direct their eyes toward Him [for clarification], and only then does he reveal to them the upshot of the matter. “To the land that I will show you” (Genesis 12:1) – “upon one of the mountains…”24God did not reveal the exact location at first, leaving Abraham wondering where it was to be. Similarly, “And proclaim to it the proclamation that [I speak to you]” (Jonah 3:2). Similarly, “Arise, go out to the valley, and there I will speak to you” (Ezekiel 3:22).25In all these cases God gave a vague command at first, specifying the details only later.
“Abraham awoke early in the morning and saddled his donkey; he took his two young men with him, and Isaac his son; he chopped wood for the burnt offering, arose, and went to the place that God told him” (Genesis 22:3). “Abraham awoke early in the morning and saddled his donkey” – Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: Love upsets one’s usual practice and hatred upsets one’s usual practice. Love upsets one’s usual practice, as it is written: “Abraham awoke early in the morning [and saddled his donkey]…” Did he not have several slaves [who could do this for him]? The explanation is that love upsets one’s usual practice.26Since Abraham was so enthused to fulfill God’s wishes, he did everything himself, including saddling the donkeys, though this was not ordinarily his practice. Hatred upsets the natural order, as it is written: “Bilam arose in the morning, and saddled his donkey” (Numbers 22:21). Did he not have several slaves? The explanation is that hatred upsets one’s usual practice. Love upsets the natural order, as it is written: “Joseph harnessed his chariot, and went up toward Israel his father” (Genesis 46:29). Did Joseph not have several slaves? The explanation is that love upsets one’s usual practice. Hatred upsets the natural order, as it is written: “He [Pharaoh] harnessed his chariot” (Exodus 14:6). Did he not have several slaves? The explanation is that hatred upsets one’s usual practice. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: [God said:] ‘Let one saddling come and counteract the other saddling.’ Let the saddling that Abraham our patriarch saddled in order to go and perform the will of the Omnipresent, of Him who spoke and brought the world into being, as it is stated: “Abraham extended his hand [and took the knife to slaughter his son]” (Genesis 22:10), counteract the saddling that Bilam saddled in order to go and curse Israel.27It was in the merit of Abraham’s actions that Bilam’s curses were negated. Let the harnessing that Joseph harnessed to greet his father come and counteract the harnessing of Pharaoh to go and pursue Israel.28It was in the merit of Joseph’s actions that Pharaoh’s attack on the Israelites ended in failure. Rabbi Yishmael taught: Let the drawn sword that Abraham our patriarch wielded, as it is stated: “Abraham extended his hand and took the knife to slaughter his son” (Genesis 22:10), counteract the drawn sword regarding which Pharaoh said: “I will draw my sword [and my hand will destroy them]” (Exodus 15:9). “He took his two young men with him” – Rabbi Abahu said: Two people acted with propriety,29It is proper for a man of stature to take two attendants along on a journey.  Abraham and Saul. Abraham, as it is stated: “He took his two young men with him”; Saul, “he went, and two men with him” (I Samuel 28:8).  “He chopped wood30The Hebrew atzei is in plural, indicating that two logs of wood were split. for the burnt offering” – Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Yosei in the name of Rabbi Meyasha, and some teach it in the name of Rabbi Benaya: In reward for the two choppings [beki’ot] with which Abraham chopped the wood for the burnt offering, he was privileged to have the sea split before the children of Israel, as it is stated: “He chopped [vayvaka] wood for the burnt offering” and it is stated elsewhere: “The water was split [vayibaku]” (Exodus 14:21). Rabbi Levi said [to him]: Enough. Until here.31The derivations regarding saddling and harnessing are valid, but your comparison of chopping wood to the splitting of the sea goes too far. Rather, Abraham [acted] according to his ability, and the Holy One blessed be He [acted] according to his ability.32It is improper to draw a comparison between man’s actions and God’s actions. “[He] arose, and went to the place” – he was given reward for rising up, and [further] reward for walking.

=== 56 | 56 ===
“On the third day, Abraham lifted his eyes, and saw the place from a distance” (Genesis 22:4). “On the third day, Abraham lifted his eyes” – it is written: “He will revive us after two days; on the third day, He will lift us, and we will live before Him” (Hosea 6:2).1The idea expressed in this verse – that salvation comes on the third day, after two days of hardship or deprivation – is now illustrated with several examples. “On the third day” of the tribes,2Jacob’s twelve sons are often called “the tribes.” as it is written: “Joseph said to them on the third day, [do this and you shall live]” (Genesis 42:18). “On the third day” of the spies [sent by Joshua], as it is stated: “You shall hide there three days, […and then go on your way]” (Joshua 2:16). “On the third day” of the giving of the Torah, as it is stated: “It was on the third day” (Exodus 19:16). “On the third day” of Jonah, as it is written: “Jonah was in the innards of the fish three days and three nights” (Jonah 2:1). “On the third day” of those who ascended [to the Land of Israel] from the Diaspora [with Ezra], as it is written: “We remained there three days” (Ezra 8:32). “On the third day” of the revival of the dead, as it is written: “He will revive us after two days; on the third day, He will lift us” (Hosea 6:2).3The verse foretells that the resurrection will take place after a two-day waiting period. “On the third day” of Esther: “It was on the third day; Esther donned royal raiments [and stood in the courtyard of the king’s house]” (Esther 5:1). She wore the royal raiments of her ancestor’s household.4Esther was a descendant of King Saul. By what merit [did Esther succeed in her mission on the third day]? The Rabbis and Rabbi Levi, the Rabbis say: It was by the merit of the third day on which the Torah was given, as it is stated: “It was on the third day, when it was morning” (Exodus 19:16). Rabbi Levi said: It was due to the merit of the third day of Abraham our patriarch, as it is stated: “On the third day, [Abraham lifted his eyes].”  “And saw the place from a distance” – what did he see? He saw a cloud attached to the mountain. He said: ‘It appears that this is the place where the Holy One blessed be He told me to sacrifice my son.’
“Abraham said to his young men: You stay here with the donkey, and I and the lad will go to there; we will prostrate ourselves, and we will return to you” (Genesis 22:5). He said to Isaac: ‘Do you see what I see?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ He said to his two young men [his attendants]: ‘Do you see what I see?’ They said to him: ‘No.’ He said: ‘Since the donkey does not see it and you do not see it: “You stay here with the donkey.”’  From where is it derived that slaves are likened to an animal?5In that they are considered to have no familial ties. It is from here: “Stay here with the donkey [im haḥamor]” – the people [am] of the donkey [haḥamor]. The Rabbis derive it from here [i.e., from elsewhere], from the giving of the Torah, as it is stated: “Six days you shall work and perform all your labor…you, your son and your daughter, your slave and your maidservant, and your animal” (Exodus 20:9–10). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: [Abraham saw that] this place was destined to be distanced from its owners.6This is derived from “he saw the place from a distance.” Abraham prophetically saw that one day the Temple on that mountain would be destroyed, and its owners, the Jewish people, would be driven away from it. Will it be forever? [No,] as the verse states: “This is My resting place forever; here I will settle” (Psalms 132:14) – when the one [the Messiah] arrives in whose regard it is written: “A humble man riding upon a donkey” (Zechariah 9:9).7This is expounded from “stay [or settle down] here with the donkey.” The Jewish people will eventually return to settle “here,” the place of which God said “here I will settle,” and this will occur when the Messiah will come, riding on a donkey. “I and the lad will go to there [ko]” – Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: [He was intimating:] We will go and see what will be the ultimate status of ko.8“So [ko] shall be your descendants” (Genesis 15:5). Since Abraham had been commanded to sacrifice Isaac, they were now going to find out how God would fulfill his promise to Abraham that he would have a multitude of descendants.  “We will prostrate ourselves, and we will return to you” – [his mouth] informed him that he would return in peace from Mount Moriah.9By Abraham’s choice of words, “we will return,” he was unwittingly uttering a prophecy that he and Isaac would both return. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Everything is due to the merit of prostration. Abraham returned from Mount Moriah [with Isaac] due only to the merit of prostrating – “we will prostrate ourselves, and we will return to you.” Israel was redeemed [from Egypt] due only to the merit of prostration, as it is stated: “The people believed…and they bowed and prostrated themselves” (Exodus 4:31). The Torah was given due only to the merit of prostration, as it is stated: “You shall prostrate yourselves from afar” (Exodus 24:1). Hannah was remembered [by God]10When He granted her conception. due only to the merit of prostration, as it is stated: “They prostrated themselves before the Lord” (I Samuel 1:19). The exiles will be gathered in due only to the merit of prostration, as it is stated: “It will be on that day, a great shofar will be sounded…and they will prostrate themselves to the Lord on the holy mountain in Jerusalem” (Isaiah 27:13). The Temple will be built due only to the merit of prostration, as it is stated: “Exalt the Lord our God and prostrate yourself at His holy mountain” (Psalms 99:9). The dead will be revived due only to the merit of prostration, as it is stated: “Come, let us prostrate ourselves and bow; let us kneel before the Lord our Maker [oseinu]” (Psalms 95:6).11Oseinu is an allusion to the fact that we will be made anew in the revival of the dead.
“Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering and placed it upon Isaac his son; he took in his hand the fire and the knife, and the two of them went together” (Genesis 22:6). “Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering” – like someone bearing his own gibbet on his shoulder.12Like a condemned man who is forced to carry the gibbet on which he is to be hanged. “He took in his hand the fire and the knife [maakhelet]” – Rabbi Ḥanina said: Why is a knife called maakhelet? It is because it renders food [okhalin] fit to be eaten.13Meat cannot be eaten unless the animal is first slaughtered with a knife. The Rabbis say: All the eating that the people of Israel eat [okhelim] in this world,14That is, all the benefit they receive. they eat due only to the merit of that knife [of Abraham’s]. “The two of them went together” – this one to bind and the other one to be bound; this one to slaughter and that one to be slaughtered.
“Isaac said to Abraham his father; he said: My father. He said: Here I am, my son. He said: Here are the fire and the wood; but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?” (Genesis 22:7). “Isaac said to Abraham his father; he said: My father” – Samael15This is another name for the Satan. came to our patriarch Abraham. He said to him: ‘Old man, old man – have you lost your heart? Are you going to slaughter the son who was granted to you at the age of one hundred years?’ He [Abraham] said to him: ‘It is with this understanding [that I am going].’ He [Samael] said to him: ‘If He were to test you beyond this, would you be able to withstand it? –“If a matter tries you, will you be overwhelmed?”’ (Job 4:2). He [Abraham] said to him: ‘[I will comply] even if it is beyond this.’ He said to him: ‘Tomorrow He will tell you that you are a shedder of blood because you shed the blood of your son.’ He said: ‘It is with this understanding [that I am going].’ Since [Samael saw that] it was to no avail, he turned to Isaac. He said to him: ‘Son of the despondent woman,16Imagine how your mother will feel if you are killed. he is going to slaughter you.’ He [Isaac] said to him: ‘It is with this understanding [that I am going].’ He [Samael] said to him: ‘If so, all the finery that your mother crafted [for you] will go as inheritance to Ishmael, the one hated in her household, and you do not take all this to heart?’ If a word does not enter completely, it enters half way.17This is an expression. When someone utters slander, even if the hearer does not believe his words, he does begin to have his doubts. In this case, although Samael did not convince Isaac, he was able to sow uncertainty in him. That is what is written: “Isaac said to Abraham his father…My father” – why “father, my father,” twice? It was so that he should become filled with mercy for him.  “He said: Here are the fire and the wood” – he said to Him: ‘May He [God] bring trouble upon that man who is the subject of His rebuke.’18Satan, of whom it is said, “The Lord rebuke you, Satan” (Zechariah 3:2). Abraham was telling Isaac to disregard Samael’s words. In any case, “God will Himself see to the lamb, my son” (Genesis 22:8). [By this he meant:] And if not, [if God will not provide a lamb], you yourself will be the lamb for burnt offering. “Abraham said: God will Himself see to the lamb for a burnt offering, my son, and the two of them went together” (Genesis 22:8). “The two of them went together” – this one to bind and the other one to be bound; this one to slaughter and the other one to be slaughtered.
“They came to the place that God had told him; Abraham built the altar there and arranged the wood, and he bound Isaac his son and placed him on the altar, upon the wood” (Genesis 22:9). “They came to the place that God had told him; Abraham built the altar there” – and where was Isaac? Rabbi Levi said: He [Abraham] had taken him and concealed him, saying: ‘[I do this] so that that the one who is the subject of His rebuke will not throw a stone at him and disqualify him from being an offering.’ “Abraham built the altar there…and he bound Isaac his son” – Rabbi Ḥofni bar Yitzḥak said: For every action that our patriarch Abraham did in binding up his son Isaac below, [on earth], the Holy One blessed be He placed constraints on the guardian angels of the idolaters above, [in Heaven].19In the merit of Abraham’s actions in binding Isaac, the hands of the idolaters’ guardian angels were tied and restrained from bringing harm to Israel in the future. But He did not do so [categorically]. Rather, when Israel distanced themselves [from God] in the days of Jeremiah, the Holy One blessed be He said to them: ‘What do you think, that these restraints are permanent?’ It is as it is stated: “For they are like [ad] tangled thorns [sirim], and like drunken drunks” (Nahum 1:10) – for is it forever [ad] that the guardian angels [sarim] are entangled? [No, it is not.] Rather, when they [Israel] become “like drunken drunks,”20Becoming “drunk” with sins. those restraints become untied, as it is written: “They will be consumed like dried whole straw” (Nahum 1:10).21Just as dried straw is easily and swiftly consumed by fire, so will those bonds restraining the guardian angels melt away easily and swiftly from their hands. At the moment that our patriarch Abraham extended his hand to take the knife to slaughter his son, the ministering angels wept. That is what is written: “Behold, the angels cried out outside [ḥutza]” (Isaiah 33:7) – what is ḥutza? Rabbi Azarya said: It is beyond [ḥutza] the bounds of natural conduct for a person to slaughter his son. What were they saying [as they wept]? “The highways are desolate” (Isaiah 33:8) – Does Abraham not receive passersby?22Let that merit cause You to allow him to keep his son. “Those passing on the way [oraḥ] have ceased” (Isaiah 33:8) – just as it says: “It had ceased to be with Sarah [the manner of [oraḥ] women]” (Genesis 18:11).23“Those passing on the way” is an allusion to Sarah. They beseeched God to take her into consideration.  “He breached the covenant” (Isaiah 33:8) – “I will fulfill My covenant with Isaac” (Genesis 17:21).24Is it possible that God has abandoned His covenant with Isaac? “He has spurned the cities” (Isaiah 33:8) – “He [Abraham] dwelled between Kadesh [and Shur]”25Abraham chose to live on the road rather than in a settled city, so that he could extend kindness to weary wayfarers.  (Genesis 20:1). “He had no regard for man” (Isaiah 33:8) – is there no merit in existence for [sparing] Abraham? That is astonishing. And what tells you that the verse is referring specifically to ministering angels? Mimaal is stated here,26“And he placed him on the altar, upon [mimaal] the wood.” and elsewhere it is stated: “Seraphim were standing above [mimaal] him” (Isaiah 6:2).
“Abraham extended his hand and took the knife to slaughter his son” (Genesis 22:10). “Abraham extended his hand and took the knife” – Rav asked Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great: ‘From where is it derived that [according to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi] slaughter must be performed with an object that is movable?’27Something that is not attached to the ground. [Rabbi Ḥiyya replied: ‘Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi learned it] from here: “Abraham extended his hand.”’28Implying that the object used for slaughtering must be capable of being taken up in the hand. He [Rav] said to him: ‘If he [Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi] said this to you as a homiletical interpretation, it is possible that he retracted his teaching;29It is possible that Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi retracted his teaching that slaughtering must be done with an object that is not connected to the ground. but if [he said it to you] as an actual derivation, he has not retracted his teaching.’ It is as Levi taught: If they were attached [to the ground] from the outset, they are invalid [for slaughter], but if they were detached and then were re-attached they are valid, as we learn in the Mishna:30Mishna Ḥullin 1:2. One who slaughters with a hand sickle, with a harvest sickle, with a flint, or with a reed, his slaughter is valid.31Even though the reed is attached to the ground. According to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, the case of the reed must be understood as a reed that was detached and then re-attached, for otherwise it would be invalid for use in slaughtering. This corroborates Levi’s statement that something that was detached and re-attached is valid.  Rabbi Yosei said: Five things were stated regarding the stalk of a reed: It may not be used for slaughter; it may not be used for circumcision; one may not slice meat with it; one may not wipe his hands with it; and one may not pick his teeth with it, because an evil spirit rests upon it.
“The angel of the Lord called to him from the heavens, and said: Abraham, Abraham. He said: Here I am” (Genesis 22:11). “The angel of the Lord called to him from the heavens, and said: Abraham, Abraham” –Rabbi Ḥiyya taught: This32Repeating a person’s name twice. is an expression of affection, [and] an expression of exhortation.33In this case, an exhortation not to harm Isaac. Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov said: [It also denotes that it is] for him and for future generations.34The actions of the person referred to in this manner are reflected in the future as well, as the Midrash goes on to explain. There is no generation in which there is not someone like Abraham; there is no generation in which there is not someone like Jacob; there is no generation in which there is not someone like Moses; there is no generation in which there is not someone like Samuel.35These are the four people whose names are doubled in Tanakh. “He said: Do not extend your hand against the lad, and do not do anything to him, for now I know that you are God-fearing, and you did not withhold your son, your only one, from Me” (Genesis 22:12). “He said: Do not extend your hand [against the lad]” – and where was the knife?36It would have been more expected for God to have said: ‘Do not wield that knife against your son,’ since it was with the knife that Abraham had planned to kill Isaac. Three tears fell from the ministering angels and destroyed the knife. He [Abraham] then said to Him: ‘[Since I no longer have the knife], I will strangle him.’ He [God] then said to him: “Do not extend your hand against the lad.” He [Abraham] said to Him: ‘I will extract from him a drop of blood.’ He said to him: “Do not do anything [me’uma] to him” – do not inflict any blemish [muma] on him. “For now I know” – I have made it known to everyone that you love Me. “You did not withhold [your son, your only one [yeḥidekha]]…” – so that one should not say that any ills that are external to one’s body are not really ills;37Let it not be said that Abraham’s readiness to sacrifice his son was not the ultimate act of submission because it did not affect Abraham’s own body. rather, I ascribe credit to you as if I had said to you: ‘Sacrifice yourself,’ and you did not refuse.38Yaḥid is sometimes used as a reference to the soul. When God said that Abraham did not withhold yeḥidekha, he was referring to his own life.
Another matter, Rabbi Yitzḥak said: When Abraham sought to bind Isaac his son, he said to him: ‘Father, I am a young man, and I am concerned that my body will tremble due to fear of the knife, and I will [thereby] upset you, or perhaps the slaughter will [thereby] be rendered unfit and it will not be counted for you as a valid offering. Therefore, bind me very well.’ Thereupon, “he bound Isaac his son.” Is a person capable of binding a thirty-seven- year-old [variant reading: a twenty-six-year-old] without his consent?39So it must be that Isaac consented to be bound.  Immediately, “Abraham extended his hand.” As he extended his hand to take the knife, his eyes were emitting tears and the tears were falling into Isaac’s eyes, because of the father’s mercy [for his son]. Nevertheless, his heart was joyful in fulfilling the will of his Creator. The angels gathered themselves into groups up above. What did they cry out? “The highways are desolate, those passing on the way have ceased, he breached the covenant, he has spurned the cities” (Isaiah 33:8)40See section 5, where the relevance of this passage is explained. – does He not in fact desire Jerusalem, and the Temple that He had planned to bequeath to Isaac’s descendants? “He had no regard for man” (Isaiah 33:8) – if the merit of Abraham is not sufficient, there is no significance for any person before Him.41“He had no regard for man” means that if God does not show grace to the great, righteous Abraham, no other man could possibly hope for grace from Him. Rabbi Aḥa said: Abraham began to express his astonishment, [saying to God]: ‘These events are nothing short of bewildering. Yesterday42Some time ago. You said: “For it is through Isaac that will be called your descendants” (Genesis 21:12), then You said: “Take you your son […and offer him up]” (Genesis 22:2), and now You say to me: “Do not extend your hand against the lad”? This is bewildering.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham: ‘“I will not violate My covenant, nor alter the utterance of My lips” (Psalms 89:35) – when I said to you: “Take you your son,” I did not say: “Slaughter him,” but rather, “take him up.” I said this to you in affection. You have taken him up and fulfilled My words, now take him down.’ <Variant reading: They said a parable; this is analogous to a king who said to his friend: ‘Bring your son up to [eat at] my table.’ He brought him to him, knife in hand. The king said: ‘Did I say to bring him up in order to eat him? I said: Bring him up out of affection for him.’ That is what is written: “[They built altars on which to burn their sons and daughters in fire, something that I never commanded] and which never entered my mind” (Jeremiah 19:5) – this refers to Isaac.>
“Abraham lifted his eyes and saw that behold, there was a ram, after this, which had been caught in the thicket by its horns. Abraham went, took the ram, and offered it up as a burnt offering in place of his son” (Genesis 22:13). “Abraham lifted his eyes and saw that behold, there was a ram, after this” – what is meant by “after this”? Rabbi Yudan said: “After” all of Israel’s actions in which they become caught up in transgressions and encounter problems, ultimately they will be rescued through the ram’s horn, as it is stated: “The Lord God will sound the shofar…[the Lord of Hosts will protect them…]” (Zechariah 9:14–15). Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: “After” many generations, Israel will become caught up in transgressions and become entangled with misfortunes, ultimately they will be rescued through the ram’s horn, as it is stated: “The Lord God will sound the shofar” (Zechariah 9:14). Rabbi Ḥanina bar Rabbi Yitzḥak said: All the days of the year, the people of Israel are caught up in transgressions and become entangled in misfortunes, and on Rosh Hashanah they take a shofar and sound it, and they are remembered before the Holy One blessed be He and He forgives them, as it is stated: “The Lord God will sound the shofar” (Zechariah 9:14). Rabbi Levi said: Because Abraham saw the ram freeing itself from one thicket and going and becoming entangled in another thicket, the Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘So, too, your descendants are destined to become entangled in the [four] kingdoms,43See Daniel chapters 2 and 8. [going] from [being subjugated by] Babylon to Medea, from Medea to Greece, and from Greece to Edom. But ultimately they will be rescued through the ram’s horn.’ That is what is written: “The Lord God will sound the shofar” (Zechariah 9:14). “Abraham went, took the ram, and offered it up as a burnt offering in place of [taḥat] his son” – Rabbi Banai said: He said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, consider this ram’s blood as though it were the blood of Isaac my son, its fats [burnt on the altar] as though they were the fats of Isaac my son,’ like what we learned: [If one says:] This [animal] is in place of [taḥat] that one,44Referring to an animal that had been consecrated to be sacrificed. this one is a substitute for that one, or this one is in exchange for that one – it is considered a substitute.45The second animal assumes the sanctity of the first one (the first animal remain sacred as well, however. See Leviticus 27:10.) Rabbi Pinḥas said: He said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, consider it as though I had sacrificed Isaac my son first, and then I sacrificed this ram in addition to [taḥat] him,’ just as it says: “Yotam his son reined after him [taḥtav]” (II Kings 15:7).46When Yotam reigned after [taḥat] his father, he did not supplant his father’s reign; rather, both he and his father were kings, albeit not simultaneously. Here, too, Abraham prayed that God should consider it as though he had offered both the ram and Isaac.   It is like what we learn in the Mishna: [If one makes a vow, declaring that something shall be consecrated] like the sheep or like the sheepfolds, [it is consecrated]47Mishna Nedarim 1:3. When he said ‘like the sheep,’ it is assumed that he was referring to a particular sacrificial sheep, as the Midrash goes on to elaborate. – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Like the sheep of the daily offering. Reish Lakish said: Like Isaac’s ram. There48In Babylon. they said: Like the offspring of a sin offering. Bar Kapara taught: Like the lamb that never suckled in all its days.49The miraculous lamb, created just for this occasion – referring to the sheep found by Abraham.
“Abraham called the name of that place The Lord will see, as it is said to this day: On the mount where the Lord will be seen” (Genesis 22:14). “Abraham called the name of that place The Lord will see” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: He said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, when You said to me: “Take you your son, your only one,” I had something to argue in response: Yesterday you said: “For it is through Isaac [that descendants will be considered for you[”…” and now You say: “Take you your son … [and offer him up]”? (Genesis 22:2). But, God forbid, I did not do so. Rather, I suppressed my mercy to fulfill Your will. May it be Your will, Lord our God, when Isaac’s descendants encounter transgressions and wicked deeds, may this binding [of Isaac] be remembered for them, and may You become filled with mercy towards them.’ Abraham called it [Jerusalem] Yireh, as it is stated: “Abraham called the name of that place The Lord will see [yireh].” Shem called it Shalem, as it is stated: “Malki Tzedek50He is identified with Shem. king of Shalem” (Genesis 14:18). The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘If I call it Yireh, as Abraham called it, Shem, a righteous man, will have a complaint. If I call it Shalem, Abraham, a righteous man, will have a complaint. Instead, I shall call it Yerushalayim, as both of them called it, – Yireh, Shalem – Yerushalayim.’ Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Ḥelbo: While it was still called Shalem, the Holy One blessed be made Himself a provisional booth [sukka] and He would pray in it, as it is stated: “His abode [sukko] was in Shalem, His dwelling place in Zion” (Psalms 76:3). What did He say [in His prayers?] May it be My will that I will see construction of My [permanent] house [here]. Another interpretation, this teaches that the Holy One blessed be He showed him [Abraham] the [future] Temple as built,51The Hebrew text in most editions has “destroyed, then built, then destroyed, then built,” but this is a textual error and the extra words should be deleted (Yefeh Toar).  then destroyed and then built, as it is stated: “The name of that place The Lord will see [yireh]” – that refers to the Temple built, just as it says: “Three times in the year [all your males] shall appear [yeraeh]” (Deuteronomy 16:16). “As it is said to this day: On the mount where the Lord” – that refers to the Temple destroyed, as it is stated: “On Mount Zion that is desolate” (Lamentations 5:18). “The Lord will be seen” – [that refers to the Temple] built and perfected in the future, like the matter that is stated: “For the Lord has rebuilt Zion and is seen in His glory” (Psalms 102:17).
“The angel of the Lord called to Abraham a second time from the heavens” (Genesis 22:15). “He said: I swear by Myself, the utterance of the Lord, that because you have done this matter, and did not withhold your son, your only one” (Genesis 22:16). “The angel of the Lord called…a second time…He said: I swear by Myself” – what need was there for this oath? He [Abraham] said to Him: ‘Take an oath to me that you will not test me again from now on, nor Isaac my son.’ This is analogous to one who jumped from the bank of a stream, over the current, and took his son along with him as he jumped.  Another interpretation, what need was there for this oath? Rabbi Ḥama ben Rabbi Ḥanina: He said to Him: ‘Take an oath to me that You will not test me again from now on.’ This is analogous to a king who was married to a noblewoman. She bore for him a first son, and he divorced her. [He remarried her and she bore him] a second son, and he divorced her, a third son, and he divorced her. When she bore a tenth son for him, all of them gathered together and said to him: ‘Take an oath to us that you will not divorce our mother from now on.’ So, too, when Abraham our patriarch was tested with the tenth ordeal,52The binding of Isaac was the tenth and last of Abraham’s tests (see Mishna Avot 5:3). he said to Him: ‘Take an oath to me that You will not test me again from now on.’ Rabbi Ḥanin said: “That because you have done this matter” – this was the tenth test, and yet you say [when reading the verse]: “That because you have done this matter”? The explanation is that this final ordeal is equal in importance to all the others combined, as had he not accepted it upon himself, he would have lost everything <variant reading:="" everything="" that="" he="" had="" done.=""> “For that I will bless you and multiply your descendants as the stars of the heavens, and as the sand that is upon the seashore, and your descendants will inherit the gate of their enemies” (Genesis 22:17). “For that I will bless you [varekh avarekhekha]…” – [the doubling of the verb indicates] a blessing for the father, a blessing for the son. “And multiply [veharba arbeh]” – multiplication for the father, multiplication for the son. “And your descendants will inherit the gate of their enemies” – this refers to Tarmod.53The people of Tarmod were implacable enemies of the Jews. Fortunate are all those who will witness the downfall of Tarmod, as it was a partner to the two destructions [of the Temples]. Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Ḥanina, one of them said: In the destruction of the First Temple, they provided eighty thousand archers <variant reading:="" shooters="">, and in the destruction of the Second Temple, it provided eight thousand archers. “Abraham returned to his young men, and they arose and went together to Beersheba and Abraham lived in Beersheba” (Genesis 22:18). “Abraham returned to his young men” – and where was Isaac? Rabbi Berekhya in the name of the Rabbis from over there:54Babylon. He sent him away to Shem to learn Torah from him. This is analogous to a woman who became wealthy from plying her spindle. She said: ‘Since it was from this spindle that I became wealthy, it will never depart from my possession’. So, Abraham said: ‘Everything that has come into my possession is only because I engaged in Torah and mitzvot. That is why I do not want it to depart from my children forever.’ Rabbi Ḥanina said: He sent him at night55Abraham did not bring Isaac back with him, but told him to travel later on, at night. due to the evil eye.56He did this so that the evil eye would not affect Isaac in the wake of the miracle that was performed on his behalf. [Similarly, we find] that from the moment that Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya emerged from the fiery furnace, their names are not mentioned again. Where did they go? Rabbi Elazar said: They died because of the spittle.57After they survived, all the gentiles mocked Israel and spat at them, saying: ‘You have a God capable of such miracles, and yet you worship idols?’ God took the lives of Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya so that Israel would no longer be mocked by the gentiles. Rabbi Yosei said: They died from the [evil] eye. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: They relocated and went to Yehoshua ben Yehotzadak to learn Torah from him. That is what is written: “Hear now, Yehoshua the High Priest, you and your colleagues who sit before you, [for they are men of wonders]” (Zechariah 3:8). Rabbi Ḥanina said: It is was with that understanding that Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya descended into the fiery furnace – in order that a sign would be performed through them.58If they would be saved, it would be a sign of God’s greatness. If they would not be saved, it would be a sign of loyalty to God even at the cost of one’s life.

=== 57 | 57 ===
“It was after these matters, that it was told to Abraham, saying: Behold, Milka, she too has borne children to your brother Naḥor” (Genesis 22:20). “It was after these matters, it was told to Abraham, saying: Behold, Milka…has borne children.” It is written: “The life of good tidings heals the heart, and envy is the rot of bones” (Proverbs 14:30) – while he [Abraham] was still at Mount Moriah1Where he had come so close to losing Isaac. he received tidings that the [future] spouse of his son was born, as it is stated: “Behold, Milka, too, has borne … .”2One of Milka’s descendants was Rebecca. “It will be healing for your navel, and an elixir for your bones” (Proverbs 3:8) – while he was still at Mount Moriah he received tidings that the [future] spouse of his son was born,3The navel is symbolic of the connection from one generation to the next. as it is stated: “Behold, Milka, she too has borne children.”
“Like cold water on a weary soul is good tidings from a distant land” (Proverbs 25:25) – we learned there in a mishna: Upon rainfall and upon hearing good tidings, one recites the blessing: ‘Blessed [are You]…Who is good and Who bestows good.’4Berakhot 54a. Why did they see fit to juxtapose good tidings to rainfall? Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Levi: It is based on: “Like cold water on a weary soul is good tidings from a distant land” – just as over “good tidings” [one recites:] ‘Blessed [are You]…Who is good and bestows good,’ so, too, over “cold water” [one recites:] ‘Blessed [are You]…Who is good and bestows good.’ Another interpretation, “Like cold water on a weary soul,” so is “good tidings from a distant land” – this refers to Abraham, who, while he was still at Mount Moriah, received the tidings that the [future] spouse of his son was born, as it is stated: “Behold, Milka, she too has borne…”
“It was after these matters [devarim]” – after the words [devarim] that were being contemplated there. Who contemplated [these words]? Abraham contemplated and said: ‘Had he [Isaac] died on Mount Moriah, would he not have died childless? Now, what am I going to do? I am going to marry him off to one of the daughters of Aner, Eshkol, and Mamre,5Abraham’s Canaanite allies (see Genesis 14:13, 14:24). who are righteous. What do I care about lineage?’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You need not do that; Isaac’s spouse has already been born.’ “Behold, Milka, she too has borne” – “she,” “she too.”6It would have been sufficient to say “she has borne,” yet it says “she too has borne.” “Too” implies that she is being compared to someone else. Just as with [the descendants of] this one [Sarah], there were eight children born to the main wives [of Jacob] and four children born to concubines; so, too, with that one [Milka], there were eight children born to the main wife, and four children born to the concubine.7As enumerated in the coming verses.
“Utz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel, father of Aram” (Genesis 22:21). Another interpretation, he [Abraham] feared experiencing suffering.8He feared that God would test him yet again, this time with physical suffering. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You need not [fear], the one who will experience it [suffering] has already been born. “Utz his firstborn, and Buz his brother.”’9Utz refers to Job, as the Midrash goes on to explain. When did Job live? Reish Lakish said in the name of bar Kappara: He lived in the days of Abraham, as it is stated: “Utz his firstborn” and it is written: “There was a man in the land of Utz, Job was his name” (Job 1:1).10The Midrash interprets this to mean that Utz had another name, namely Job. Rabbi Yaakov bar Kahana said: He lived in the days of Jacob, as Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Dina was Job’s wife, as it is written regarding Job’s wife: “You are speaking like one of the disgraceful women [hanevalot] speak,” (Job 2:10), and it is written in Dina’s regard: “For he had committed an outrage [nevala] in Israel” (Genesis 34:7). Rabbi Levi said: He lived in the days of the Tribes.11The twelve sons of Jacob. That is what is written: “[This I have seen, and I shall tell of it,] that wise men speak up and do not withhold from their fathers” (Job 15:17–18) – this refers to Reuben and Judah.12They both spoke up and admitted that they had committed grievous sins (see Sota 7b). What reward did they receive for this? “To them alone the land was given” (Job 15:19). Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta: While they [Jacob’s family] were going down to Egypt, he [Job] was born, and while they were going up [from there], he died. You find that the sum of Job’s years was exactly two hundred and ten years, and Israel spent two hundred and ten years in Egypt. Satan came [before God] to present accusations [against Israel],13For worshiping idols while they were in Egypt. but He incited him instead against Job. Rabbi Ḥananya son of Rabbi Aḥa said: This is analogous to a shepherd who was standing and watching over his flock. A wolf came and confronted him. He said [to his assistants]: ‘Throw him one goat so he can satisfy his aggression with it.’ Rabbi Ḥama said: This is analogous to someone who was sitting at a feast. A dog came and confronted him. He said [to his attendants]: ‘Give him a loaf of bread so he can satisfy his aggression with it.’ So, too, Satan came [before God] to present accusations [against Israel] and He incited him instead against Job. That is what is written: “God hands me over to the unjust one, and by means of the wicked, He misdirects me” (Job 16:11) – would that it had been for righteous people,14I would not care so much if Satan’s malice had been redirected to me in order to protect righteous people from him, but in fact the people of Israel were sinful at that time. but they were wicked people. Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda says: He [Job] lived during the days when the judges judged. That is what is written: ‘“Behold, all of you have seen it; why do you accuse me of worthlessness?” (Job 27:12).15It is the generation of the Judges that is described to as being worthless (see Bava Batra 15b). You have seen my actions and the actions of my generation. You have seen my actions: Mitzvot and good deeds; the actions of my generation: They seek to pay the fee of prostitutes from the threshing floor.’16The first thing they do with their hard-earned grain is to spend it on immoral behavior. It is not the way of the righteous to pay the fee of prostitutes from the threshing floors.17They spend their money on mitzvot and good deeds, not on sinful activity. That is what is written: “You have loved the prostitute’s fee upon every threshing floor of grain” (Hosea 9:1). Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: He [Job] lived in the days of the Chaldeans, as it is stated: “The Chaldeans set three columns” (Job 1:17). Rabbi Natan said: He lived during the kingdom of Sheba, as it is stated: “Sheba fell upon them and took them” (Job 1:15). Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa said: He lived during the days of Aḥashverosh, in whose regard it is written: “Let them seek for the king virgin young women who are of fair appearance” (Esther 2:2), and it is written: “No women as beautiful as the daughters of Job were found in all the land” (Job 42:15). Reish Lakish said: Job did not exist at all.18The entire book of Job is an allegory, not a narration of a true story. Did Reish Lakish reverse his opinion? For elsewhere, Reish Lakish said in the name of bar Kappara: He lived in the days of Abraham, but here he says that Job did not exist at all. [No, he did not change his opinion.] What did he mean by: [Job] did not exist at all? [He meant only that] he did not actually experience the suffering that was written about him. Why, then, was it written about him? The intent was to say that if it had befallen him, he would have been able to withstand it. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: He [Job] was one of those who came up from the [Babylonian] exile. He was an Israelite, and he had a Torah academy in Tiberias. That is why they learned the laws of rending one’s garments19Upon hearing tragic news (see Job 1:20). and the blessing of mourners20See Job 1:21. from his actions. That is what is written: “Job rose, and he rent his robe” (Job 1:20) – from here we learn that a person must rend his garments while standing. Rabbi Ḥanina said: He was [not an Israelite, but] a gentile. Rabbi Ḥiyya taught: [God said:] ‘One righteous gentile arose for Me among the nations of the world, I gave him his reward21In this world (see Job 42:12). and dismissed him.’22From the World to Come. Who was that? It was Job. “Utz his firstborn […and Kemuel, father of Aram]” – Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Laban is the same as Kemuel. Why was he named Kemuel? It is because he arose [kam] against the nation of God [El]. “And his concubine, and her name was Re'uma, she, too, bore, Tevaḥ, and Gaḥam, and Taḥash, and Maakha” (Genesis 22:24). “And his concubine, and her name was Re’uma…” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: All of them were named with the idea of punishment:23For they were all wicked. Tevaḥ – they are slaughtered [tevaḥun]; Gaḥam – they are excised [gemaḥun]; Taḥash – they are weakened [teḥashun]; Maakha – they are crushed [me’akhun].

=== 58 | 58 ===
“Sarah’s lifetime was one hundred years and twenty years and seven years, the years of the life of Sarah” (Genesis 23:1). “Sarah’s lifetime was one hundred years.” “The Lord knows the days of the faultless; their inheritance will last forever” (Psalms 37:18) – just as they are faultless, so their years are faultless: When twenty years old she was like a seven year old girl regarding beauty, and when a hundred years old she was like a twenty year old regarding sin.1Only from the age of twenty is one held accountable for those sins that are punishable by heavenly action. Another matter, “the Lord knows the days of the faultless [temimim]” – this refers to Sarah, who was faultless in her actions. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Like a calf without blemish [temima]. “Their inheritance will last forever,” as it is stated: “Sarah’s lifetime was” – why was it necessary to say: “The years of the life of Sarah” at the end? It is to tell you that the lives of the righteous are beloved before the Omnipresent in this world and in the World to Come.2The words “life of Sarah” are repeated to indicate that she in fact had two lives – one in this world and one in the World to Come.
“The sun rises and the sun sets” (Ecclesiastes 1:5) – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Do we not know that the sun rises and the sun sets? The meaning is, however, that before the Holy One blessed be He causes the sun of a righteous person to set, he causes the sun of his righteous counterpart to rise. The day that Rabbi Akiva died, Rabbeinu [Yehuda HaNasi] was born, and they applied this verse in his regard: “The sun rises and the sun sets.” On the day that Rabbeinu died, Rav Ada bar Ahava was born, and they applied this verse in his regard: “The sun rises and the sun sets.” On the day that Rav Ada bar Ahava died, Rabbi Avun was born, and they applied this verse in his regard: “The sun rises and the sun sets.” On the day that Rabbi Avun died, his son Rabbi Avun was born. On the day that Rabbi Avun died, Abba Hoshaya of Teriya was born. On the day Abba Hoshaya died, Rabbi Hoshaya was born, and they applied this verse in his regard: “The sun rises and the sun sets.” Before He caused Moses’ sun to set, He caused Joshua’s sun to rise, as it is stated: “The Lord said to Moses: Take you Joshua, the son of Nun […and lay your hands upon him]” (Numbers 27:18). Before Joshua’s sun set, the sun of Otniel ben Kenaz rose,3Otniel was the first of the Judges, (as the leaders of Israel were called after Joshua’s death). as it is stated: “Otniel son of Kenaz…captured it”4Otniel captured Kiryat Sefer while Joshua was still alive. (Joshua 15:17). Before Eli’s sun set, Samuel’s sun rose: “The lamp of God was not yet extinguished, and Samuel was lying in the Sanctuary of the Lord” (I Samuel 3:3).5This is interpreted here as a metaphor: Before the life of Eli, the priest of God, was “extinguished,” Samuel was already in place to act as spiritual leader in the Sanctuary. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Like a calf without blemish.6This sentence is an error and should be deleted (Yefe Toar). Before the Holy One blessed be He caused Sarah’s sun to set, Rebecca’s sun rose. First, “behold, Milka, she too has borne children” (Genesis 22:20),7One of Milka’s descendants listed there is Rebecca.  and only then: “Sarah’s lifetime was one hundred years….”
Rabbi Akiva was once sitting and lecturing and the audience began to doze off. He sought to rouse them. He said: ‘Why was Esther seen fit to reign over one hundred and twenty-seven provinces?8See Esther 1:1. The explanation is: Let Esther, who was a descendant of Sarah, who lived one hundred and twenty-seven years, come and reign over one hundred and twenty-seven provinces.’
“Sarah died in Kiryat Arba, which is Hebron, in the land of Canaan; Abraham came to lament for Sarah, and to weep for her” (Genesis 23:2). “Sarah died in Kiryat Arba” – it was called by four names: Eshkol,9See Numbers 13:22–24. Mamre,10See Genesis 13:18. Kiryat Arba, Hebron. Why does it [the Torah] call it Kiryat Arba? It is because four [arba’a] righteous men resided there: Aner, Eshkol and Mamre, and Abraham, and four righteous men were circumcised there: Abraham, Aner, Eshkol, and Mamre. Alternatively, it is because four righteous men, patriarchs of the world, were buried there: Adam the first man, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Alternatively, it is because four matriarchs are buried there: Eve, Sarah, Rebecca, and Leah. And [it is called this also] after its lords, who numbered four, the giant and his three sons.11See Joshua 15:14. Rabbi Azarya said: It is [so named] because it was from there that our patriarch Abraham departed when he pursued [the armies of] the four kingdoms, who were world leaders.12See Genesis chapter 14. It is [so named also] because it fell by lottery to four parties: Initially to Judah, then to Caleb, then to the Levites, and then to the priests.13See Joshua 15:13, 21:10–11, 21:13. Also, it is one of the four undesirable places in the Land of Israel. What were they? Rabbi Yitzḥak and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Dor, the Dor District, Timnat Seraḥ, and Hebron. The Rabbis say: Dana, Kiryat Sana, Timnat Seraḥ, and Hebron.
“Abraham came to lament for Sarah, and to weep for her” – from where did he come? Rabbi Levi said: He came from Teraḥ’s burial to [that of] Sarah. Rabbi Yosei said to him: But is it not so that Teraḥ’s burial preceded Sarah’s burial by two years?14Teraḥ died when Abraham was one hundred thirty-five years old (see Genesis 11:26 and 11:32), and Sarah died when he was one hundred thirty-seven years old (see Genesis 17:17). Rather, from where did he come? From Mount Moriah.15Where the binding of Isaac had taken place. Sarah died as a result of grief over that incident. That is why the binding [of Isaac] is juxtaposed to “Sarah’s lifetime was.”
“Abraham arose from before his dead, and he spoke to the children of Ḥet, saying” (Genesis 23:3). “Abraham arose from before his dead” – this teaches16The verse can also be translated: “Abraham arose from before death.” The angel of death was intimidating him and urging him to bury Sarah promptly. that he saw the angel of death provoking him. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: From where is it derived what we learn in a mishna: One whose dead one [a deceased relative] is lying before him17That is, he is charged with burying the body. is exempt from the recitation of Shema, from prayer, and from wearing phylacteries, as well as all mitzvot in the Torah?18Mishna Berakhot 3:1. It is from here: “[Abraham] arose…and he spoke.”19He did not engage in any other activity prior to his burying his dead. “I am a sojourner and a resident among you: give me a burial plot with you, and I will bury my dead from before me” (Genesis 23:4). “A sojourner [ger] and a resident”; ger means one who dwells as a tenant; toshav means a landlord. [Abraham was saying:] ‘If you prefer, I will act as a tenant,20Humbly beseeching your permission to bury Sarah. but if not, I will act as a landlord,21And take it without your consent. as this is what the Holy One blessed be He has said to me: “To your descendants I have given this land”’ (Genesis 15:18). “Give me a burial plot with you, and I will bury my dead from before me” – I am requesting [a plot] for only one dead person, as it is stated: “Give me a burial plot with you, [and I will bury my dead].” “The children of Ḥet answered Abraham, saying to him” (Genesis 23:5). “Hear us, my lord: you are a prince of God in our midst, in our choicest graves bury your dead; none of us shall withhold his grave from you, from burying your dead” (Genesis 23:6). “The children of Ḥet answered Abraham…Hear us, my lord…” – you are king over us, you are prince over us, you are like a god to us. He said to them: ‘Let the world not fail to accept its true King, let the world not fail to accept its true God.’  “In our choicest graves” – in the choicest one of our many graves.  “Bury your dead” – many dead.22Although Abraham had requested a single grave site, for Sarah, the children of Ḥet offered him a site for many burials.  “Abraham prostrated himself before the people of the land, the children of Ḥet” (Genesis 23:7.  “Abraham prostrated himself before the people of the land”23The verse does not say that Abraham bowed “to” the people, but that he bowed “before” them. He bowed to God in their presence, giving thanks for his good fortune in obtaining the permission he had sought. – from here we learn that one should give thanks [to God] over hearing good tidings.
“He spoke with them, saying: If you are willing to bury my dead from before me, heed me, and intercede for me with Ephron, son of Tzoḥar” (Genesis 23:8). “He spoke with them, saying: If you are willing…[intercede [pigu] for me]” – prevail upon him for me, mediate on my behalf; and if that is not [sufficient], entreat him on my behalf.24The word pigu can connote all of these meanings. “Ephron was sitting among the children of Ḥet and Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the hearing of the children of Ḥet, of all those coming to his city gate, saying” (Genesis 23:10). “Ephron was sitting [yoshev] among the children of Ḥet” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Yashav is written;25Yoshev, “was sitting,” is usually spelled with a vav, but here the vav is missing, so that the word could be read yashav, “he sat.” If the verse is saying that “he sat,” it means that at that point in the narrative he sat down among the children of Ḥet, meaning that he assumed a position of honor among them. on that day they appointed him chief officer [over them], so that there would not be [a situation in which] a person of great stature [Abraham] would be purchasing from a person of low stature. “Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the hearing of the children of Ḥet, [of all those coming to his city gate]”26The implication is that all the people of the city were present. – Rabbi Pinḥas said: This teaches that they all locked their doors and went out to show kindness towards Abraham [by attending Sarah’s funeral]. “No, my lord, heed me; the field I have given to you, and the cave that is in it, I have given it to you; before the eyes of my people I have given it to you; bury your dead” (Genesis 23:11). “He spoke to Ephron in the hearing of the people of the land, saying: But if you please, hear me: I will give the price of the field; take it from me, and I will bury my dead there” (Genesis 23:13).  “And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him” (Genesis 23:14). “My lord, heed me: Land worth four hundred shekels of silver, between me and you, what is it? Bury your dead” (Genesis 23:15). “Abraham heeded Ephron, and Abraham weighed for Ephron the silver that he spoke in the hearing of the children of Ḥet, four hundred shekels of silver, in the currency of merchants” (Genesis 23:16). “No, my lord, heed me; the field I have given to you, and the cave…My lord, heed me: Land worth four hundred shekels of silver” – Rabbi Ḥanina said: All the shekels that are stated in the Torah refer to sela’im; in the Prophets, litrin;27A litra being equal to twenty-five sela’im. and in the Writings, centenaria.28A centenarium being equal to one hundred sela’im. Rabbi Yudan said: The exception is the shekels of Ephron, which were centenaria. That is what is written: “A greedy man rushes after wealth, and he does not know that diminishment will befall him” (Proverbs 28:22). “A greedy man rushes after wealth” – this refers to Ephron, who cast a greedy eye upon the wealth of the righteous man [Abraham].29By demanding an exorbitant price for his field. “And he does not know that diminishment will befall him” – as the Torah diminished the letter vav from him.30Throughout the narrative, Ephron’s name is written with a vav, but here, where he overprices his field, his name is spelled without the vav. Thus, because of his greediness, diminishment befell him. That is what is written: “Abraham heeded Ephron and Abraham weighed for Ephron [the silver…]” – Ephron is written without a vav. “Four hundred shekels of silver, in the currency of merchants” – Rabbi Abba bar Bizna said: It was usable for all merchandise.31Abraham gave the highest quality of coin, acceptable to all merchants for all kinds of merchandise.
“The field of Ephron that was in Makhpela that was before Mamre, the field and the cave that was in it, and every tree that was in the field, that was within its border all around, were established” (Genesis 23:17). “As possession for Abraham before the children of Ḥet, of all coming to his city gate” (Genesis 23:18). “The field of Ephron…were established [vayakam]” – it had been lowly and was now elevated [vekamat], as it had belonged to an insignificant person and now it became that of a great person. “The field of Ephron that was in Makhpela” – this teaches that it doubled [nikhpelu] in value in the eyes of everyone,32After Abraham acquired it. and that anyone who is buried in it can be certain that his reward is doubled [kaful].33Due to its great sanctity. Rabbi Abahu said: It is because the Holy One blessed be He folded up [kafaf] the [great] height of Adam the first man34See Bereshit Rabba 12:6. and buried him in it [the Cave of Makhpela]. “The field and the cave that was in it…” – Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi] said: From where is it derived what we learned: One who sells his field must write down the field and its [specific] border markers? It is from here: “The field and the cave that was in it, and every tree that was in the field that was within its border all around, as possession for Abraham before the children of Ḥet.” Rabbi Elazar said: How many inkwells are emptied, how many quills are broken in order to write “the sons of Ḥet”?35It is repeated so frequently that it must use a good deal of ink and many pens to write it when a scribe writes a Torah. “The sons of Ḥet” is repeated ten times, corresponding to the Ten Commandments, to teach you that anyone who endorses the transaction of a righteous man, it is as though he fulfilled the Ten Commandments. Rabbi Yudan said: “The sons of Barzilai” is written five times,36In I Kings chapter 2. corresponding to the five books of the Torah, to teach you that anyone who feeds a slice of bread to a righteous man,37As Barzilai fed David (see II Samuel 17:27). it is as though he fulfilled the five books of the Torah.
“Then, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Makhpela opposite Mamre, which is Hebron, in the land of Canaan” (Genesis 23:19). “Then, Abraham buried” – that is what is written: “One who pursues righteousness and kindness will find life, righteousness, and honor” (Proverbs 21:21). “One who pursues righteousness” – this refers to Abraham, as it is written [of him]: “[For I love him, so that he will command his children and his household after him,] that they observe the way of the Lord to perform righteousness” (Genesis 18:19). “And kindness” – as he performed an act of kindness for Sarah.38By buying her a burial plot. “Will find life” – “The years of Abraham's life that he lived, one hundred and seventy-five years” (Genesis 25:7). “Righteousness, and honor” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Yitzḥak said: The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘My craft is performing kindness. You have adopted My craft, now come and don My garment:’39Share the honor of a description that is used for Me. “Abraham was old, advanced in years” (Genesis 24:1).40God is referred to as “the one of ancient days” (Daniel 7:9).

=== 59 | 59 ===
“Abraham was old, advanced in years, and the Lord blessed Abraham with everything” (Genesis 24:1). “Abraham was old, advanced in years.” It is written: “Gray hair is a crown of glory; it will be found in the way of righteousness” (Proverbs 16:31). Rabbi Meir went to Mamla, he saw that they were all dark-haired. He said: ‘Are you, perhaps, all from the house of Eli, as it is written: “All those raised in your house will die as young men”?’ (I Samuel 2:33). They said to him: ‘Rabbi, pray for us.’ He said to them: ‘Go and engage in acts of righteousness and you will merit old age.’ What is his source? “Gray hair is a crown of glory.” And where can it be found? “It will be found in the way of righteousness.” From whom can you learn this? From Abraham, in whose regard it is written: “[For I love him, so that he will command his children and his household after him,] that they observe the way of the Lord, to perform righteousness and justice” (Genesis 18:19). He merited old age – “Abraham was old, advanced in years.”
“Might and grandeur are her garb, and she laughs to the final day” (Proverbs 31:25). “Might and grandeur are her garb” – of Torah;1Those who faithfully uphold the Torah are blessed with the “garb” of might and grandeur. “and she laughs to the final day” – when does she laugh? It is in the future.2In the World to Come, the righteous who upheld the Torah will rejoice. From whom can you learn this? From Abraham. Because it is written in his regard: “[For I love him, so that he will command his children and his household after him,] that they observe the way of the Lord, to perform righteousness,” (Genesis 18:19), he merited old age – “Abraham was old, advanced in years.” “Length of days is on its right; on its left, is wealth and honor” (Proverbs 3:16). “Length of days is on its right”3On the right side of the Torah. – in the World to Come;4This is the preferable form of reward for those who uphold the Torah, as if it is on the right side of the Torah. “on its left is wealth and honor” – in this world.5The less preferable form of reward, as if, on the Torah’s left side, is success in this world. Even if He comes to grant man [reward] in a left-handed fashion,6That is, a reward in this world. the person receives wealth and honor. From whom do you derive this? From Abraham. Because it is written in his regard: “[For I love him, so that he will command his children and his household after him,] that they observe the way of the Lord, to perform righteousness and justice,” (Genesis 18:19), he merited old age – “Abraham was old, [advanced in years, and the Lord blessed Abraham with everything].”
Rabbi Yitzḥak began: “Even when I am old and gray, God, do not forsake me” (Psalms 71:18) – Rabbi Aḥa said: Are old age and gray hair not synonymous? The explanation is that [David was saying:] ‘If You grant me old age, grant me gray hair.’7Grant me the visage of old age, which commands the respect due to older people. From whom can you learn this? From Abraham. Because it is written in his regard: “[For I love him, so that he will command his children and his household after him,] that they observe the way of the Lord, to perform righteousness and justice” (Genesis 18:19), he merited old age – “Abraham was old, advanced in years.”
Rabbi Shmuel bar Rav Yitzḥak began: “One who pursues righteousness and kindness [will find life, righteousness, and honor]” (Proverbs 21:21). Upon the death of Rabbi Shmuel bar Rav Yitzḥak, who used to dance [at weddings] with three myrtle branches,8He would juggle the branches to entertain the bride and groom. winds and storms emerged that uprooted all the good trees in the Land of Israel. Why was that? Because he used to pick branches from them with which to dance before the bride.9The storms that uprooted the trees were a sign that the very forces of nature were mourning his death. The Rabbis would say: ‘Why does he act like this? Why does he demean the honor of the Torah?’10It is not befitting for a Torah scholar of such esteem to perform this kind of entertainment. Rabbi Ze’eira said: ‘Leave him, as he knows what he is doing.’ When he died, they went out to bestow kindness upon him.11A common expression meaning that they went to his funeral, and eulogized him. A fiery branch descended and assumed the shape of a myrtle branch, and interposed itself between the bier and the congregation. They said: ‘See this elder, who used to rise up and exert himself [in doing mitzvot], so a [fiery] branch rose up for him.’  Alternatively, “one who pursues righteousness” (Proverbs 21:21) – this is Abraham. “[For I love him, so that he will command his children and his household after him,] that they observe the way of the Lord”; “and kindness…” (Genesis 18:19), as cited above.12See Bereshit Rabba 58:9.
“You are fairer [yafyafita] than sons of man; grace flows…” (Psalms 45:3) – [this refers to Abraham]. You are fair13The word yafyafita, with a doubling of the syllable yaf, indicates two kinds of beauty. among the heavenly, as it is stated: “The angels cried outside” (Isaiah 33:7).14The angels cried for Abraham at the binding of Isaac (see Bereshit Rabba 56:5). You are fair among the earthly – “you are a prince of God in our midst” (Genesis 23:6). “Therefore, God has blessed you forever” (Psalms 45:3) – “the Lord blessed Abraham with everything.” “Who will ascend the mountain of the Lord?” (Psalms 24:3). This refers to Abraham, [who experienced spiritual elevation atop Mount Moriah, where God told him:] “Now I know that you are God fearing” (Genesis 22:12). “Who will stand [yakum] in His holy place?” (Psalms 24:3) – this refers to Abraham, as it is stated: “Abraham arose [vayakom] early in the morning, to go to the place” (Genesis 19:27). “Clean of hands and pure of heart” (Psalms 24:4) – “[Abram said to the king of Sodom: I have raised my hand to the Lord…] that neither a thread nor a shoelace [nor anything of yours shall I take]” (Genesis 14:22–23); “and pure of heart” – [for he said to God:] “Far be it from You to do something like this, [to put the righteous to death along with the wicked]” (Genesis 18:25). “Who has not taken a soul in vain” (Psalms 24:4) – this refers to Nimrod’s soul;15Abraham slew Nimrod, but it was not without justification, because Nimrod was pursuing him to kill him. “nor taken an oath deceitfully” (Psalms 24:4) – “I have raised my hand to the Lord, God Most High” (Genesis 14:22). “He will receive the blessing of the Lord, and righteousness [from the God of his salvation]” (Psalms 24:5) – “Abraham was old…and the Lord blessed Abraham with everything.”  Abraham was the source of blessing for everyone, as it is stated: “[All the families of the earth] shall be blessed in you” (Genesis 12:3). Who was the source of blessing for Abraham? The Holy One blessed be He was his source of blessing – “the Lord blessed Abraham with everything.” Moses was the source of miracles for Israel, as it is written: “With all the signs and the wonders…that Moses performed” (Deuteronomy 34:11–12). Who was the source of miracles for Moses? It was the Holy One blessed be He, as it is stated: “Moses built an altar and called its name; The Lord Is My Miracle” (Exodus 17:15). David was Israel’s shepherd, as it is stated: “You will shepherd My people Israel” (I Chronicles 11:2). Who was David’s shepherd? It was the Holy One blessed be He, as it is stated: “The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want” (Psalms 23:1). Jerusalem is the source of light for the world, as it is stated: “Nations will walk by your light” (Isaiah 60:3). Who is the source of light for Jerusalem? It is the Holy One blessed be He, as it is written: “The Lord will be an eternal light for you” (Isaiah 60:19).
“Abraham was old [zaken].” Zaken – this one acquired [zeh kana] two worlds.16He enjoyed both worlds – possessing great wealth and a ripe old age in this world, and the ultimate reward in the World to Come. There were three people who were crowned with old age and length of days, and the three of them were originators of dynasties: Abraham, Joshua,17See Joshua 13:1. and David.18See I Kings 1:1. Abraham was the originator of the patriarchs. Joshua was the originator of the monarchy of the tribe of Ephraim, as it is stated: “From Ephraim came those whose roots are in Amalek” (Judges 5:14) – this refers to Joshua.19Joshua was the first to wage war against Amalek (Exodus 17:9). David was the originator of the monarchy of the tribe of Judah. Rabbi Aḥa said: You may meet a person who appears old, but does not [actually] have [length of] days,20This refers to someone who grays prematurely; he appears aged, although he is young. or one who has [length of] days but does not appear old. But here, [regarding Abraham,] the elderly appearance corresponded to the [length of] days, and the [length of] days corresponded to the elderly appearance.  “Advanced in years [ba bayamim]” – he gained entry [ba] into two worlds.21This is derived from the syllables ba ba, which could be interpreted as “he entered, he entered.” Rabbi Abba said: He entered [ba] through the direct gate to the World to Come.22Bayamim is taken as a reference to one’s truly significant days [yamim], that is, in the World to Come. Abraham, in his great righteousness, gained entry [ba] to that world directly, without reservation. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: [Abraham had entered [ba]] those days in whose regard it is written: “Before the bad days come” (Ecclesiastes 12:1).23That verse refers to old age, when man’s senses and physical strength begin to fail him. Although chronologically Abraham reached this age, the verse goes on to say: “And the Lord blessed Abraham with everything.” He was miraculously spared the ravages of old age.
“The Lord blessed Abraham with everything” – Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yudan said: [This means] that He granted him a female child. Rabbi Neḥemya said to him: [Even] regarding the primary member of the king’s household,24Sarah, Abraham being referred to as “the king.” blessing is not written.25It is not written anywhere that Sarah was blessed; certainly the Torah would not say that Abraham’s daughter was a blessing. Rather, “the Lord blessed Abraham with everything” means that He did not grant him a daughter at all. Rabbi Levi said three interpretations: “With everything” means that he granted him control over his evil inclination; “with everything” means that Ishmael repented during his lifetime; “with everything” means that his food storehouse lacked nothing. Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Ḥama: “With everything” means that He did not test him again.
“Abraham said to his servant, the elder of his household, who was in charge of everything that was his: Please, place your hand under my thigh” (Genesis 24:2). “Abraham said to his servant, the elder [zekan] of his household” – as the appearance of his face [ziv ikonin] was similar to his. “Who was in charge of everything that was his” – [this means] that he had full control over his evil inclination, just as he [Abraham] did. “Please, place your hand under my thigh”26Near the place of circumcision. – because it [the precept of circumcision] was given to them through pain, that is why it was beloved by them, and they would take an oath only by that. “I will administer an oath to you by the Lord, God of the heavens and God of the earth, that you not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose midst I live” (Genesis 24:3). “I will administer an oath to you by the Lord, God of the heavens [and God of the earth].” Rabbi Pinḥas said: Before I informed His creations about His existence, He was [called only] “God of the heavens”;27And this is why God is referred to only by this description in verse 7, where Abraham was referring to the time before he came to the Land of Canaan. but after I informed His creations about Him he is [called also] “God of the earth.” “That you not take” – he cautioned him that he should not go to [seek as a bride] the daughters of Aner, Eshkol, and Mamre. “Rather, you shall go to my land and to my birthplace, and take a wife for my son, for Isaac” (Genesis 24:4). “Rather, you shall go to my land and to my birthplace” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Even if the wheat kernels in your city are darnel,28An inferior species of wheat. sow with them.29Although the members of Abraham’s family were not known for their righteousness, he had to make do with whatever was available to him.
“The servant said to him: Perhaps the woman will not wish to follow me to this land; shall I return your son to the land from which you departed?” (Genesis 24:5). “The servant said to him” – that is what is written: “A trader, scales of deceit are in his hand; he loves to exploit [laashok ahev]” (Hosea 12:8). “A trader [kenaan]” – this is Eliezer,30The Sages always identify the servant in our passage as Eliezer, who is mentioned in Genesis 15:2. [who was a Canaanite]. “Scales of deceit are in his hand” – because he was sitting and deliberating about his daughter: Is she worthy [to marry Isaac] or is she not worthy? Laashok ahev – to exploit the beloved one [ahuvo] of the world, that being Isaac. He said: ‘“Perhaps [the woman] will not wish [to follow me]” and I will give him my daughter [in marriage].’ He [Abraham] said: ‘You are cursed31“Cursed be Canaan” (Genesis 9:25). and my son is blessed. The cursed do not cleave to the blessed.’
“Abraham said to him: Beware lest you return my son there” (Genesis 24:6). “The Lord, God of the heavens, who took me from my father's house, and from my birthplace, and who spoke to me, and who took an oath to me, saying: To your descendants I will give this land; He will send His angel before you, and you will take a wife for my son from there” (Genesis 24:7). “Abraham said to him: Beware…the Lord, God of the heavens, who took me from my father’s house” – this refers to his father’s house. “And from my birthplace” – this refers to his neighborhood. “And who took an oath to me” – in Ḥaran. “And who spoke to me” – [at the covenant] between the pieces.32See Genesis 15:1–21. “He will send his angel before you” – Rabbi Dosa said: This refers to a particular angel.33Some say this refers to the archangel Metatron. At the moment that Abraham our patriarch said: “He will send his angel before you,” the Holy One blessed be He designated two angels for him; one to bring out Rebecca, and one to accompany Eliezer. “And if the woman will not wish to follow you, you shall be absolved from this oath of mine; only you shall not return my son there” (Genesis 24:8). “And if the woman will not wish…only [rak] you shall not return my son there” – rak is a term of exclusion, [intimating:] My son will not return there, but my grandson [Jacob] will return.
“The servant took ten camels from the camels of his master, and he went, and all his master’s goods in his hand; he arose and went to Aram Naharayim, to the city of Naḥor” (Genesis 24:10). “The servant took ten camels from the camels of his master…” – the camels of Abraham our patriarch were notable, [in that] everywhere that they would go out, they would go out muzzled.34So that they should not eat vegetation belonging to a private individual. “And all his master’s goods in his hand” – Rabbi Ḥelbo said: This refers to his will.35In it, he bequeathed all his belongings to Isaac. “He arose and went to Aram Naharayim” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: [He arrived] on that same day. This is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yitzḥak [elsewhere]: “I came today to the spring” (Genesis 24:42) – today I departed and today I arrived.  “You made the land quake; You shattered it. Heal its shards, for it has toppled”36The Midrash interprets all these descriptions as references to incidents in which someone was able to reach long distances in a short amount of time, as if the ground itself contracted for him. (Psalms 60:4). “You made the land quake” – in the days of Abraham;37See Genesis Rabba 43:3. “you shattered it” – in the days of Eliezer; “heal its shards” – in the days of Jacob;38See Genesis Rabba 68:8. “for it has toppled” – in the days of Yishbi Benov. That is what is written: “Yishbi Benov, who was of the offspring of the giant” (II Samuel 21:16). He wielded his shield, and David leapt backwards eighteen cubits.39From the force of the shield. This one feared that one, and that one feared this one. This one [Yishbi Benov] feared [David], saying: ‘If this is how he leaps backwards, what can he do going forward?’ And that one [David] feared this one [Yishbi Benov], saying: ‘If he can wield his shield like this, how can I stand against him?’ David said: ‘If only I had one of my sister’s sons to come and aid me.’ Immediately, “Avishai son of Tzeruya came to his aid” (II Samuel 21:17). Was he standing behind the door [that he arrived so quickly]? That is a rhetorical question. The Rabbis say: Even if he was at the other end of the world, the Holy One blessed be He flew him and brought him in the blink of an eye, so that that righteous one [David] should not have to stand there in distress. That is what is written: “Avishai son of Tzeruya came to his aid and smote the Philistine and put him to death. Then David’s men took an oath [to him, saying]: You will not go out with us to battle [any longer], so that you not extinguish the lamp of Israel” (II Samuel 21:17). “He made his camels crouch outside the city by a well of water at the time of evening, at the time that the women go out to draw water” (Genesis 24:11). “He made his camels crouch outside the city” – he had them go on their knees.
“At the time of evening, at the time that the women go out to draw water” – Rav Huna said: When a person goes to take a wife, and hears the sound of dogs barking, he listens to what they are saying;40He will listen for any sound that he might regard as an omen as to whether the marriage will succeed. “at the time of evening, at the time that the women go out to draw water.”41Eliezer thought that he might overhear a hint about an appropriate girl by listening to the conversation of the women drawing water.

=== 60 | 60 ===
“He said: Lord, God of my master Abraham, please arrange it for me today, and perform kindness with my master Abraham” (Genesis 24:12). “He said: Lord, God of my master Abraham, please arrange it for me today…” “Who among you fears the Lord, who heeds the voice of His servant…” (Isaiah 50:10). “Who among you fears the Lord” – this is Abraham;1See Genesis 22:12. “who heeds the voice of His servant…” – [this means] that the Holy One blessed be He heeded the voice of his [Abraham’s] servant. “Who walked in darkness” (Isaiah 50:10) – as he came forth from Mesopotamia and its environs, but he did not know where he was to go, like a person who is situated in the dark. “And there was no light for him” (Isaiah 50:10) – and who provided illumination for him? The Holy One blessed be He provided illumination for him every place that he would go. “Let him trust in the name of the Lord and rely on his God” (Isaiah 50:10) – “[You called his name Abraham,] and You found his heart faithful before You” (Nehemiah 9:7–8). Another interpretation, “Who among you fears the Lord” – this is Eliezer; “who heeds the voice of His servant…” – [he heeded] the voice of Abraham who was the servant of the Holy One blessed be He, as it is stated: “For the sake of My servant, Abraham” (Genesis 26:24). “Who walked in darkness” – when he went to bring Rebecca. “And there was no light for him” – and who provided illumination for him? The Holy One blessed be He provided illumination for him, with shooting stars and lightning. “Let him trust in the name of the Lord and rely on his God” – “He said: Lord, God of my master Abraham, please arrange it for me today.”
It is written: “A wise servant will dominate a shameful son and will share in an inheritance among brothers” (Proverbs 17:2). “A wise servant” – this refers to Eliezer. What was his wisdom? He said:2Before he became Abraham’s slave. ‘He3Referring to himself. already has the curse of that man upon him,4“Cursed be Canaan; a slave of slaves shall he be to his brothers” (Genesis 9:25). Eliezer was a descendant of Canaan (see Bereshit Rabba 59:9). perhaps a Kushite or barbarian will come along and enslave me. It is preferable to be enslaved in this household [of Abraham] and not in any other household.’ “Will dominate a shameful son” – this refers to Isaac,5Abraham gave him control over Isaac in the sense that he was entrusted to choose a bride for him. who put all the idolaters to shame when he was bound atop the altar.6With his complete dedication to God’s will, he put all the idolaters to shame. “And will share in an inheritance among brothers” – among Israel; just as they mention the merit of the patriarchs [in their prayers], so, too, this one mentioned the merit of the patriarchs [in his prayer]: “He said: Lord, God of my master Abraham…” “And perform kindness with my master Abraham” – [Eliezer said:] ‘If you begin something, finish it.’7This is a popular saying. Eliezer applied it in his prayer to God: ‘You shortened my path for Abraham’s sake, help me complete the mission.’ Rabbi Ḥagai said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: Everyone requires kindness. Even Abraham, for whose sake [divine] kindness spreads throughout the world, required kindness, as it is stated: “And perform kindness with my master Abraham” – if you begin something, finish it.
“Behold, I am standing by the spring of water and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water” (Genesis 24:13). “May it be that the girl to whom I will say: Tilt your jug please, and I will drink, and she will say: Drink, and I will also give your camels to drink; it is she You have confirmed for Your servant, for Isaac, and through her I will know that You have shown kindness to my master” (Genesis 24:14). “It was before he concluded to speak, and behold, Rebecca was coming out, who was born to Betuel, son of Milka, wife of Nahor, brother of Abraham, and her jug is on her shoulder” (Genesis 24:15). “Behold, I am standing by the spring of water and the daughters of the men of the city…May it be that the girl to whom I will say: Tilt…” – there are four people who made inappropriate demands [of God], three were granted appropriate responses, one was granted an inappropriate response. They are: Abraham’s servant Eliezer, Caleb, Saul, and Yiftaḥ. Eliezer said: “May it be that the girl to whom I will say….” What if some maidservant would emerge and give him to drink, would he have taken her to marry his master’s son? That is a rhetorical question. Yet the Holy One blessed be He made an appropriate arrangement for him: “It was before he concluded to speak, and behold, Rebecca was coming out…”  Caleb said: “Whoever smites Kiryat Sefer and captures it, I will give him Akhsa my daughter as a wife” (Judges 1:12). What if some slave would have conquered it, would he have given him his daughter? Yet the Holy One blessed be He made an appropriate arrangement for him, as it is stated: “Otniel son of Kenaz, Caleb’s…brother, captured it; and he gave him Akhsa his daughter as a wife” (Judges 1:13). Saul said: “It shall be, that whichever man smites him [Goliath], the king will enrich him with great wealth, and he will give him his daughter as a wife” (I Samuel 17:25). What if some Kushite or idolater or slave had emerged and smitten him, would he have given him his daughter? Yet the Holy One blessed be He made an appropriate arrangement for him, as it is written: “David, the son of that nobleman” (I Samuel 17:12). Yiftaḥ [said:] “It shall be that whatever emerges…I will offer it up as a burnt offering” (Judges 11:31). What if some dog or cat had emerged, would he have offered it up as a burnt offering? And the Holy One blessed be He made an inappropriate arrangement for him. That is what is written: “Yiftaḥ came…and behold, his daughter came out to greet him” (Judges 11:34). Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: He [Yiftaḥ] was obligated to pay for monetary consecration.8When his daughter came out to greet him, although he was of course not obliged to sacrifice her, he was obligated to redeem her with money, as one redeems consecrated property that cannot be used. Reish Lakish said: He was not even obligated to pay for monetary consecration, as we learn in a mishna:9Temura 5:6. If one said regarding an impure animal or a blemished animal: ‘These are hereby [consecrated as] a burnt offering, it is as if he has said nothing at all.’ [But if he said:] ‘These are hereby [consecrated] for use towards a burnt offering,’ they are to be sold, and he must bring a burnt offering with their money.10Yiftaḥ’s statement was analogous to the first case, so his declaration was null and void. Pinḥas [the high priest] was not there to abrogate his [Yiftaḥ’s] vow for him. Instead, Pinḥas said: ‘It is he who requires my services; shall I go to him?’ And Yiftaḥ said: ‘I am the head of the chieftains of Israel, shall I go to Pinḥas?’ Between the two of them, that young woman was lost.11Yiftaḥ did fulfill his vow through his daughter, although this was not in accordance with Torah law, as explained in the previous paragraph. This accords with [the saying] that people say: Between the midwife and the mother in childbirth, the son of the wretched woman is gone.12If the baby dies, each one blames the other.  Both of them [Pinḥas and Yiftaḥ] were punished for the blood of the young woman. Yiftaḥ died as a result of his limbs falling off. Everywhere he would go, one of his limbs would fall off and they would bury it there. That is what is written: “Yiftaḥ died and he was buried in the cities of Gilad” (Judges 12:7) – “the city of Gilad” is not stated, but rather, “the cities of Gilad.”13Indicating that he was buried in several cities. As for Pinḥas, the Divine Spirit was stripped from him. That is what is written: “Pinḥas son of Elazar had been chief over them” (I Chronicles 9:20) – “is chief over them” is not written here, but rather, “had been chief.” “In earlier times the Lord had been with him” (I Chronicles 9:20).
“It was before he concluded to speak” – Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: There are three people who were answered [in their prayers] as soon as they spoke: Abraham’s servant Eliezer, Moses, and Solomon. Eliezer – “it was before he concluded to speak, and behold, Rebecca was coming out.” Moses, as it is written: “It was, as he concluded to speak all these words, the ground that was beneath them split” (Numbers 16:31). Solomon, as it is written: “When Solomon had concluded praying [to the Lord], fire descended from the heavens…” (II Chronicles 7:1).
“The girl was of very fair appearance, a virgin, and a man had not been intimate with her; she went down to the spring, she filled her jug, and came up” (Genesis 24:16). “The girl was of very fair appearance, a virgin” – we learn in a mishna:14Ketubot 1:3. The marriage contract of a woman whose hymen was ruptured by wood is two hundred [zuz], these are the words of Rabbi Meir.15Her legal status is that of a virgin, whose marriage contract must be two hundred zuz at a minimum. The Rabbis say: The marriage contract of a woman whose hymen was ruptured by wood is one hundred.16Her legal status is that of a non-virgin, whose marriage contract is only one hundred zuz. Rabbi Ḥanina in the name of Rabbi Eliezer: The source for Rabbi Meir is: “[A virgin,] and a man had not been intimate with her” – implying that if a girl’s hymen had been ruptured by wood, she is [still considered] a virgin.17According to Rabbi Meir, the words “a man had not been intimate with her” is intended to be the definition of the previous statement, “a virgin.” The source for the Rabbis is: “A virgin” – implying that if her hymen had been ruptured by wood, she is not a virgin.18According to the Rabbis, “a virgin” and “a man had not been intimate with her” are intended to be two separate statements. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: No one other than Rebecca was the first woman to consort with someone who was circumcised at eight days.19Of all those who were circumcised by Abraham (see Genesis 17:26–27), only Isaac was circumcised at the prescribed age of eight days (see Genesis 21:4). Reish Lakish said: Because the daughters of idolaters preserve themselves in the place of their virginity but are lax regarding their other orifices, [the Torah tells us that] this one was “a virgin” from the place of the hymen, “and a man had not been intimate with her” from other orifices.  Rabbi Yoḥanan said: From the fact that it states: “Virgin,” do we not know that “a man had not been intimate with her”?20The literal translation of the phrase is: “no man had known her.” The explanation is that she was not even propositioned by any man, in accordance with the verse: “Indeed, the rod of wickedness [will not rest upon the lot of the righteous, lest the righteous set their hands to wrongdoing]” (Psalms 125:3). “She went down to the spring, she filled her jug, and came up” – all the women were going down and drawing water from the spring, but this one, when the water saw her it immediately rose up [towards her].21The verse does not say that Rebecca drew the water from the well, but rather that she merely “filled her jug,” implying that she did not have to lower it down into the well. The Holy One blessed be He said to her: ‘You are a precursor for your descendants; just as you, when the water saw you it immediately rose up, so, too, your descendants, when the well will see them, it will immediately rise up.’ That is what is written: “Then Israel sang this song: Rise up, well; give voice for it” (Numbers 21:17).
“The servant ran toward her, and he said: Please allow me to sip a little water from your jug” (Genesis 24:17). “The servant ran toward her” – toward her good deeds.22Since he saw the water rise for her, he realized she must be exceptionally righteous. “Please allow me to sip a little water from your jug” – [just] one sip. “She said: Drink, my lord, and she hastened to lower her pitcher into her hand, and she gave him to drink” (Genesis 24:18).  “When she had finished giving him to drink, she said: I will draw for your camels also, until they have finished drinking” (Genesis 24:19). “She hastened and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw, and drew for all his camels” (Genesis 24:20). “The man was astonished at her; he was silent, to know whether the Lord had made his journey successful or not” (Genesis 24:21). “The man was astonished at her…” – Rabbi Yoḥanan of Tzippori said: He was squinting23To see her more clearly. and looking at her [to see] if “the Lord had made [his journey] successful.” “When the camels concluded drinking, the man took a gold nose ring whose weight was one half shekel, and two bracelets to put on her hands, whose weight was ten gold shekels” (Genesis 24:22). “When the camels concluded drinking, [the man] took…” – Rav Huna in the name of Rabbi Yosef: There was a precious stone in it that weighed half a shekel. “And two bracelets to put on her hands” – corresponding to the two tablets [of the Ten Commandments]. “Whose weight was ten gold shekels” – corresponding to the Ten Commandments. “He said: Whose daughter are you; please tell me. Is there room in your father’s house for us to stay the night?” (Genesis 24:23). “He said: Whose daughter are you; please tell me. [Is there room in your father’s house for us to stay the night [lalin]?]” – a stay for one night. “She said to him: I am the daughter of Betuel, son of Milka, whom she bore to Naḥor” (Genesis 24:24). “She said to him: Both straw and feed is plentiful with us, as well as room for lodging” (Genesis 24:25). “She said to him: I am the daughter of Betuel, son of Milka…as well as room for lodging [lalun]” – to lodge for several nights.24Although he asked her about staying over for one night, she replied that he could stay for many nights. “The man bowed and prostrated himself to the Lord” (Genesis 24:26).  “The man bowed and prostrated himself to the Lord” – from here we learn that one should express thanks [to God] for good tidings. “He said: Blessed is the Lord, God of my master Abraham, who did not withhold His kindness and His truth from my master; I, the Lord guided me on the way to the house of my master’s brethren” (Genesis 24:27). “He said: Blessed is the Lord, God of my master Abraham, who did not withhold His kindness…” – from the fact that the path was miraculously shortened, I knew that “the Lord guided me on the way to the house of my master's brethren.”
“The girl ran and told her mother’s household all about these matters” (Genesis 24:28). “The girl ran and told her mother’s household” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: A woman frequents only her mother’s household. They raised an objection to him: “She [Rachel] told her father” (Genesis 29:12). He said to them: That was because her mother had died. To whom could she have told? Is it not to her father? “Rebecca had a brother and his name was Laban, and Laban ran out to the man, to the spring” (Genesis 24:29). “When he saw the nose ring and the bracelets upon his sister’s hands, and when he heard the words of Rebecca his sister, saying: So spoke the man to me, he came to the man and, behold, he was standing beside the camels at the spring” (Genesis 24:30). “Rebecca had a brother and his name was Laban” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said a favorable interpretation – he was very fair in complexion.25Lavan (Laban) means white. Rabbi Berekkya said an unfavorable interpretation – he was white, [i.e. pure], in wickedness. “Laban ran out to the man, to the spring [haayin]” – he was assessing [me’ayen] him.26He was looking over Eliezer, to see if he might get some money from him.  “He was standing beside the camels at the spring [haayin]” – he [Laban] was assessing [me’ayen] himself.27Whether or not he would be able to deceive Eliezer to benefit himself. “He said: Come, blessed of the Lord; why are you standing outside, and I have cleared the house and place for the camels?” (Genesis 24:31). “He said: Come, blessed of the Lord” – he thought that he was Abraham, as the contours of his face resembled him. Rabbi Yosei ben Dosa said: Canaan28Canaan was cursed by Noah (Genesis 9:25). and Eliezer were one and the same, and because he faithfully served that righteous man [Abraham], he emerged from the ranks of the cursed and entered the ranks of the blessed.  “He said: Come, blessed of the Lord” – Rabbi Yaakov said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan of Beit Guvrin, who would use this as a parting statement:29When taking leave of his host. If Eliezer, by means of faithfully serving that righteous man, emerged from the ranks of the cursed and entered the ranks of the blessed, then the people of Israel, who perform acts of kindness for their greater and lesser members with their hands and their feet, all the more so. “Why are you standing outside” – it is not in keeping with your esteem to remain outside. “And I have cleared the house” – from the filth of idol worship.
“The man came to the house and unfastened the camels. He gave straw and feed for the camels, and water to wash his feet and the feet of the men who were with him” (Genesis 24:33). “The man came to the house [and unfastened the camels]…” – he untied their muzzles. Rabbi Huna and Rabbi Yirmeya asked Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Rabba: Were the camels of Abraham our patriarch not like the donkey of Rabbi Pinḥas ben Yair?30As the Midrash goes on to relate, Rabbi Pinḥas’ donkey would not touch forbidden food. Surely Abraham’s animals were no less righteous than those of Rabbi Pinḥas, therefore there was no need to muzzle them to prevent them from eating private vegetation, and the unfastening mentioned in the verse was referring to their saddles. Robbers once took the donkey of Rabbi Pinḥas ben Yair. It spent three days with them and did not eat anything. They said: ‘In the end it will die, and stink up our cave for us. Let us return it to its owner.’ They sent it out and it came to its owner’s house. When it arrived it brayed, and he recognized its voice. He said: ‘Open the gate for that unfortunate one and give it to eat, as three days have passed during which it did not taste a thing.’ They gave it barley, but it would not taste it. They said to him: ‘We gave it barley but it would not taste it.’ He said to them: ‘Did you process it?’31By removing the chaff and other refuse. They said to him: ‘Yes.’ [He asked:] ‘Did you separate the tithes of demai from it?’32Demai is produce purchased from a person who is not trustworthy regarding the separation of tithes from his produce. One who buys such produce must separate the tithes himself, as a precaution. They said to him: ‘No. Did you not teach us, Rabbi: “One who purchases grain for an animal, or flour for hides, or oil for light, or oil to rub into leather is exempt from tithing demai?”’33Demai 1:3. He said to them: ‘What can we do for it if it is stringent with itself?’34The donkey was so righteous that it did not want to rely on the exemption from tithing animal feed.  Rabbi Yirmeya once sent a basket of figs to Rabbi Ze’eira. Rabbi Yirmeya said: ‘Is it possible that Rabbi Ze’eira would eat them without tithing them?’35He therefore did not tithe them himself before sending them. Rabbi Ze’eira said: ‘Is it possible that Rabbi Yirmeya would send them without tithing?’ Between the two of them, the figs were eaten in their untithed state. The next day, Rabbi Yirmeya met Rabbi Ze’eira. He [Rabbi Ze’eira] said to him: ‘Did you tithe those figs?’ He said to him: ‘No.’ Rabbi Abba bar Yemina said to Rabbi Ze’eira: ‘If the people of early generations were likened to angels, we are likened to human beings. If they were likened to people, we are likened to donkeys. And [if we are likened to donkeys] we are not likened to the donkey of Rabbi Pinḥas ben Yair, [but to an ordinary donkey]. When the donkey of Rabbi Pinḥas ben Yair was given untithed food it would not eat it, but we ate untithed figs.’  “He gave straw and feed for the camels” – the conversation of the servants of the patriarch’s household are more significant than the Torah laws of the descendants. The passage about Eliezer is two or three columns long, it states it and repeats it. The [law of impurity of] creeping animals is one of the fundamental laws of the Torah, but the fact that its blood imparts ritual impurity, like its flesh,36The flesh of a creeping animal imparts impurity (see Leviticus 11:29–38), but the Torah does not state explicitly that its blood imparts impurity. is learned only from a derivation based on an extra letter in a verse. [What is that derivation?] Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says: Tameh, hatameh (Leviticus 11:29).37The verse, when speaking of creeping animals, could have said: “And these are impure [tamei],” but instead it says “And these are the impure ones [hatamei].” It is from the additional letter heh that the impurity of its blood is derived. Rabbi Eliezer ben Yosei says: Zeh, vezeh (Leviticus 11:29).38The verse, when speaking of creeping animals, could have said: “These [zeh] are the impure ones,“ but instead it says “And these [vezeh] are the impure ones.” It is from the additional letter vav that the impurity of its blood is derived. “And water to wash his feet and the feet of the men who were with him” – Rabbi Aḥa said: The washing of the feet of the servants of the patriarch’s household is more significant than the Torah laws of the descendants, for [the Torah] found it necessary to write even about the washing of his feet, The creeping animal is one of the fundamental laws of the Torah, but the fact that its blood imparts impurity like its flesh is learned only from a derivation based on an extra letter in a verse. [What is that derivation?] Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says: Tameh, hatameh, Rabbi Eliezer ben Yosei says: Zeh, vezeh.
“Food was placed before him to eat, and he said: I will not eat until I have spoken my words. He said: Speak” (Genesis 24:33). “He said: I am Abraham's servant” (Genesis 24:34). “Food was placed before him to eat…He said: I am Abraham's servant” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: If you possess some uncomplimentary trait, say it first. “Now, if you will perform kindness and truth with my master, tell me, and if not, tell me, and I will turn to the right or to the left” (Genesis 24:49). “Now, if you will perform kindness and truth with my master, tell me…and I will turn right or left.” “Right” – this refers to Ishmael; “left” – this refers to Lot, just as it says: “[Abram said to Lot: …separate yourself from me.] If to the left, I will go right, and if to the right, I will go left” (Genesis 13:8–9).
“Laban and Betuel answered and said: The matter has come forth from the Lord; we can speak to you neither bad nor good” (Genesis 24:50). “Behold, Rebecca is before you, take her and go, and she will be a wife for your master’s son, as the Lord has spoken” (Genesis 24:51). “Laban and Betuel answered and said: The matter has come forth from the Lord” – from where did it come forth? Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina bar Yitzḥak: It came forth from Mount Moriah.39It was immediately after Abraham’s binding of Isaac on Mount Moriah that Abraham was informed about Rebecca’s birth (Genesis 22:20–23). Her marriage to Isaac was foreordained from that point. The Rabbis say: From where did it come forth? “She will be a wife for your master’s son, as the Lord has spoken.”40The marriage of Isaac and Rebecca was not foreordained upon her birth. The match between them was ordained in Heaven only now.
“The servant took out vessels of silver, vessels of gold, and garments, and he gave them to Rebecca, and he gave her brother and her mother precious objects” (Genesis 24:53). “The servant took out vessels of silver […and precious objects]” – Rabbi Huna said: Fruit delicacies. The Rabbis said: Toasted grain and nuts. Is toasted grain then the most beloved of all these things?41Since it is listed last, after gold and silver vessels, the implication is that it is the most precious of all the items on the list. The explanation is that it comes to teach you that if a person sets out on a trip without provisions with him, he will suffer.42On the road, precious objects are no substitute for food. Similarly, “Each woman will borrow [silver vessels and gold vessels and] garments from her neighbor” (Exodus 3:22) – are garments most beloved of all these things? The explanation is that it comes to teach you that if a person sets out on a trip without taking his garments with him, he will suffer. Similarly: “All those surrounding them supported them [with vessels of silver, with gold, with goods, with livestock, and with precious objects]” (Ezra 1:6).
“Her brother and her mother said: Let the girl remain with us for some days, or ten months; afterward she shall go” (Genesis 24:55). “Her brother and her mother said: Let the girl remain with us” – where was [her father] Betuel? He wanted to impede [the betrothal of Rebecca] and was stricken down overnight. That is what is written: “The righteousness of the honest will straighten his way” (Proverbs 11:5). “The righteousness of the honest” – this is Isaac; “will straighten his way” – the way of Eliezer. “In his evil, the wicked one is rejected” (Proverbs 11:5) – this is Betuel, who was stricken down overnight. “Let the girl remain with us some days” – this refers to the seven days of mourning for him [Betuel]. “Or ten months [asor]” – this refers to the twelve months that a virgin is given to secure her needs for herself.43After betrothal, a fiancée is entitled to take twelve months before the wedding to prepare herself (Mishna Ketubot 5:2). Laban and his mother were willing to speed up the process, so they requested only ten months.  “They said: We will call the girl, and ask her response” (Genesis 24:57).  “They said: We will call the girl [and ask her response]” – from here we learn that one may marry off an orphan girl only with her consent. “They called Rebecca and said to her: Will you go with this man? She said: I will go” (Genesis 24:58). “They called Rebecca and said to her: [Will you go with this man?]” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: They were hinting to her: ‘Will you [really] go? Will you [really] go?’44They did not want her to go. It was as though they were asking: Are you even considering going with him? “She said: I will go” – I am going against your will, even if you disapprove.
“They sent Rebecca their sister, and her nursemaid, and Abraham’s servant, and his men” (Genesis 24:59). “They blessed Rebecca, and said to her: Our sister, may you become thousands and myriads, and let your descendants inherit the gate of their enemies” (Genesis 24:60). “They sent Rebecca…they blessed Rebecca” – they were downcast and despondent [that she was going], and they blessing her only with their mouths.45Not with their hearts. “Our sister, may you become thousands and myriads” – Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina: Why was Rebecca granted [conception] only after Isaac prayed for her?46See Genesis 25:21. It was so that the idolaters [Laban and his mother] should not say: ‘Our prayer bore fruit.’ Instead, “Isaac entreated the Lord on behalf of his wife” (Genesis 25:21). Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Levi: “The blessing of the lost would come to me” (Job 29:13). “The blessing of the lost [oved]” – this refers to Laban the Aramean, as it is stated: “An Aramaean sought to destroy [oved] my father” (Deuteronomy 26:5). “Would come upon me” – this refers to Rebecca. “Our sister, may you become thousands [alfei] and myriads [revava]” – chieftains [alufim] emerged from her through Esau, and myriads through Jacob. Chieftains from Esau – “the chieftain of Teiman, the chieftain of Kenaz” (Genesis 36:15); myriads [revava] from Jacob, as it is written: “I rendered you numerous [revava] like the plants of the field” (Ezekiel 16:7). Some say that both of these emerged through Israel, as it is written: “When it rested, he said: Repose Lord, among the myriad [rivevot] thousands of [alfei] Israel” (Numbers 10:36).
“Rebecca and her maids rose, and rode upon the camels, and followed the man. The servant took Rebecca and went” (Genesis 24:61). “Rebecca and her maids rose, [and rode upon the camels]…” [Why did they ride on camels?]47Camels are difficult to ride. Rabbi Levi said: It is the nature of camels that they grow in the East.48So Rebecca and her maids were used to riding them. The Rabbis say: [Camels were used for a symbolic reason.] Just as a camel has one sign of purity49It chews its cud. and one sign of impurity,50It does not have split hooves. so Rebecca produced one righteous person and one wicked person. “And followed the man” – as it is unbefitting for a man to walk behind a woman. “Isaac came from going to Be’er Laḥai Ro’i and he was living in the land of the south” (Genesis 24:62). “Isaac came from going [ba mibo]” – he was coming [ba] back from bringing something.51Mibo is interpreted to mean: From bringing. And where had he gone? To Be’er Laḥai Ro’i. He had gone to bring Hagar back [to Abraham], she being the one who had sat by the well [be’er], and who had said to the One who lives [laḥai] forever: ‘See [re’eh] my misery.’52See Genesis 21:14–21:19. “Isaac went out to have some words in the field toward evening, and he lifted his eyes, and behold, he saw camels coming” (Genesis 24:63). “Isaac went out to have some words [lasuaḥ] in the field toward evening” – siḥa is nothing other than prayer, as it is stated: “The prayer of a poor man, when he feels overwhelmed and pours out his prayer [siḥo] before the Lord” (Psalms 102:1). Likewise it says: “Evening and morning and noon, I pray [asiḥa]…” (Psalms 55:18).
“Rebecca lifted her eyes, she saw Isaac, and she fell from upon the camel” (Genesis 24:64). “Rebecca lifted her eyes, she saw Isaac” – Rav Huna said: She saw that his hand was outstretched in prayer. She said: ‘He is certainly a great man,’ and that is why she inquired about him.53See the next verse. “She fell [vatipol] from upon the camel” – she tilted herself downward,54It does not mean that she actually fell to the ground. just as it says: “When he stumbles [yipol], he will not fall” (Psalms 37:24).55The verse shows that yipol does not necessarily mean to fall. “She said to the servant: Who is that man who is walking in the field toward us? The servant said: He is my master. She took the veil, and covered herself” (Genesis 24:65). “She said to the servant: [Who is that [halazeh] man]” – Rabbi Ḥiyya said: She saw that he was attractive and was overwhelmed before him, just as it says: “Behold, here comes that [halazeh] dreamer” (Genesis 37:19).56Halazeh is used in reference to Joseph, who was very attractive (see Genesis 39:6). The same was true of Isaac. The Rabbis said: [Halazeh means:] He and his accompanying angel; halazeh [as an abbreviation for] that different one [alon zeh].57Rebecca saw that the individual accompanying Isaac was no ordinary man. “The servant said: He is my master. [She took the veil, and covered herself]” – there are two people who covered themselves with a veil, and they both bore twins: Rebecca and Tamar. Rebecca – “she took the veil”; Tamar – “she covered herself with a veil, and she wrapped herself” (Genesis 38:14). “The servant related to Isaac all the matters that he had done” (Genesis 24:66). “The servant related to Isaac [all the matters]” – Rabbi Eliezer said: The general statements of the Torah58Such as here, where the Torah makes the general statement that Eliezer related “all the matters,” but does not specify what they were. are more common than its detailed statements, as, if it had desired to write it [the details of what had transpired], it would have written two or three [more] columns. The Rabbis say: He revealed to him the matters that involved praise [for God], [such as] that the path was miraculously shortened for him.
“Isaac brought her into the tent of his mother Sarah; he took Rebecca, she became his wife, and he loved her, and Isaac was comforted after his mother” (Genesis 24:67). “Isaac brought her into the tent of his mother Sarah”59The word “of” is actually missing in the Hebrew, so that the verse literally means: “Isaac brought her into the tent. Sarah his mother.” – all the days that Sarah was alive, there was a cloud suspended over the entrance to her tent. When she died, that cloud ceased. When Rebecca came, the cloud returned. All the days that Sarah was alive, the doors were kept wide open [for guests]. When Sarah died, that opening ceased. When Rebecca came, the opening returned. All the days that Sarah was alive, there was [divine] blessing bestowed upon her dough. When Sarah died, that blessing ceased. When Rebecca came, it returned. All the days that Sarah was alive, there was a lamp kindled from Shabbat night until Shabbat night. When Sarah died, that lamp ceased. When Rebecca came, it returned. When he saw that she was acting just like his mother, separating ḥalla in purity, and shaping loaves from her dough in purity, immediately, he “brought her into the tent.”60The verse means to say that he brought her into the tent because she was just like Sarah in her righteousness. Rabbi Yudan said: The Torah teaches you that if an [unmarried] person has adult children, he should see to marrying them off first and then take a wife for himself. From whom do you learn it? From Abraham. First, “Isaac brought her into the tent of his mother Sarah” and then, “Abraham took another wife, and her name was Ketura” (Genesis 25:1).

=== 61 | 61 ===
“Abraham took another wife, and her name was Ketura” (Genesis 25:1). “Abraham took another wife, and her name was Ketura.” It is written: “Happy is the man who has not walked…” (Psalms 1:1). “Who has not walked in the counsel of the wicked” (Psalms 1:1) – this [“the wicked”] refers to the generation of the Dispersion. “Has not stood in the path of sinners” (Psalms 1:1) – these are the people of Sodom, as it is stated: “The people of Sodom were extremely wicked and sinful to the Lord” (Genesis 13:13). “And has not sat [yashav] in the company of the insolent one” (Psalms 1:1) – this refers to Avimelekh,1He is considered insolent because after expelling Abraham he said to him: “In accordance with the kindness that I have shown you” (Genesis 21:23). as it is stated: “Behold my land is before you, [dwell [shev] wherever it suits you]…” (Genesis 20:15).2Abraham did not accept Avimelekh’s offer to dwell near him. “But whose desire is the Torah of the Lord” (Psalms 1:2) – “For I love him, so that he will command [his children and his household after him that they keep the way of the Lord]…” (Genesis 18:19). “And he meditates on His Torah” (Psalms 1:2) – Rabbi Shimon said: He [Abraham] had no father to teach him, and he did not have a teacher. From where, then, did he learn Torah? The answer is that the Holy One blessed be He set his two kidneys [kilyotav]3The kidneys were considered the seat of thought in the body. as two teachers of a sort, and they would flow forth and teach him Torah and wisdom. That is what is written: “I bless the Lord who counsels me, even on nights when my thoughts [khilyotai] are anguished” (Psalms 16:7). “He will be like a tree planted” (Psalms 1:3) – the Holy One blessed be He planted him in the Land of Israel. “Which brings forth its fruit in season” (Psalms 1:3) – this refers to Ishmael. “And whose leaf does not wither” (Psalms 1:3) – this refers to Isaac. “And whatever he does will prosper” (Psalms 1:3) – this refers to the sons of Ketura, as it is stated: “Abraham took another wife, and her name was Ketura.”
“Planted in the House of the Lord, they blossom in the courts of our God. They will continue to yield fruit even in old age” (Psalms 92:14–15) – this refers to Abraham our patriarch. “They will remain full and fresh” (Psalms 92:15) – “Abraham took another [wife].” “For the tree has hope” (Job 14:7) – Abraham our patriarch has hope. “If it is hewed [yikaret], it will yet regenerate” (Job 14:7) – if He will say to him: ‘Perform [kerot] the covenant [of circumcision],’ “it will yet regenerate” – [he constantly increased his performance of] mitzvot and good deeds. “And its roots will not cease” (Job 14:7) – this refers to his [Abraham’s] vitality.4After his circumcision he went on to produce a child, Isaac. “If its root grows old in the earth” (Job 14:8) – “Abraham was old” (Genesis 24:1). “And its trunk dies in the dirt” (Job 14:8) – “Sarah died”5And was buried in the earth. (Genesis 23:2). “It will blossom from the scent of water” (Job 14:9) – due the scent of mitzvot and good deeds, he will blossom.6Because of his virtuous behavior, he was enabled to father more children in his old age. “And produce branches” (Job 14:9) – “[branches] of a sapling” is not written here, but rather, “[branches] like a sapling” – the addition is greater than the tree itself: “Abraham took another [wife]…”7And through this new wife he produced even more offspring than he had previously.
“In the morning sow your seed, and in the evening do not rest your hand” (Ecclesiastes 11:6) – Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua, Rabbi Eliezer said: If you sowed in the early season, sow in the late season [as well], as you do not know “which will succeed” (Ecclesiastes 11:6), whether that of the early season or that of the late season, “or whether they both alike will be good” (Ecclesiastes 11:6). Rabbi Yehoshua said: If a poor person comes to you in the morning, give him charity, [and if another comes] in the evening, give him [as well], as you do not know for which of them the Holy One blessed be He will record about you,8You do not know which act will be recorded as a good deed by God.  for this one or for that one, “or whether they both alike will be good.” Rabbi Yishmael and Rabbi Akiva, Rabbi Yishmael says: If you studied Torah in your youth, study Torah in your old age [as well], as you do not know which of them will endure, this one or that one, “or whether they both alike will be good.” Rabbi Akiva says: If you had students in your youth, procure students for yourself in your old age [as well], as you do not know which of them will endure, this one or that one, “or whether they both alike will be good.” Rabbi Akiva had twelve thousand students from Akko to Antipatris9That is, from one end of the the land of Israel to the other. and they all died in one time period. Why? Because they were miserly10With their knowledge, not wishing to share it with the other students. toward one another. Ultimately, he produced seven [disciples]: Rabbi Meir, Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Yosei, Rabbi Shimon, Rabbi Elazar ben Shamua, Rabbi Yoḥanan HaSandlar, and Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov. Some say: Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Meir, Rabbi Yosei, Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai, Rabbi Ḥanina ben Ḥakhinai, and Rabbi Yoḥanan HaSandlar. He said to them: ‘My sons, the previous students died only because they were miserly toward one another. See to it that you do not act in accordance with their actions.’ They arose and filled the entire Land of Israel with Torah knowledge.  Rabbi Dostai in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: If you had children in your youth, take a wife in your old age and produce [more] children.11This is another interpretation of the Ecclesiastes verse: “In the morning sow your seed, and in the evening do not rest your hand.” From whom do you learn this? From Abraham, who had children in his youth, and took a wife in his old age and produced [more] children. That is what is written: “Abraham took another [wife]…”
“And her name was Ketura” – Rav said: This is Hagar. Rabbi Neḥemya said to him: ‘But is it not written “[Abraham took] another [vayosef]”?’ He said to him: ‘[That means only that] he married her on the basis of a divine command, just as it says: “The Lord continued [vayosef] speaking to me again, saying”’ (Isaiah 8:5). He said to him: ‘But is it not written “and her name was Ketura”?’ He said to him: ‘That is because she was perfumed [mekuteret] with mitzvot and good deeds.’ [He said to him:] But is it not written: “And to the sons of the concubines12Plural. If Hagar and Ketura were one and the same, Abraham would have had only one concubine. of Abraham [Abraham gave gifts and sent them away from Isaac his son, while he was still alive…]”?’ (Genesis 25:6). He said to him: ‘Pilagsham13The omission of the yud intimates that the word could be interpreted as a single concubine. is written. “While he was still alive [ḥai]” – [this alludes to Hagar] the one who had sat by the well and said to the One who lives [ḥai] forever: See my misery.’ Rabbi Berekhya said: Even though it says: “She [Hagar] went off and wandered in the wilderness…” (Genesis 21:14), lest you say that perhaps some person was suspected [of becoming immorally involved] with her, the verse states: “And her name was Ketura” – from the word ‘bound up’ [ketar]; she was like one who seals a treasure and takes it out bound and sealed.14Her name indicates that she was chaste after leaving Abraham. Bar Kappara said: Additions [tosafto] that are granted by the Holy One blessed be He are even greater than the original item. Cain was the original son [of Eve], and Abel, because he was considered an addition, as it is written: “She continued [vatosef] giving birth…[to Abel]” (Genesis 4:2) – he was born with his two twin sisters.15Whereas Cain was born with just one twin sister (see Bereshit Rabba 22:2).  Joseph was the original son [of Rachel], and Benjamin, because addition is written in his regard,16See Genesis 30:24. he produced ten children, as it is written: “And the sons of Benjamin: Bela, and Bekher…” (Genesis 46:21).  Er was the original son [of Judah], and Shela, because an expression of addition is used for him,17See Genesis 38:5. he produced ten courts. That is what is written in Chronicles: “The sons of Shela son of Judah: Er, father18The term father in this passage refers to the head of a court. of Lekha; and Lada father of Maresha; and the families of the house of the craft of fine linen, of the house of Ashbe’a...” (I Chronicles 4:21–23). Job’s age was originally19Before he began to suffer from his afflictions. only seventy years, and one hundred and forty years were added to his life, as it is written: “After this, Job lived for one hundred and forty years” (Job 42:16). Hezekiah’s original reign20Before being reprimanded by Isaiah and praying for forgiveness (Isaiah 38:1–3). was only fourteen years, but fifteen years were added to it, as it is stated: “Behold, I am adding fifteen years to your days” (Isaiah 38:5). Ishmael was the original son, and the sons of Ketura, because an expression of addition is used regarding them21Genesis 25:1. [the verse tells us] “She bore him Zimran…” (Genesis 25:2).22The verse goes on to list six children.
“She bore him Zimran, and Yokshan, and Medan, and Midyan, and Yishbak, and Shuaḥ” (Genesis 25:2). “Yokshan begot Sheva and Dedan; and the sons of Dedan were Ashurim, Letushim, and Le’umim” (Genesis 25:3). Rami bar Yeḥezkel said: Zimran – [he was called this] because they [his descendants] would “prune [mezamrin]” the world [of its inhabitants];23They were fierce warriors and killed many people. Yokshan – because they acted with ferocity [mitkashin] in the world. The Rabbis said: Zimran – because they would sing praises [mezamrin] in idol worship; Yokshan – because they would bang [makshin] on the drum for idol worship. “Yokshan begot Sheva and Dedan…[Ashurim, Letushim, and Le’umim]” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Although the Aramaic translators say [for these last three names]: Merchants, iron workers, and heads of nations, they were [in fact] all heads of nations.
“Abraham gave all that was his to Isaac” (Genesis 25:5).  “Abraham gave all that was his to Isaac” – Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Neḥemya, and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yehuda said: [He gave him] the rights of a firstborn son.24Even though Yishmael was older than him. Rabbi Neḥemya said: The power to bless.25See Bereshit Rabba 39:11. The Rabbis said: The right to burial [in the Makhpela Cave], and a will.26In which he bequeathed all his property to Isaac.  Rabbi Ḥama said: It was not blessings that he [Abraham] bequeathed to him, but gifts. This is analogous to a king who had an orchard, which he gave over to a sharecropper. In it, there were two trees intertwined into a single twining; one produced life-giving [fruits] and the other produced poisonous [fruits]. That sharecropper said: ‘If I water the one that is life-giving, the one that is poisonous will be watered along with it, but if I refrain from watering the poisonous one, how will the one that is life-giving survive?’ He then said: ‘I am a mere [temporary] sharecropper. I have performed my duties as sharecropper, and whatever the owner of the orchard wishes to do, he will do.’ So, Abraham said: ‘If I bless Isaac, my son Ishmael and Ketura’s sons will want to be included. If I do not bless Ishmael’s sons and Ketura’s sons, how can I bless Isaac?’ He then said: ‘I am flesh and blood, here today, in the grave tomorrow. I have already done my part; from here on, what the Holy One blessed be He wishes to do in His world, let Him do.’ When Abraham died, the Holy One blessed be He revealed himself to Isaac and blessed him. That is what is written: “It was after the death of Abraham, God blessed Isaac his son…” (Genesis 25:11).
“But to the sons of the concubines that Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts; and he sent them away from Isaac his son, during his lifetime, eastward, to the east country” (Genesis 25:6). “But to the sons of the concubines…” – In the days of Alexander of Macedonia, the children of Ishmael came to lodge a claim against Israel regarding the birthright. Two evil families, the Canaanites and the Egyptians, came with them. They [the rabbis] said: ‘Who will go and contend with them?’ Gevia ben Kosem said: ‘I will go and contend with them.’ They told him: ‘Be careful that you do not cede the Land to them.’ He said: ‘I am going to contend with them; if I am victorious, it is well and good, and if not, you can always say: Who is this lowly person, that he should represent us?’ He went and contended with them. Alexander of Macedonia said to them: ‘Who is lodging a claim against whom?’ The Ishmaelites said: ‘We are lodging a claim against them [Israel], and it is on the basis of their own Torah that we come against them. It is written: “Rather, he shall acknowledge the firstborn, son of the hated wife [to give him a double portion]” (Deuteronomy 21:17). By right, Ishmael is entitled to receive a double portion.’ Gevia ben Kosem said to him: ‘My lord the king, may a person not do as he pleases for his owns sons?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ He said to him: ‘Is it not written: “Abraham gave all that was his to Isaac”?’ (Genesis 25:5). They said to him: ‘Where is the document of gifts that he divided among his sons?’ He said to them: “And to the sons of the concubines of Abraham, Abraham gave gifts.” They departed from there shamefacedly. The Canaanites said: ‘It is on the basis of their own Torah that we come against them. It is written everywhere: “To the land of Canaan,” “the land of Canaan” – let them give us back our land.’ Gevia ben Kosem said to them: ‘My lord the king, may a person not do as he pleases with his slave?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ He said to him: ‘What is written? “Cursed is Canaan, a slave of slaves…. [And he said: Blessed be the Lord, God of Shem, and Canaan shall be slaves unto them]” (Genesis 9:25–26). The Land is ours and they are slaves to my lord the king.’27Alexander, being a Greek, was descended from Yefet (Genesis 10:2), and Canaan was cursed to be a slave to Yefet as well (see Genesis 9:27). They departed from there shamefacedly. The Egyptians said: ‘It is on the basis of their own Torah that we come against them. Six hundred thousand [Israelite] men departed from our midst laden with silver vessels and gold vessels, as it is written: “They stripped Egypt” (Exodus 12:36). Let them give us back our silver and our gold.’ Gevia ben Kosem said to him: ‘My lord the king, six hundred thousand people spent two hundred and ten years in their midst, among them silversmiths and among them goldsmiths, who normally receive one dinar a day as wages. The philosophers sat and calculated and did not even reach one hundred years [of labor] before the land of Egypt would be found to be bankrupt.’ They departed from there shamefacedly. He [Alexander] once sought to ascend to Jerusalem. The Samaritans28Who were always antagonistic towards the Jews, and especially towards their Temple in Jerusalem (see Ezra chapter 4). went and said to him: ‘Be aware that they will not allow you to enter their Holy of Holies.’ When Gevia ben Kosem sensed this, he went and made two felt shoes for him and placed on them two gems, each valued at twenty thousand silver dinars. When he [Alexander] reached the Temple Mount, he [Gevia] said to him: ‘My lord the king, remove your shoes and put on these felt shoes, the floor being slippery, so your feet should not slip.’29It is forbidden to enter the Temple Mount wearing shoes (Mishna Berakhot 9:6). When he reached the Holy of Holies, they said to him: ‘Until here we have permission to enter; from here on, we do not have permission to enter.’ He said to him [Gevia]: ‘When I leave here, I will flatten your forehead’ [variant reading: Your hump]. He said to him: ‘If you can do that, you would be an expert doctor, and could charge a great fee.’30Gevia had a misshapen forehead or back. “And sent them away from Isaac his son [eastward, to the east country]” – he said to them: As far east as you can go, go east,31This explains the apparent repetitiveness of: “eastward, to the east country.” so you will not be burned by Isaac’s coals.32If you ever have a territorial dispute with Isaac, you will be burnt, so you had better keep your distance. But Esau, because he came to confront Jacob, he received his punishment from him. That is what is written: “Is it for you to be jovial, like those in antiquity whose legs led them afar to live? Who devised this against Tyre [Tzor] the glorious…”33The prophet is warning the people of Tzor not to be jovial in their confrontation with Israel. That would be the proper mood for those other descendants of Abraham, who went to settle far away from Israel to avoid such confrontation. (Isaiah 23:7–8). Rabbi Elazar said: Every instance of Tzor that is written in the Bible with a vav, the verse is speaking of the city of Tyre; when it is without a vav, the verse is speaking of Rome.34The Romans are considered to be descendants of Edom, or Esau. “The glorious [ma’atira]” – Rabbi Abba said: It was surrounded [with riches] like a crown [atara]. Rabbi Yanai said in the name of Rabbi Shimon son of Rabbi Yanai: It was surrounded by thorns.35According to this interpretation, the verse is not speaking of the glory of Tzor, but of its ultimate downfall and desolation.

=== 62 | 62 ===
“These are the days of the years of Abraham’s life that he lived, one hundred and seventy-five years” (Genesis 25:7). “Abraham expired and died at a good old age, aged and content, and he was gathered to his people” (Genesis 25:8). “These are the days of the years of Abraham’s life.” It is written: “The Lord knows the days of the faultless; their legacy will last forever” (Psalms 37:18). “The Lord knows the days of the faultless” – this is Abraham, as it is stated: “Be faultless” (Genesis 17:1). “Their legacy will last forever” – “these are the days of the years of Abraham’s life,” as the Holy One blessed be He was fond of the years of the righteous and recorded them in the Torah, so the legacy of their days would be remembered forever – “at a good old age, aged and content.” “[Abraham] expired” – Rabbi Yehuda bar Ilai said: The pious men of old would suffer from intestinal illness for ten or twenty days [before dying], which teaches you that sickness cleanses [the soul]. Rabbi Yehuda said: Anyone in whose regard “expiring” is stated, died of intestinal illness. It is written: “Might and grandeur are her clothing, [and she rejoices at the final day]” (Proverbs 31:25) – the entire reward granted to the righteous is prepared for them in the future, and the Holy One blessed be He shows them the granting of the reward that he is destined to give them in the future while they are still in this world, and their souls are satisfied [with what they have seen], and they go to sleep, [i.e., expire peacefully]. Rabbi Elazar said: This is analogous to a feast that the king prepared. He invited the guests [beforehand] and showed them what they would be eating and drinking. Their souls were satisfied, and they went to sleep [with this feeling of satisfaction]. So, too, the Holy One blessed be He shows the righteous the granting of their reward that he is destined to give them in the future while they are still in this world, and they go to sleep, as it is stated: “For now, I would lie down and be silent. [I would sleep; then there would be rest for me]” (Job 3:13) – this shows that at the moment of the departure of the righteous [from this world], the Holy One blessed be He shows them the reward granted to them. When Rabbi Abahu was dying, he was shown thirteen rivers of [precious] balsam oil. He asked: ‘Whose are these?’ They said to him: ‘Yours.’ He said: ‘These are for Abahu? “And I had said: For nothing I labored, I expended my strength for emptiness and futility; but indeed, my portion is from the Lord”’ (Isaiah 49:4). Zavdi ben Levi, Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, and Rabbi Yosei ben Parta, the three of them recited these verses as they were dying. One of them said: “For this, everyone who is devoted to You should pray at the time of finding” (Psalms 32:6); “For our heart rejoices in Him…” (Psalms 33:21). Another said: “You prepare a table before me in the presence of my enemies” (Psalms 23:5); “But let all who take refuge in You rejoice” (Psalms 5:12). Another said: “For one day in Your courtyard is better than one thousand” (Psalms 84:11). The Rabbis say: “How great is the goodness You have in store for those who fear You” (Psalms 31:20). All this shows that at the moment of the departure of the righteous from the world, the Holy One blessed be He shows them the reward granted to them. Ben Azai says: “Precious in the eyes of the Lord is the death of His devoted ones” (Psalms 116:15). When does the Holy One blessed be He show them the reward that is prepared for them?1When does He show them how precious they are in His eyes? It is adjacent to their death. That is what is written: “the death of His devoted ones.” That is why: “And she rejoices at the final day” (Proverbs 31:25). What is the difference between the death of youths and the death of the elderly? Rabbi Yehuda said: A lamp, when it becomes extinguished on its own, [when the oil has run out,] it is good for it and good for the wick. But when it does not become extinguished on its own, [and there is still oil in it,] it is bad for it and bad for the wick. Rabbi Abahu said: A fig, when it is picked at its proper time, it is good for it and good for the fig tree.2This is why the Torah makes a point of writing that Abraham died “at a good old age, aged and content.” But when it is picked not at its proper time, it is bad for it and bad for the fig tree.3If a person dies in ripe old age, this is the natural course of things, but if he dies young, before his time, it is unnatural and detrimental to his soul, which was not able to reach its full potential. Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great and his students – and some say it was Rabbi Akiva and his students, and others say it was Rabbi Yosei ben Ḥalafta and his students – had the routine that they would come early in the day and sit and study beneath a certain fig tree. The owner of the fig tree would come early each day and pick its fruit. They said: ‘Is he, perhaps, suspicious of us?’4Is that why he keeps coming by when we are here? What did they do? They changed their place. He went to them and said to them: ‘My masters, the one mitzva that you sat and afforded me, that you were sitting and studying beneath my fig tree, you have deprived me of it.’ They said to him: ‘We had said that perhaps you were suspicious of us.’ He reassured them and they returned to their place. What did he do? He woke up early in the morning, but he did not go to pick the fruit.5He refrained from picking the fruit while they were there, as he did not want to make them feel that he suspected them. The sun shone upon it [the tree] and they [the figs] became infested with worms. They said: ‘The owner of a fig tree knows when it is the proper time to harvest the fig tree, and he picks its fruits [at that specific time]. So, too, the Holy One blessed be He knows when it is the proper time for the righteous to depart from the world and he removes them [at that specific time].’ That is what is written: “My beloved descended to his garden, to the beds of fragrant plants, [to eat in the gardens, to pluck lilies]” (Song of Songs 6:2).6The Beloved One in Song of Songs refers to God. Plucking the lilies is a metaphor for removing the righteous from this world. “At a good old age [beseiva]” – Reish Lakish said: There are three people in whose regard seiva is stated: Abraham, and it was beneficial for him; David,7I Chronicles 29:28. and it was beneficial for him; Gideon,8Judges 8:32. and it was not beneficial for him. Why? “Gideon crafted it into an ephod” (Judges 8:27) – for idol worship.
“Isaac and Ishmael his sons buried him in the cave of Makhpela, in the field of Efron, son of Tzohar the Hitite, that is before Mamre” (Genesis 25:9). “Isaac and Ishmael his sons buried him in the cave of Makhpela” – here the maidservant’s son [Ishmael] accorded honor to the mistress’s son [Isaac, by allowing him to go first]. “The field that Abraham purchased from the children of Ḥet; there Abraham was buried, and Sarah his wife” (Genesis 25:10). “The field that Abraham purchased” – Rabbi Tanḥuma said: Were there not thirty-eight years between Sarah’s burial and Abraham’s burial? And yet you say here: “There Abraham was buried, and Sarah his wife”?9Why is Sarah’s burial mentioned at this point, being that it had happened so many years in the past? The explanation is that it is to teach you that everyone who performed kindness to Sarah [in attending her funeral] was privileged to perform kindness for Abraham [in attending his funeral as well]. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Shem and Ever were walking before his bier, and they saw an empty spot alongside her [Sarah] for our patriarch Abraham, and they buried him in that adjacent plot, in the place that was prepared and designated for him.10And that is why Sarah’s burial is mentioned at this point.
“It was after the death of Abraham, God blessed Isaac his son, and Isaac lived beside Be’er Laḥai Ro’i (Genesis 25:11). “It was after the death of Abraham, God blessed Isaac his son” – Rabbi Simon said: Everywhere that it is stated “it was after [the death],” the world regressed. “It was after the death of Abraham” – immediately, “All the cisterns…the Philistines sealed them after Abraham’s death” (Genesis 26:15, 18). “It was after the death of Moses, servant of the Lord” (Joshua 1:1) – immediately, the well, the clouds of glory, and the manna ceased. “It was after Joshua’s death” (Judges 1:1) – immediately, the pegs of the Land waged war against them.11The reference is to the Canaanite nations. They are called “pegs,” as in Numbers 33:55: "Those whom you leave over will be like pegs in your eyes and thorns in your side.” “It was after Saul’s death” (II Samuel 1:1) – “the Philistines were waging war against Israel” (I Samuel 31:1). The students raised an objection to Rabbi Simon: ‘But is it not written: “After the death of Yehoyada, the princes of Judah came and prostrated themselves to the king”?’ (II Chronicles 24:17).12There does not appear to be any regression there. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: ‘Rabbi Simon came to say [his rule] only concerning [the phrase] “it was after [the death].”’13Whereas in this verse, the words “it was” are missing from the formula. Rabbi Yudan said: [The words “it was after the death” of certain people connote that] the world would have regressed had the Holy One blessed be He not established others in their stead, as it is written: “It was after Abraham’s death,” and it is written: “Isaac dug anew” (Genesis 26:18). “It was after the death of Moses, servant of the Lord, the Lord said to Joshua son of Nun, saying” (Joshua 1:1). And it is written: “It was after Joshua’s death…the Lord said: Judah will ascend” (Judges 1:1–2). It is written: “It was after Saul’s death and David had returned from smiting the Amalekites, and David had stayed in Tziklag [two] days” (II Samuel 1:1),14David immediately took Saul’s place as military leader. and it is written prior to this matter, [even] prior to Samuel’s death: “David was the son of a nobleman…” (I Samuel 17:12).15This is the opening verse of the passage describing the beginning of David’s career as a warrior, when he slew Goliath.
“These are the descendants of Ishmael son of Abraham, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah’s maidservant, bore to Abraham” (Genesis 25:12). “These are the descendants of Ishmael son of Abraham” – Rabbi Ḥama bar Ukva and the Rabbis were sitting and finding difficulty [with this passage]: ‘Why did the verse see fit to describe the lineage of the wicked man [Ishmael] here, [as well as his age at death]?’ [Just then] Rabbi Levi passed by. They said: ‘Here comes the master of halakha, let us ask him.’ Rabbi Levi said: ‘It is in order to tell you at what age your ancestor [Jacob] was blessed.’16From knowing the age of Ishmael when he died (see the next verse), it can be derived that Jacob was sixty-three years old when he received his father’s blessing. See Megilla 17a. “These are the years of the life of Ishmael, one hundred and thirty-seven years, and he expired and died and he was gathered to his people” (Genesis 25:17). “These are the years of the life of Ishmael” – why did the verse see fit to recount the years of the wicked one here? It is because he came from the far reaches of the desert to perform kindness for his father [in attending his funeral]. “They dwelled from Ḥavila to Shur, that is adjacent to Egypt, all the way to Assyria: he settled among all his brethren” (Genesis 25:18). “They dwelled from Ḥavila…” – here it says: “he settled [among all his brethren]” [nafal, literally, fell down], but elsewhere it says [of Ishmael]: “He will dwell [yishkon] [among all his brethren]” (Genesis 16:12). The explanation is that all the days our patriarch Abraham was alive – yishkon. When our patriarch Abraham died – nafal.17He fell in stature. Before he extended his hand against the Temple – yishkon; once he extended his hand against it18See Psalms 83:3–19. – nafal. In this world – yishkon; but in the future – nafal.

=== 63 | 63 ===
“This is the legacy of Isaac, Abraham’s son. Abraham begot Isaac” (Genesis 25:19). “This is the legacy of Isaac, Abraham’s son.” “The father of the righteous will exult with happiness [gil yagil], and the begetter of the wise will rejoice in him” (Proverbs 23:24) – happiness [gila] after happiness when the righteous one is born. “It was in the days of Aḥaz…” (Isaiah 7:1) – Rabbi Hoshaya said: The ministering angels said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘Master of the universe, woe that Aḥaz reigned.’1Ahaz was a wicked king. See II Kings 16:1–4. He said to them: ‘He is Yotam’s son. His father was righteous, and I cannot extend my hand against him.’ “And the begetter of the wise will rejoice in him” – Rabbi Levi said: From where do you say that anyone who has a son who diligently engages in Torah, that he becomes filled with mercy upon him? The verse states: “My son, if your heart is wise, my heart too will rejoice” (Proverbs 23:15). Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya says: I have derived only the heart of his flesh and blood father, from where is it derived that even the Holy One blessed be He becomes filled with mercy upon him when he diligently engages in Torah? The verse states: “My heart too2The midrash is explaining that the verse says "too" as a reference to God, who rejoices with him. will rejoice.” Happiness after happiness – when he is a righteous one, son of a righteous one; “this is the legacy of Isaac, Abraham’s son.”
“The crown of elders is grandchildren” (Proverbs 17:6). The fathers are the crown of their children, and the children are the crown of their fathers. The fathers are the crown of their children, as it is stated: “And the glory of children is their fathers” (Proverbs 17:6). And the children are the crown of their fathers, as it is written: “The crown of elders is grandchildren.” Rabbi Shmuel bar Rav Yitzḥak said: Abraham was rescued from the fiery furnace due only to the merit of Jacob. This is analogous to one who had a judgment before the governor, and his sentence, issued by the governor, was that he was to be burned. That governor foresaw through astrology that he [the defendant] was destined to beget a daughter and she would marry the king. He said: ‘He is worthy to be spared due to the merit of his daughter that he is destined to beget, and she will marry the king.’ So, Abraham, his sentence issued by Nimrod was that he was to be burned. The Holy One blessed be He foresaw that Jacob was destined to emerge from him. He said: ‘Abraham is worthy of being spared due to the merit of Jacob.’ That is what is written: “Therefore, so says the Lord to the house of Jacob, who redeemed Abraham…” (Isaiah 29:22).3The order of the Hebrew words allows for "who" to be interpreted as referring to Jacob. Alternatively, “the crown of elders is grandchildren” – “this is the legacy of Isaac, Abraham’s son.”
Abram was called Abraham. Isaac was called Abraham, as it is stated: “This is the legacy of Isaac, Abraham’s son; Abraham.” Jacob was called Israel, as it is written: “He said: No longer will Jacob be said to be your name, but rather, Israel” (Genesis 32:29). Isaac was called Israel, as it is written: “These are the names of the children of Israel who came to Egypt with Jacob [et Yaakov]” (Exodus 1:1).4The midrash interprets the verse as saying that Jacob is included in “the children of Israel.” If so, Israel in this verse is Isaac. Abraham was called Israel. Rabbi Natan said: It is a profound matter. “The dwelling of the children of Israel that they dwelled in Egypt” (Exodus 12:40), in the land of Canaan, and in the land of Goshen “was four hundred and thirty years” (Exodus 12:40).5The total starts from the Covenant of the Pieces, which God made with Abraham before Isaac was born, and the Torah refers to it as: “The dwelling of the children of Israel.”
“Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebecca, daughter of Betuel the Aramean, from Padan Aram, sister of Laban the Aramean, to be his wife” (Genesis 25:20). “Isaac was forty years old [when he took Rebecca, daughter of Betuel the Aramean, from Padan Aram, sister of Laban the Aramean, to be his wife]” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: If it is to teach that she is from Aram Naharayim, and is it not already stated: “From Padan Aram,” why does the verse state “Aramean” – “daughter of Betuel the Aramean [haarami]”?6Somebody who lived in Padan Aram was called an Aramean. Why does the verse state “sister of Laban the Aramean”? Rather, it is coming to teach you: Her father was a charlatan [ramai], her brother was a charlatan, and the residents of her place were likewise so, but this righteous woman who emerged from their midst, to what is she comparable? It is to a “lily among the thorns” (Song of Songs 2:2). “He went to Padan Aram” (Genesis 28:5). Why does the verse state: “To Laban the Aramean”? (Genesis 28:5).It teaches that he included them all in deceit.
“Isaac entreated the Lord opposite his wife, because she was barren, and the Lord acceded to his entreaty, and Rebecca his wife conceived” (Genesis 25:21). “Isaac entreated [vayetar] the Lord opposite his wife” – Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Because he poured out prayers abundantly [beosher].7In Aramaic, the root ayin tav reish is parallel to the Hebrew ayin shin reish.  Reish Lakish said: Because he overturned the decree. On that basis they call a pitchfork atra, as it overturns the grain. “Opposite his wife” – it teaches that Isaac was prostrated here and she was prostrated there, and he was saying: Master of the universe, all the children that You are giving me will be from this righteous woman.’ She, too, said so: ‘All the children that You are destined to give me will be from this righteous man.’ “Because she was barren” – Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Lakish: She did not have a uterus, and the Holy One blessed be He fashioned a uterus for her. “The Lord acceded [vayeater] to his entreaty” – Rabbi Levi said: This is analogous to the son of kings, who was tunneling under his father in order to take a litra of gold. This one was tunneling from inside,8The king sought to enable his son to gain access to the gold. and that one was tunneling from outside, as in Arabia they call tunneling atirata.
“The children were agitated within her, and she said: If this is so, why do I exist? She went to inquire of the Lord” (Genesis 25:22). “The children were agitated [vayitrotzetzu] within her” – Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: This one ran [ratz] to kill that one and that one ran to kill this one. Reish Lakish said: This one permitted the command of [matir tzivuyo] that one, and that one permitted the command of this one.9Each of them permitted himself to do what the other deemed prohibited. Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Levi: So that you will not say that it was after he [Esau] emerged from his mother’s womb that he confronted him, but rather, while he was still in his mother’s womb, his fist [zirte] was outstretched toward him. That is what is written: “The wicked are corrupt [zoru] from the womb” (Psalms 58:4). “The children were agitated within her” – when she would stand adjacent to synagogues and study halls, Jacob would convulse to emerge. That is what is written: “Before I formed you in the belly I knew you” (Jeremiah 1:5). When she would pass houses of idol worship, Esau would run and convulse to emerge. That is what is written: “The wicked are corrupt from the womb.” “The Lord said to her: Two peoples are in your womb, and two nations will be separated from your innards; one nation will prevail over the other nation, and the elder will serve the younger” (Genesis 25:23). “Her days to give birth were complete, and behold, there were twins in her womb” (Genesis 25:24).  “The first emerged ruddy, all of him like a cloak of hair, and they called his name Esau” (Genesis 25:25). “Then his brother emerged, his hand grasping Esau’s heel, and he called his name Jacob. And Isaac was sixty years old when she bore them” (Genesis 25:26). “She said: If this is so, why do I exist [lama zeh anokhi]?” Rabbi Yitzḥak said: It teaches that our matriarch Rebecca was circulating around the entrances of women’s houses and saying to them: ‘In your days, did you experience this suffering? If this is the suffering that comes with children; had I only not conceived.’ Rav Huna said: [She said:] ‘If this is how I am destined to produce twelve tribes, would I only not conceive the numerical value of zeh.’10See the end of the paragraph. It is taught in the name of Rabbi Neḥemya: Rebecca was worthy to have twelve tribes emerge from her. That is what is written: “The Lord said to her: Two peoples are in your womb” – these are two; “and two nations” – that is four; “and one nation will prevail over the other nation” – that is six; “and the elder will serve the younger” – that is eight. “Her days to give birth were complete” – that is ten. “The first emerged ruddy” – that is eleven; “then his brother emerged” – that is twelve. There are some who derive it from this verse: “She said: If this is so, why do I exist [lama zeh anokhi]?” Zayin – seven, heh – 5, that is twelve, the numerical value of zeh.  “She went to inquire of the Lord” (Genesis 25:22) – were there synagogues and study halls in those days?11Had there been, she could have gone to pray there to God; where, then, did she go? She could have prayed at home. Did she not go only to the academy of Shem and Ever? It is, rather, to teach you that anyone who enters before a Torah scholar, it is as though he enters before the Divine Presence.
“The Lord said to her” (Genesis 25:23) – Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon and Rabbi Yoḥanan in the name of Rabbi Eliezer ben Rabbi Shimon:: The Holy One blessed be He never deigned to speak with a woman except for that righteous woman,12Sarah, see Bereshit Rabba 48:20. and that, too, was for a reason. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: How much did He go in a roundabout manner in order to speak with her: “No, but you did laugh” (Genesis 18:15). But is it not written: “She13Hagar. called the name of the Lord who spoke to her”? (Genesis 16:13). Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Abba Ḥama bar Ḥanina: It was by means of an angel. Rabbi Elazar said: By means of Shem son of Noah. “Two peoples [goyim] are in your womb” (Genesis 25:23) – two of the proudest of peoples are in your womb. This one is proud of his world14His world that exists for the sake of Torah and leads to the World to Come. and that one is proud of his empire. Two of the proudest of peoples are in your womb – Hadrian among the idolaters and Solomon in Israel. Another matter, two of those hated by the peoples are in your womb.15The word “two” is extraneous, as unless otherwise indicated, the plural “peoples” connotes two. The word “two [shenei]” is expounded as sonei or senuei – those hated by peoples. All the idolaters hate Esau, and all the idolaters hate Israel. [Alternately] the most hated of the sons is in your womb, as it is written: “But I hated Esau” (Malachi 1:3). “And two nations will be separated from your innards” (Genesis 25:23) – from here it is derived that he was born circumcised.16They were already different while they were in the womb. Jacob was circumcised and Esau was not. “One nation will prevail over the other nation” (Genesis 25:23) – Rabbi Ḥelbo said: To this point, they would be called: “Savta, Raama, and Savtekha” (Genesis 10:7).17Small nations and families were counted. From you, Jews and Romans would arise.  “The elder will serve the younger” (Genesis 25:23) – Rabbi Huna said: If he [Jacob] merits, he [Esau] will serve, but if not, he [Esau] will be served.
“Her days to give birth were complete” (Genesis 25:24) – elsewhere18When Tamar gave birth (Genesis 38:27). they19The days of pregnancy. are incomplete, and here they are complete. Elsewhere it is written: “Twins [teomim]” (Genesis 38:27) – Peretz and Zeraḥ were both righteous, but here, “tomim” – Jacob was righteous, Esau, wicked.20The regular spelling is teomim. The midrash explains that a letter missingfrom the word indicates that something is amiss. “The first emerged ruddy” (Genesis 25:25) – Rabbi Ḥagai said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: Due to the merit of: “You shall take for you on the first day” (Leviticus 23:40),21The mitzva of the four species. I reveal myself to you first, as it is stated: “I am first and I am last” (Isaiah 44:6); I will exact retribution on your behalf from the first – that is Esau, as it is written: “The first emerged”; I will build for you the first – this is the Temple, in whose regard it is written: “Throne of glory, exalted from the first, [is the place of our Temple]” (Jeremiah 17:12); and I will bring you the first, this is the messianic king, in whose regard it is written: “The first to Zion, behold, here it is” (Isaiah 41:27). Another matter, “the first emerged ruddy” – why did Esau emerge first? It was so he would emerge and his corruption would depart with him. Rabbi Abahu said: It is like that bathhouse attendant who washes the bathhouse and then bathes the king’s son. So, why did Esau emerge first? It was so he would emerge and his corruption would depart with him.22The womb would remain clean for Jacob. A noblewoman asked Rabbi Yosei ben Ḥalafta, she said to him: ‘Why did Esau emerge first?’ He said to her: ‘The first droplet23Of semen. was Jacob’s.’ He said to her: ‘This is analogous to an instance where you place two pearls into one tube, is it not the one that you placed first that will emerge last? So, the first droplet was Jacob’s.’ “Ruddy,” Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: As though he were a shedder of blood. When Samuel saw that David was ruddy, as it is written: “He sent and brought him and he was ruddy” (I Samuel 16:12), he was afraid and said: ‘This is a shedder of blood like Esau.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: “With beautiful eyes” (I Samuel 16:12). Esau killed at his own initiative, but this one kills at the initiative of Sanhedrin. The emperor Diocletian was a swineherd near Tiberias. When he would come to the study hall of Rabbi,24Rabbi Yehuda Nesia, grandson of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi. the children would go out and strike him. Sometime later, he became emperor, and he descended and resided near the Panyas; variant reading: Pamyas, and he sent directives to Tiberias just before nightfall on Thursday: ‘I decree that the prominent leaders of the Jews shall appear before me before morning on Sunday.’ He commanded the emissary and said to him: ‘Do not deliver them [the directives] to them until sunset on Friday.’ Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman went down to bathe. He saw Rabbi standing before the great study hall, and he saw that his face was sickly. He said to him: ‘Why is your face sickly?’ ‘Such and such directives were sent to me by the empire.’ He said to him: ‘Come and bathe, as your Creator performs miracles on our behalf.’ They entered to bathe, and the demon Arginiton came, and was laughing and dancing before them. Rabbi wanted to scold him. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said to him: ‘Leave him alone, as sometimes he appears for the purpose of miracles.’ He said to him: ‘Your master is in distress and you are standing, laughing, and dancing.’ He [the demon] said to them: ‘Go eat and drink and observe a fine Shabbat, as your Master will perform miracles on your behalf, and I will have you stand before him on Sunday morning.’ At the conclusion of Shabbat, after the service, he took them and stood them outside the gates of Panyas.  They [servants] entered and said to him [Diocletian]: ‘They are standing before the gates.’ He said: ‘Close the gates.’ He [the demon] took them [the Rabbis] and placed them on the city wall. They [servants] entered and told him [Diocletian]. He said: ‘I decree that they should heat the bathhouse for three days, and then they will enter, bathe, and come before me.’ They went and heated the bathhouse for three days, and one of the Arginiton demons entered and diluted it25With cold water. for them. They entered, bathed, and came before him. He said to them: ‘Because you know that your God performs miracles on your behalf, you belittle the emperor.’ They said to him: ‘We belittle Diocletian the swineherd, but we are subjugated to Diocletian the emperor.’ He said to them: ‘Even so, do not demean a young Roman, and not a low ranking soldier.’ “All of him like a cloak of [kaaderet] hair” (Genesis 25:25) – all of him is worthy of the cloak. The Rabbis of the South in the name of Rabbi Alexandri, and Raḥava in the name of Rabbi Kahana said: He came out all unkempt and scattered like an aderet – like the chaff and the straw from the threshing floor [idera]. That is what is written: “Then the iron…were pulverized, and became like the chaff from the threshing floors [idrei] of summer” (Daniel 2:35). Rabbi Hanina bar Yithak said: What caused them to be pulverized? “From the threshing floors [me’idera] of the summer” (Daniel 2:35) – it is because they extended their hands against the great [adirim].26Israel. “They called his name Esau [Esav]” (Genesis 25:25) – this is the falsehood [heh shav] that I created in My world. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: You called your swine a name, I, too, call My firstborn son a name: “So said the Lord: My son, My firstborn, is Israel” (Exodus 4:22).
“Then his brother emerged” (Genesis 25:26) – a certain officer asked one of the Sages in Beit Seloni. He said to him: ‘Who will assume the kingdom after us?’ He took a blank paper, took a quill, and wrote on it: “Then his brother emerged, his hand grasping…heel” (Genesis 25:26). They said: ‘See ancient matters from the mouth of a modern Sage, to inform you how much pain that righteous one suffered.’
“The lads grew; Esau was a man who knows hunting, a man of the field; Jacob was a simple man, a dweller in tents” (Genesis 25:27). “The lads grew” – Rabbi Levi said: This is analogous to a myrtle and a thorn bush that grew adjacent to one another. When they grew and blossomed, this one produced its fragrance and that one produced its thorns. So, all thirteen years, both of them would go to school and both of them would come from school. After thirteen years, this one would go to study halls, and that one would go to houses of idol worship. Rabbi Elazar said: A person must be responsible for his son until age thirteen. From there on, he must say: ‘Blessed that He has absolved me from the punishment of this one.’ “Esau was a man who knows hunting [tzayid]” – he would ensnare [tzad] people with his mouth. You [say you] did not steal; who stole with you? You [say you] did not kill, who killed with you?27The Romans, the descendants of Esau, would ignore the denials of the accused. Rabbi Abahu said: He was a field person, a hunting person.28The verse does not say he worked the field or engaged in hunting, but rather, he was “a man of the field.” He hunted in the house and hunted in the field. In the house, [he said]: ‘How does one prepare salt?’29He asked about separating teruma  and tithes from salt and straw, in an effort to create a devout impression, although he knew that there is no such obligation. In the field, [he said:] ‘How does one prepare straw?’ Rabbi Ḥiyya said: He abandoned himself like a field.30Engaging in homosexual relations. Israel said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘Master of the universe, is it not enough that you subjugated us to seventy nations, but even to this one, that engages in relations like a woman?’ The Holy One blessed be He said to them: ‘I, too, will exact retribution against him with that expression.’ That is what is written: “The heart of the valiant of Edom will be on that day like the heart of a woman in anguish” (Jeremiah 49:22).  “Jacob was a simple man, a dweller in tents” – two tents; the study hall of Shem, and the study hall of Ever. “Isaac loved Esau because of the game in his mouth, and Rebecca loved Jacob” (Genesis 25:28). “Isaac loved Esau because of the game in his mouth” – good meat for his mouth and a good cup for his mouth.  “And Rebecca loved Jacob” – the more she would hear his voice, the more she would add love onto her love for him.
“Jacob cooked a stew, and Esau came from the field and he was weary” (Genesis 25:29). “Jacob cooked a stew” – he [Esau] said to him: ‘What is the nature of this stew?’ He said to him: ‘It is because that elder31Abraham. died.’ He said: ‘Did the attribute of justice strike that elder?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ He said: ‘If so, there is no granting of reward and no revival of the dead.’32Esau was claiming that if the righteous Abraham died at a young age relative to Adam and Noah, that proved that there was no reward for righteousness. (Etz Yosef) The Divine Spirit screams: “Do not weep for the dead, and do not be moved for him” (Jeremiah 22:10) – this is Abraham; “Weep for one who is leaving” (Jeremiah 22:10) – this is Esau.
“Esau came from the field” – Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Aivu, Rabbi Pinḥas in the name of Rabbi Levi, and the Rabbis in the name of Rabbi Simon: You find that Abraham lived one hundred and seventy-five years, and Isaac one hundred and eighty. Those five years that the Holy One blessed be He withheld from his life, it is because Esau violated two transgressions: He consorted with a betrothed young woman, as it is stated: “For he found her in the field”33This verse refers to a betrothed woman who was raped. (Deuteronomy 22:27); “and he was weary” – he killed a person, just as it says: “For my soul is wearied by the killers” (Jeremiah 4:31). Rabbi said: He stole as well, just as it says: “If thieves came for you, if plunderers of the night…” (Obadiah 1:5). The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘This is what I promised to Abraham, and said to him: “You shall go to your fathers in peace; [you shall be buried at a good old age]” (Genesis 15:15) – is this “a good old age,” that he sees his grandson engaging in idol worship, engaging in forbidden sexual relations, and shedding blood? It is preferable that he leave the world [without seeing it].’ That is what is written: “For Your kindness is better than life” (Psalms 63:4). “Esau said to Jacob: Feed me now from that red, red [haadom haadom] dish, as I am weary. Therefore, his name is called Edom” (Genesis 25:30). “Esau said to Jacob: Feed me [haliteni] now from that red” – Rabbi Ze’eira said: That wicked one opened his mouth wide like a camel. He said to him: ‘I will open my mouth and you continuously pour,’ like what we learned: One may not forcibly overfeed a camel and one may not force feed it. However, one may place food into its mouth [malitin].34Shabbat 155b.  “From that red, red [ha’adom ha’adom]” – Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: From him and from his Patron.35God is the Patron of Jacob. Esau sought to consume the stew, and the Temples of Jacob’s God. Reish Lakish said: From him, and from those like him [hadomin lo].36His righteous descendants, who are similar to him. He is red, his cooked food is red, his land is red, his warriors are red, his garments are red, One who is red exacts retribution against him, in red garments.37See Isaiah 63:1–2. He is red – “the first emerged ruddy” (Genesis 25:25). His cooked food is red – “feed me now from [that] red.” His land is red – “to the land of Se’ir, to the field of Edom" (Genesis 32:4). His mighty ones are red –“his warriors’ shields are reddened” (Nahum 2:4). His garments are red – “his soldiers are colored scarlet” (Nahum 2:4). One who is red exacts retribution against him – “my beloved is clear and ruddy” (Song of Songs 5:10). In red attire – “why is there red in Your attire?” (Isaiah 63:2).
“Jacob said: Sell me your birthright this day” (Genesis 25:31). “Jacob said: Sell me…this day” – he said to him: ‘Sell me one day38The one day is the length of God’s day, based on an interpretation of the verse: “One thousand years in Your eyes are like yesterday [keyom etmol]” (Psalms 90:4). of yours.’ Rabbi Aḥa said: Anyone who knows how to calculate the days of the exile will find that Jacob sat one day in tranquility in the shadow of Esau. “Esau said: Behold, I am going to die, and why do I need [lama zeh li] a birthright?” (Genesis 25:32). “Esau said: Behold, I am going to die” – Reish Lakish said: He began cursing and blaspheming. “Lama li”39That would have been enough to convey his rhetorical question: “Why do I need a birthright?” is not written here, but rather, “lama zeh li.” It teaches that he denied: “This is [zeh] my God” (Exodus 15:2). Another matter, “behold, I am going to die” – as Nimrod was seeking to kill him because of that garment that had belonged to Adam the first man. When he would don it and go out to the field, all the beasts and the birds in the world would come and gather near him. “Jacob said: Take an oath to me this day, and he took an oath to him, and he sold his birthright to Jacob” (Genesis 25:23). “[Jacob] said: Take an oath to me” – what did Jacob our patriarch see that led him to dedicate himself to acquiring the birthright? It is as we learned: until the Tabernacle was established, private altars were permitted, and service was performed by the firstborn. From the time that the Tabernacle was established, private altars were prohibited, and service was performed by the priests.40Zevaḥim 112b. He said: ‘Will this evil one stand and sacrifice?’ That is why he dedicated himself to acquiring the birthright. That is what is written: “For I will render you blood, and blood will pursue you; surely, you hated blood, and blood will pursue you” (Ezekiel 35:6). Did Esau hate blood? Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: This is the blood of birthright and offerings. Rabbi Levi said: This is the blood of circumcision. The Rabbis said: You hated a person’s blood in his body. That is what is written: “He loved curses, and they will now come upon him. [He had no desire for blessing, and it will now be far from him]” (Psalms 109:17). Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Ḥama: “He had no desire for blessing” – and no desire for birthright. Rabbi Huna said: This is the blood of the offerings, as it is called blessing, just as it says: “You shall craft for Me an altar of earth…[in every place where I mention my name, I will come to you and I will bless you]” (Exodus 20:21).
“Jacob gave Esau bread and a stew of lentils; he ate, he drank, he arose, and he went, and Esau scorned the birthright” (Genesis 25:34). “Jacob gave Esau bread and a stew of lentils” – just as this lentil is shaped like a circle, so, the world is cyclical. Just as this lentil has no opening, so, it is prohibited for a mourner to speak. Just as this lentil has aspects of mourning and rejoicing, so, mourning because our patriarch Abraham died; rejoicing, because Jacob took the birthright. “He ate, he drank” – he brought a group of immoral people in with him. They said: ‘We will eat his food and mock him.’ But the Divine Spirit was saying: “Set the table” (Isaiah 21:5) – prepare the table; “set the lookout to watch [tzafo hatzafit]” (Isaiah 21:5) – prepare the candelabrum. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: There is a place where they call the candelabrum tzafita.  “Arise princes” (Isaiah 21:5) – this is Mikhael and Gavriel. “Anoint a shield” (Isaiah 21:5) – write that the birthright is to Jacob. Bar Kappara said: Because they were mocking Jacob, the Holy One blessed be He agreed, and mocked them, and authorized the birthright to Jacob. From where is it derived? It is as it is written: “So said the Lord: My firstborn son is Israel” (Exodus 4:22). “He arose, and he went” – Rabbi Levi said: He departed from his world.41He lost his share in the World to Come. “Esau scorned the birthright [et habekhora]” – what did he scorn with it?42The word et is expounded as an amplification, indicating that he scorned something else as well. Rabbi Levi said: He scorned the revival of the dead with it. That is what is written: “With the coming of the wicked, comes also scorn” (Proverbs 18:3). “With the coming of the wicked” – this is Esau, as it is stated: “They will be called the region of the wicked” (Malachi 1:4). “Comes also scorn [buz]” – as his disgrace [bizyono] comes with him. “And with shame [kalon], humiliation [ḥerpa]” (Proverbs 18:3) – as the shame of famine accompanies him. Ḥerpa is nothing other than famine, just as it says: “So that you will no longer be subject to the humiliation of [ḥerpat] famine among the nations” (Ezekiel 36:30).

=== 64 | 64 ===
“There was a famine in the land, besides the first famine that was during the days of Abraham, and Isaac went to Avimelekh king of the Philistines, to Gerar” (Genesis 26:1). “There was a famine in the land.” “The Lord knows the days of the faultless” (Psalms 37:18) – this is Isaac. “Their inheritance will last forever” (Psalms 37:18), “Reside in this land [and I will be with you, and I will bless you]” (Genesis 26:3), “They are not put to shame in difficult times” (Psalms 37:19) – the difficulty of Avimelekh. “And in days of famine they are sated” (Psalms 37:19) – “There was a famine in the land.”
“The Lord will not starve the soul of the righteous” (Proverbs 10:3) – this is Isaac. “Reside in this land.” “And He averts the devastation of the wicked” (Proverbs 10:3) – this is Avimelekh. “There was a famine” – Ten famines came to the world. One during the days of Adam the first man – “accursed is the ground because of you” (Genesis 3:17); one during the days of Lemekh – “from the ground that the Lord had cursed” (Genesis 5:29); one during the days of Abraham – “there was famine in the land and Abram descended to Egypt” (Genesis 12:10); one during the days of Isaac: “there was a famine in the land”; one during the days of Jacob – “for these two years there has been famine” (Genesis 45:6); one during the days when the judges judged – “It was in the days when the judges judged, there was a famine in the land” (Ruth 1:1); one during the days of Elijah, as it is stated: “As the Lord God of Israel [lives…there will not be dew or rain these years, except by my word]” (I Kings 17:1); one during the days of David – “there was a famine during the days of David” (II Samuel 21:1); one during the days of Elisha – “there was a great famine in Samaria” (II Kings 6:25); and one that is progressing and coming to the world and one in the future, as it is stated: “I will send famine in the land, not famine for bread, not thirst for water…” (Amos 8:11). Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: The primary brunt of them was during the days of David, but it would have been appropriate for them to have been during the days of Saul, but because Saul was an offshoot of a sycamore tree1The sycamore tree is frail. the Holy One blessed be He transferred it and brought it during the days of David. Shila sinned and Yoḥana is punished?2The phrase means how can one person sin and another be punished. Rabbi Ḥiyya Rabba said: This is analogous to a glazier who had a basket filled with cut, ornate glassware. When he sought to hang his basket, he would bring a peg, implant it into the wall, and then hang his basket. Therefore, all of them did not befall lowly people,3Major catastrophes did not befall people who would not be able to withstand them. They befell mighty people, who could withstand them. but rather, mighty people. Rabbi Berekhya would read in their regard:4Regarding David’s generation. “He gives strength to the weary” (Isaiah 40:29). Rabbi Ḥelbo said: Two [famines] came during the days of Abraham. Rabbi Aḥa said: One during the days of Abraham and one during the days of Lemekh. The famine that came during the days of Elijah was a famine of drought; one year it produced and one year it did not produce.5There was a small amount of rain, and there was some produce (See Mishna Avot 5:8). The famine that came during the days of Elisha was one of panic – “until the head of a donkey was sold for eighty silver pieces” (II Kings 6:25). The famine that was during the days that the judges judged – Rabbi Huna said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: Forty-one se’a were sold for the price of forty-two se’a. But was it not taught: A person may not leave the Land of Israel unless two se’a of wheat go for one sela. Rabbi Shimon said: When? It is at a time that one cannot find any to acquire, but if he can find any to acquire, even if it is one se’a for a sela, he may not leave the Land of Israel. Because Elimelekh left the Land of Israel, he was punished that he and his sons died.
“Isaac went to Avimelekh [king of the Philistines], to Gerar” – to Gardiki.6The name of that area in Roman times. Rabbi Dostai in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: Why did they [not]7Radal and Etz Yosef add the word "not" based on Yerushalmi, Sheviit 6:1. decree impurity on the abode in Gardiki?8Even though they decreed impurity on places outside of Israel, on this place, which is close to the border they did not decree impurity since people would not go there anyway. It is because it is a poor abode. Until where? It is until the ravine of Egypt. “The Lord appeared to him, and said: Do not go down to Egypt; dwell in the land that I will tell you” (Genesis 26:2). “The Lord appeared to him, and said: Do not go down to Egypt; dwell [shekhon] in the land” – establish permanent residence [shekhuna] in the Land of Israel; plant, sow, graft branches9See Matnot Kehuna. on trees. Alternatively, “shekhon in the land” – cause the Divine Presence [haShekhina] to rest in the land. “Reside in this land, and I will be with you, and I will bless you, for I will give all these lands to you, and to your descendants, and I will keep the oath that I took to Abraham your father” (Genesis 26:3). “Reside in this land” – Rabbi Hoshaya said: [God said:] ‘You are an unblemished burnt offering; just as a burnt offering, if it goes outside the curtains, it is disqualified, you, too, if you go out of the Land of Israel, you are disqualified.’ “To you, and to your descendants, I will give all these [ha’el] lands – the mighty; just as it says: “He took the mighty of [eilei] the land” (Ezekiel 17:13). Another matter, why does it not state haeleh, but rather, ha’el? It is to say: I will give you some of them. When will I give you the rest? It will be in the future.
“Because Abraham heeded My voice, and observed My commission, My commandments, My statutes, and My Torahs” (Genesis 26:5). “Because [ekev] Abraham heeded My voice” – Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Ḥanina, both of them say: Abraham was forty-eight years old when he acknowledged his Creator. Reish Lakish said: Abraham was three years old when he acknowledged his Creator, the numerical value of ekev,10Ayin – 70 + kof – 100 + bet – 2 = 172. Abraham died at age one hundred and seventy-five, which means that he heeded God’s voice for one hundred and seventy-two years – from age three. Abraham heeded the voice of his Creator. “And observed My commission, My commandments, My statutes, and My Torahs” – Rabbi Yonatan said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Abraham knew even the laws of Eiruv Hatzerot.11If there are several houses which open to a joint courtyard which is fenced in, an Eiruv Hatzerot is required to allow moving objects from the houses to the courtyard. See Rambam Hilkhot Eiruvin 1:1–7. “My Torahs” – two Torahs; he fulfilled even minor mitzvot of the Oral Law. Rabbi Simon said: Abraham knew even the new name that the Holy One blessed be He is destined to call Jerusalem, as it is written: “Abraham called the name of that place The Lord will see” (Genesis 22:14), and it is written: “The name of the city from that day shall be: The Lord is there” (Ezekiel 48:35); and it is written: On that day12The language of the verse is: “At that time” despite the fact that the midrash cites it as “on that day.” “they will call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord” (Jeremiah 3:17). Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda: There is no day that the Holy One blessed be He does not introduce a new halakha in the supernal court. What is the source? “Hear the fury of His voice, the sound [vehegeh] that emerges from His mouth” (Job 37:2) – and hegeh means nothing other than Torah, like the matter that is stated: “You shall ponder [vehagita] it day and night” (Joshua 1:8).
“It was when the time he was there was extended, Avimelekh king of the Philistines looked through the window, and behold, he saw Isaac playing with Rebecca his wife” (Genesis 26:8). “It was when the time he was there was extended” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: A bad dream, a harsh prophecy, and disproportionate mourning are nullified by the passage of extended time. A harsh prophecy, from where is it derived? It is as Israel would say to the prophet: “The days will lengthen, and every vision will be void” (Ezekiel 12:22). Disproportionate mourning, the passage of extended time nullifies, from Isaac,13Isaac had been mourning for Abraham. as it is written: “It was when the time he was there was extended,” and immediately, “behold…Isaac was playing.” Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: Because extended time had passed, you began engaging in this matter?14A reference to conjugal relations. This is the way the midrash interprets "playing." Did Rabbi Yoḥanan not say: One who engages in conjugal relations during the day, it is indecent, as Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Conjugal relations are only at night, as it is stated: “In the evening she would come and in the morning she would return” (Esther 2:14). Job cursed the day of his birth and the evening of his conception. That is what is written: “Perish the day I was born, and the night it was said: [A man has been conceived [hora gaver]]” (Job 3:3). Rabbi Marinos bar Hoshaya said: Job said: ‘If only my mother had been a menstruant when he came to consort with her, as it is stated: “Hora gaver” – this is not the time to be impregnated [hora] by a man [gaver].’ Jeremiah curses the day of his birth and the day of conception, as it is stated: “Cursed be the day on which I was born” (Jeremiah 20:14) – this is the day of birth; “the day on which my mother bore me” (Jeremiah 20:14) – this is the day of conception. Is it possible that Ḥilkiyahu,15The father of Jeremiah. See Jeremiah 1:1. a righteous man, would engage in conjugal relations during the day? It is, rather, because Jezebel was killing prophets, he came and engaged in conjugal relations during the day, and fled.
“Avimelekh commanded all the people, saying: Anyone who touches this man or his wife will be put to death” (Genesis 26:11). “Isaac sowed in that land, and found in that year one hundredfold, and the Lord blessed him” (Genesis 26:12). “Isaac sowed in that land” – Rabbi Ḥelbo said: “In that land…in that year” – the land was harsh and the year was difficult; had it been favorable, all the more so. “And found in that year one hundredfold” – one hundred kor;16Kor is a measurement of volume which contains more than 200 liters. “one hundredfold” – one hundred times.17The yield was one hundred times the seeds that he sowed. “One hundredfold” – it teaches that it produced one hundred times more than they had estimated for it. Is it not so that blessing does not rest upon an item that is weighed, measured, or counted? Why, then, did he measure it? It was due to the tithes.
“Avimelekh commanded all the people” – Rabi Aivu said: No person should even cast a rock at them; that is what is written: “They lie in wait in their dwelling places; they watch my footsteps in hopes of taking my life” (Psalms 56:7). “The man grew wealthy, and continued to grow until he became very wealthy” (Genesis 26:13). “The man grew wealthy, and continued to grow” – Rabbi Ḥanin said: To the extent that they would say: The manure of Isaac’s mules, and not Avimelekh’s silver and gold.18The manure from Isaac's mules was worth more than the Avimelekh’s gold and silver. “He had livestock of flocks, and livestock of cattle, and a great household, and the Philistines envied him” (Genesis 26:14). “He had livestock of flocks, and livestock of cattle, and a great household [vaavuda].” Daniyel the tailor said: Ve’avda is written – if a person does not render himself like a slave with his slave, he does not acquire it,19If he does not oversee the work of his slaves and workers, he will not see a benfit from the property he has. as it is stated: “Better to be lightly esteemed with a slave” (Proverbs 12:9).20It is better to work like a slave when you have a slave, otherwise you will only lose from having a slave. The way of the world is that a person must toil and seek the expenditures of his household, and they sit in his home.21The slaves sit idly at home. Avimelekh said to Isaac: Leave us, for you have grown much mightier than we” (Genesis 26:16). “Avimelekh said to Isaac: Leave us, for you have grown…mightier than we” – he said to him: ‘All that growth that you have grown, did it not come to you from us? In the past you had only one flock and now you have many flocks.’
“Isaac again dug the wells of water that they had dug in the days of Abraham his father, but the Philistines had sealed them after the death of Abraham. He called them names like the names that his father called them” (Genesis 26:18). “Isaac again dug…” – how many wells did our patriarch Isaac dig in Beersheba? Rabbi Yehuda said: Four. Corresponding to that, his descendants were arrayed into four banners in the wilderness.22The tribes of Israel were divided into four camps, or banners, in the wilderness (Numbers 2:1–32). The Rabbis say: Five, corresponding to the five books of the Torah. “The herdsmen of Gerar quarreled with Isaac’s herdsmen, saying: The water is ours. He called the name of the well Esek, because they involved themselves with him” (Genesis 26:20). “He called the name of the well Esek [because they involved themselves [hitaseku] with him]” – corresponding to the book of Genesis, in which the Holy One blessed be He became involved and created the world. “Isaac's servants dug in the valley, and they found there a well of fresh water” (Genesis 26:19). “They dug another well, and they quarreled over it as well. He called it Sitna” (Genesis 26:21). “He called it Sitna”23Enmity. – corresponding to the book of Exodus, after, “they embittered their lives with hard work” (Exodus 1:14). “They found there a well of fresh water” – corresponding to the book of Leviticus, which is filled with many halakhot. “He called it Shiva; therefore, the name of the city is Beersheba to this day” (Genesis 26:33). “He called it Shiva” – corresponding to the book of Numbers,24The book of Numbers is divided into three books, which is why there are seven books. which completes the seven [shiva] books of the Torah. But are they not five? Ben Kappara made Numbers into three books: From: “And He spoke” (Numbers 1:1) until: “It was when the Ark traveled” (Numbers 10:35) – a book in and of itself; from “it was when the Ark traveled” and the verse after it – a book in and of itself; and from the end of that passage until the end of the book – a book in and of itself. “He moved from there and dug another well and they did not quarrel over it. He called its name Reḥovot and he said: As now the Lord has expanded [hirḥiv] for us, and we will be fruitful in the land” (Genesis 26:22). “He called its name Reḥovot” – corresponding to the book of Deuteronomy, due to, “when the Lord your God will expand [yarḥiv]” (Deuteronomy 12:20) – “as now the Lord has expanded [hirḥiv] for us and we shall be fruitful in the land.”
“Avimelekh went to him from Gerar, and a group of his associates, and Fikhol the captain of his guard” (Genesis 26:26). “Avimelekh went to him from Gerar [miGerar]” – megorar, it teaches that robbers entered into his house and were vandalizing it throughout the night.25He came as a homeless stranger [ger]. Alternatively, miGerar” – megorar, it teaches that boils developed on him, just as it says: “To scratch [lehitgared] with it” (Job 2:8). “And a group of his associates [vaaḥuzat mere’ehu]” – Rabbi Yehuda said: His name was aḥuzat mere’ehu. Rabbi Neḥemya said: A group of his friends. “And Fikhol the captain of his guard” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: Pikhol26Fikhol and Pikhol are the same word. The difference in the first letter is connected to the rules of punctuation in Hebrew. was his name. Rabbi Neḥemya said: The mouth that all his armies take action at his word [al piv].
“They said: We saw that the Lord was with you, and we said: Let there now be an oath between us, between us and you, and we will establish a covenant with you” (Genesis 26:28). “If you will do us no harm, just as we have not touched you, and just as we have done only [rak] good with you, and we sent you in peace; you are now the blessed of the Lord” (Genesis 26:29). “They said: We saw” – we have seen your actions and the actions of your fathers. “Let there now be an oath…if you will do us [no harm…and just as we have done only [rak] good with you]” – rak is restrictive, as they did not perform absolute good with him. In the days of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Ḥananya, the evil empire27The evil empire is the Roman Empire. decreed that the Temple should be constructed. Papus and Lulyanus set tables from Akko to Antioch, and they provided those ascending from the exile with silver and gold, and all their needs. The Samaritans went and said: “Let it be known to the king…that [if] this rebellious city is built, and its walls finished, they will not pay minda, belo, or halakh” (Ezra 4:12–13) – minda is property tax, belo is poll tax, and halakh is head tax. He said to them: ‘What can I do, I issued a decree.’ They said to him: ‘Send and say to them: Either move it from its place, or add five cubits to it, or subtract five cubits from it, and they will relent on their own.’ The assembly of Israel were gathered together in the Beit Rimon valley. When those missives arrived, they began weeping. They wanted to rebel against the empire. They said: ‘Let one Sage enter and calm the assembly.’ They said: ‘Let Rabbi Yehoshua ben Ḥananya, who is the greatest Torah scholar, enter.’ He entered and expounded: ‘A lion mauled prey and a bone was stuck in its throat. He [the lion] said: Anyone who extracts it, I will give him a reward. An Egyptian heron with a long beak inserted its beak and extracted it. It said to it [the lion]: Give me my reward. It [the lion] said to it: Go, boast, and say that you entered the mouth of a lion in peace and emerged in peace. So, it is sufficient that we entered into dealings with this nation in peace, and emerged in peace.’ “It was on that day that Isaac's servants came and told him regarding the well that they had dug, and said to him: We have found water” (Genesis 26:32). “Isaac's servants came” – we do not know whether they found or did not find.28We do not know whether they found a new source of water. From what is written: “They found there a well of fresh water” (Genesis 26:19) – that is, they found fresh water.

=== 65 | 65 ===
“Esau was forty years old, and he took as a wife Yehudit, daughter of Be'eri the Hitite, and Basmat, daughter of Elon the Hitite” (Genesis 26:34). “Esau was forty years old” – that is what is written: “The swine from the forest gnaws at it” (Psalms 80:14). Rabbi Pinḥas in the name of Rabbi Simon: Of all the prophets, only two of them publicized it1The qualities of the evil empire of Rome. – Moses and Asaf. Moses said: “The pig because it has a split hoof” (Deuteronomy 14:8). Asaf said: “The swine from the forest gnaws at it.” Why does he analogize it to a pig? Just as this pig, when it lies, it extends its hooves, saying: ‘I am pure,’ so, this evil empire robs and takes forcibly, [yet] it appears as though it is arranging the courtroom. So, Esau, all forty years, would ensnare married women and violate them. When he reached forty years of age, he likened himself to his father. He said: ‘Just as Father took a wife at forty years of age, I, too, will take a wife at forty years of age.’ That is what is written: “Esau was forty years old.”
“He took as a wife Yehudit” – Rabbi Yudan began: “God settles the lonely in a home…” (Psalms 68:7). This is the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda, as Rabbi Yehuda said: ‘Even if there is a mamzer at the end of the world and a mamzeret at the end of the world, the Holy One blessed be He brings them and matches them with one another.’ What is its source? “God settles the lonely in a home.” So, because it is written: “Rather, you shall destroy them: The Hittite, the Emorite” (Deuteronomy 20:17) – let this one, may his name be blotted out, come and marry that one, may her name be blotted out. “Esau was forty years old, and he took…”
“Every raven after its kind” (Leviticus 11:15) – in the days of Rabbi Ḥiyya Rabba, a certain starling ascended to the Land of Israel. They took it and carried it to him. They said to him: ‘Is it permitted to eat it?’ He said to them: ‘Go and place it on the roof; any bird that comes and alights next to it, it is of that species.’ They went and placed it on the roof and an Egyptian raven alighted next to it. He said: ‘It is impure, as it is of that species. That is what is written: “Every raven after its kind.”’ They said:2Meaning, this is a known phrase. ‘The raven went to the starling only because it is of the same species.’ So, because it is written: “Rather, you shall destroy them” (Deuteronomy 20:17) – let this one, may his name be blotted out, come and marry that one, may her name be blotted out. “Esau was forty years old.”
“They were a source of bitterness for Isaac and for Rebecca” (Genesis 26:35). “They were a source of bitterness” – why for Isaac first? Because Rebecca was the daughter of idolaters, she was not particular about the filth of idol worship. But this one, because he was the son of the holy, he was particular about the filth of idol worship. That is why it was for Isaac first. Another matter, why for Isaac first? It is because the matter was attributable to her, as it is stated: “The Lord said to her: Two peoples are in your womb” (Genesis 25:23).3It was because of her lineage that one of the twins was wicked. That is why it was for Isaac first. Another matter, why for Isaac first? It is because it is the way of women to sit inside the house, and the way of men to go out on the road and learn understanding from people. But this one, because his eyes dimmed, and he was sitting inside the house, that is why it was for Isaac first.  Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: He [Esau] caused the Divine Spirit to depart from his parent.
“It was when Isaac was old, and his eyes dimmed from seeing, he summoned Esau his elder son, and said to him: My son, and he said to him: Here I am” (Genesis 27:1). “It was when Isaac was old” – Rabbi Yitzḥak began: “Those who exonerate the wicked due to [ekev] a bribe” (Isaiah 5:23) – anyone who takes a bribe and exonerates the wicked – ultimately.4He will ultimately be punished. “And remove the innocence of the righteous from him” (Isaiah 5:23) – “the innocence of the righteous” – this is Moses.5The Matnot Kehuna explains that Moses did not justify an evil person. Rather he called the person who wanted to strike his friend an evil person. See Exodus 2:13. “Remove…from him” – this is Isaac. Because he exonerated the wicked,6He loved Esau. his eyes dimmed – “it was when Isaac was old, [and his eyes dimmed…].”
“One who exonerates the wicked and one who condemns the righteous, both of them are an abomination to the Lord” (Proverbs 17:15) – Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: It was not because Rebecca loved Jacob more than Esau that she performed this action, but she said: ‘Let him [Esau] not enter and mislead that elder [Isaac],’ based on: “Both of them are an abomination to the Lord.” Because he exonerated the wicked, his eyes dimmed – “it was when Isaac was old, and his eyes dimmed.”
Rabbi Yitzḥak began: “You shall not take a bribe [for bribes blind the clear-sighted…]” (Exodus 23:8) – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: If one who took a bribe from one who owed him,7Esau owed Isaac due to the mitzva of honoring one’s father. his eyes dimmed, one who takes a bribe from one who does not owe him, all the more so – “it was when Isaac was old.”
Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa began: “Much, Lord my God, You have done; Your wonders…” (Psalms 40:6) – Rabbi Ḥanina said: All the actions and thoughts that you performed on our behalf, were for our benefit. Why did Isaac’s eyes dim? It was so Jacob could come and take the blessings – “it was when Isaac was old.”
Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: Abraham demanded aging. He said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, a man and his son enter a place and no one knows which of them to honor. Because you adorn him with aging, a person knows whom to honor.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘As you live, you have demanded a good thing, and it will begin with you.’ From the beginning of the book until that point, aging is not written. When Abraham stood, He granted him aging – “Abraham was old” (Genesis 24:1).  Isaac demanded suffering. He said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, a person dies without suffering, the attribute of justice is outstretched against him. When you bring suffering upon him, the attribute of justice is not outstretched against him.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘As you live, you have demanded a good thing, and I will begin with you.’ From the beginning of the book until here, suffering is not written. When Isaac stood, He granted him suffering – “it was when Isaac was old, and [his eyes] dimmed.” Jacob demanded illness. He said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, a person dies without illness and does not settle matters between his children. When he is ill for two or three days, he settles matters between his children.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘As you live, you have demanded a good thing, and it will begin with you’ – “One said to Joseph: Behold, your father is ill” (Genesis 48:1). Rabbi Levi said: Abraham introduced aging, Isaac introduced suffering, Jacob introduced illness, Hezekiah introduced illness that is cured. He said to Him: ‘You would sustain one until the day of his death.8In good health. But because a person is ill and recovers, is ill and recovers, he repents.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘As you live, you have demanded a good thing.’ That is what is written: “A composition of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he became ill and recovered from his illness” (Isaiah 38:9). Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: From here [we learn], that between illness and illness, there was an illness that was more severe than both of them.
“His eyes dimmed from seeing” – Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya said: From seeing evil– from seeing the evil of the wicked one. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Isaac will walk out to the marketplace and the people will say: This is the father of that wicked one. Instead, I will dim his eyes and he will remain inside his house.’ That is what is written: “With the rise of the wicked, a person should hide” (Proverbs 28:28). From here they said: Anyone who produces a wicked son or a wicked student, ultimately his eyes will dim. A wicked student, from Aḥiya the Shilonite – “Aḥiyahu was unable to see, for his eyes had dimmed due to his old age” (I Kings 14:4); he had produced Yerovam, a wicked student. A wicked son, from Isaac – “it was when Isaac was old, and his eyes dimmed.” Another matter. “from seeing [mereot]” – as a result of that sight [re’iya]; when Abraham our patriarch bound his son atop the altar, the ministering angels wept. That is what is written: “Behold, their angels cry out outside…” (Isaiah 33:7). Tears fell from their eyes into his eyes, and they had an effect inside his eyes. When he grew old, his eyes dimmed. That is what is written: “It was when Isaac was old…” Another matter. “from seeing [mereot]” – as a result of that sight [re’iya]; when Abraham our patriarch bound his son atop the altar, he [Isaac] directed his eyes heavenward and looked at the Divine Presence. They say a parable, to what is the matter comparable? It is comparable to a king who was strolling at the entrance of his palace and glanced and saw his friend’s son peering at him through the window.9It was forbidden to look at the king. He said: ‘If I kill him, I will now cause my friend to collapse. Instead, I will decree that his windows should be sealed.’ So, when Abraham our patriarch bound his son atop the altar, he directed his eyes and looked at the Divine Presence. The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘If I kill him, I will now cause Abraham my friend to collapse. Instead, I decree that his eyes will dim.’ When he grew old, his eyes dimmed – “it was when Isaac was old…”
“He summoned Esau his elder son” – Rabbi Elazar bar Shimon said: This is analogous to a province that made a list of mighty people for the king.10To serve in his army. There was a certain woman there who gave birth to a puny son, and she would call her son: Tall and Quick. She said to them: 'My son is tall and quick, but you do not conscript him?' They said: 'If, in your eyes, he is tall and quick, in our eyes he is puniest of the puny.' So, his father called him great [gadol], as it is stated: “He called Esau, his elder [hagadol] son” (Genesis 27:1). His mother called him great [gadol], as it is stated: “The garments of Esau, her elder [hagadol] son” (Genesis 27:15). The Holy One blessed be He said to them: ‘If, in your eyes, he is great, in My eyes, he is insignificant,’ as it is stated: “Behold, I rendered you insignificant among the nations, you are greatly despised” (Obadiah 1:2).11The prophecy was given with respect to Edom, the nation descended from Esau. Rabbi Berekhya said: The slaughterer corresponds to the bull.12He is called great based on the fact that his slaughterer, the Holy One blessed be He, is great. That is what is written: “There is a sacrifice for the Lord in Botzra and a great [gadol] slaughter in the land of Edom” (Isaiah 34:6).  “And said to him: My son, and he said to him: Here I am” – that is what is written: “When he ingratiates with his voice, do not trust him…” (Proverbs 26:25). Ḥizkiyahu the translator said: “As there are seven abominations in his heart” (Proverbs 26:25). [When] you find one “abomination” written in the Torah, ten [sins] are written in its regard: “There shall not be found among you anyone who passes his son or his daughter through the fire…an enchanter, a medium, an oracle, [or a necromancer, one who casts spells, or one who consults ghosts or familiar spirits, or one who inquires of the dead; for anyone who performs these things is an abomination to the Lord]”13The list consists of nine categories, rather than ten; Maharzu explains that the son and the daughter passed through fire are counted separately, to make ten. (Deuteronomy 18:10–12). Here, where “seven” is written, all the more so. That is, “as there are seven abominations,” [means that] there are seventy abominations “in his heart.”
“He said: Behold, I have now grown old; I do not know the day of my death” (Genesis 27:2). Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa said: When a person reaches the age of his parents, five years before or five years after, he should be concerned about death, as Isaac said: ‘If I will reach the years of Father, now there are many remaining; if I will reach the years of my mother: “He said [to him]: Behold, I have now grown old; I do not know the day of my death.”14Isaac was 123 years old. Abraham died at age 175 and Sarah died at age 127.  It is taught: There are seven matters that are obscured from people: The day of [their] death; the day of consolation;15The redemption (Etz Yosef). the profundity of justice; a person does not know through what he will profit; a person does not know what is in the heart of another; a person does not know what the woman is carrying in her pregnancy; and when the evil empire will fall. The day of death, from where is it derived? It is as it is written: “For a person, too, does not know his time” (Ecclesiastes 9:12). The day of consolation, from where is it derived? It is as it is written: “At its time, I will hasten it” (Isaiah 60:22). A person does not know the profundity of justice, as it is stated: “For judgment is God’s” (Deuteronomy 1:17). A person does not know through what he will profit, as it is written: “It is the gift of God” (Ecclesiastes 3:13). A person does not know what is in the heart of another, as it is written: “I, the Lord, probe the heart” (Jeremiah 17:10). A person does not know what the woman is carrying in her pregnancy, as it is written: “[You do not know]…how the fetuses grow in a womb of the pregnant” (Ecclesiastes 11:5). And when the evil empire will fall, as it is written: “For a day of vengeance is in My heart” (Isaiah 63:4).
“Now, please take your gear, your quiver and your bow, and go out to the field, and hunt game for me” (Genesis 27:3). “Now, please take your gear” – sharpen your hunting tools, so you will not feed me unslaughtered carcasses or mauled animals. Take your hunting tools, so you will not feed me stolen or forcibly-taken items. “Your quiver [telyekha]” – he said to him: ‘The blessings are pending [teluyot]. The one who is worthy to be blessed, he will be blessed.’ Another matter, “please take your gear [kelekha],” this is Babylon – “and he brought the vessels to the treasure house of his god” (Daniel 1:2). “Your quiver [telyekha],” this is Media – “they hanged [vayitlu] Haman on the gibbet” (Esther 7:10). “Your bow,” this is Greece [Yavan] – “for I bend Judah for Me as a bow […on your children Yavan]” (Zechariah 9:13). “And go out to the field,” this is Edom – “to the land of Se’ir, the field of Edom” (Genesis 32:4). “Prepare for me delicacies, as I like, and bring it to me, and I will eat; so that my soul will bless you before I die” (Genesis 27:4).  “Prepare for me delicacies” – Rabbi Eliezer said in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Zimra: Three matters were stated regarding the tree from which Adam, the first man, ate: Good for eating, beautiful to the eyes, and adds wisdom. The three of them were stated in one verse: “The woman saw that the tree was good for eating” (Genesis 3:6) – from here [we learn] that it is good for eating; “and that it was enticing to the eyes” (Genesis 3:6) – from here [we learn] that it was beautiful to the eyes; “a source of wisdom [lehaskil]” (Genesis 3:6) – from here [we learn] that it adds wisdom, just as it says: “A contemplation [maskil] by Eitan” (Psalms 89:1). Likewise, Isaac said: “Prepare for me delicacies [matamim].” He said to him: ‘Initially, I would enjoy the sight, but now I enjoy only the taste [hataam].’ Likewise, Solomon said: “With the increase of goodness, its eaters increase; [and what use is it to its owner other than the sight of his eyes?]” (Ecclesiastes 5:10)16When someone is wealthy, his household is large and his food expenditures are great. He enjoys only the sight of the food. – from here [we learn] that the blind are not sated. One who sees an empty basket and is hungry is unlike one who sees a full basket and is sated.17Somebody who sees an empty basket feels hungry, while somebody who sees a full basket does not feel hungry, since he knows that there will be food when he is hungry. “Rebecca heard as Isaac spoke to Esau his son. Esau went to the field to hunt game to bring” (Genesis 27:5). “Esau went to the field to hunt game to bring” – if he finds, excellent, but if not, “to bring” – from stolen or forcibly-taken items.
“Rebecca said to Jacob her son, saying: Behold, I heard your father speak to Esau your brother, saying” (Genesis 27:6). “Bring me game, and prepare me tasty food and I will eat, and I will bless you before the Lord before my death” (Genesis 27:7). “Now, my son, heed my voice to what I am commanding you” (Genesis 27:8). “Go now to the flock, and take for me from there two fine goat kids, and I will make of them tasty food for your father, like that he likes” (Genesis 27:9). “Rebecca said to Jacob…. Bring me game…. Now, my son, heed my voice…. Go now to the flock” – Rabbi Levi said: Go and see to the advancement of the nation that is likened to a flock, just as it says: “You are My flock, flock of My pasture” (Ezekiel 34:31). “Take for me from there two fine goat kids” – Rabbi Levi said: [Rebecca said:] ‘If you find, excellent, but if not, go and bring me from my dowry,’ as, so he [Isaac] wrote to her, that he would provide her with two goat kids each day. “Fine [tovim]” – Rabbi Ḥelbo said: Good [tovim] for you, as through them, you will take the blessings, and good for your descendants, as through them they will gain atonement on Yom Kippur, as it is written: “For on this day he shall atone…” (Leviticus 16:30).18Atonement was achieved through the offering of two goats on Yom Kippur.
“Jacob said to Rebecca his mother: Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy man, and I am a man of smooth skin” (Genesis 27:11). “Jacob said to Rebecca his mother: Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy [sa’ir] man” – a demon-like man, just as it says: “Demons [se’irim] will dance there” (Isaiah 13:21). “And I am a man of smooth [ḥalak] skin” –just as it says: “For the Lord's portion [ḥelek] is His people” (Deuteronomy 32:9). Rabbi Levi said: This is analogous to one with a full head of hair and a bald person who were standing at the edge of the threshing floor. The chaff went up onto the one with the full head of hair and became entangled in his hair. The chaff went up onto the bald person, and he placed his hand on his head and removed it. So, Esau the wicked is sullied with iniquities all the days of the year, and he has no means with which to gain atonement. But Jacob is sullied with iniquities all the days of the year, comes Yom Kippur, and he has the means with which to gain atonement, as it is stated: “For on this day he shall atone” (Leviticus 16:30). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: This is not related to that and that is not related this.19The verse is not related to that interpretation and that interpretation is not related to the verse. Rather,20The same conclusion can be reached from a different source. “the goat shall bear upon itself” (Leviticus 16:22) – this is Esau, as it is stated: “Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy [sa’ir] man.” “All their iniquities [avonotam]” (Leviticus 16:22) – the iniquities of the simple man [avonot tam], as it is stated: “Jacob was a simple [tam] man” (Genesis 25:27). “Perhaps my father will feel me, and I will be in his eyes as a deceiver, and I will bring upon myself a curse, and not a blessing” (Genesis 27:12). “Perhaps my father will feel me, and I will be in his eyes as a deceiver [metate’a]” – like a dead man [met], an aberration [to’eh],21Metate’a is an acronym for met and to’eh. and an idolater.22Anyone who distorts the truth in his speech it is as though he engages in idol worship (Sanhedrin 92a).  “I will bring upon myself a curse” – even the one blessing that he is destined to bestow at the end,23See Genesis 28:4. he will not bestow it upon me. “His mother said to him: Your curse is upon me, my son; only heed my voice, and go, take for me” (Genesis 27:13). “His mother said to him: Your curse is upon me, my son” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Adam, who sinned, was it not his mother that was cursed, as it is stated: “The ground is cursed on your account”? (Genesis 3:17). You, too, “your curse is upon me, my son.” Rabbi Yitzḥak said: [Rebecca said:] ‘It is incumbent upon me to enter and say to your father: Jacob is righteous and Esau is wicked.’24It is incumbent upon me to see to it that there will be no curse at all. “He went, took, and brought to his mother, and his mother made tasty food, like that his father likes” (Genesis 27:14). “He went, took, and brought to his mother” – compelled, coerced, and weeping.
“Rebecca took the fine garments of Esau, her elder son, that were with her in the house, and she dressed Jacob her younger son” (Genesis 27:15). “Rebecca took the fine [haḥamudot] garments of Esau, her elder son” – what he had coveted [sheḥamad] from Nimrod, and he killed him and took them. That is what is written: “The wicked covets the prey of the evil” (Proverbs 12:12). “That were with her in the house” – in them he would attend his father. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: I attended my father all my days, and I did not attend him one one-hundredth of what Esau attended his father. When I would attend my father, I attended him with dirty garments, but when I would go out on the road, I would go out with clean garments. But Esau, when he would attend his father, he would attend him only with royal garments. He said: ‘It is not in keeping with Father’s honor to attend him in anything other than royal garments.’ That is what is written: “That were with her in the house.”  How many wives did he [Esau] have, and you say: “That were with her in the house”? It is because he [Esau] knew what their [his wives’] actions were.25Esau did not trust his wives and therefore kept the special set of his clothing in his mother's house. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: There was an incident involving a group of scoundrels in that Kefar Ḥatya, who were accustomed to eat and drink in the synagogue every Shabbat eve. When they finished eating they would take the bones and cast them on the scribe. One of them was dying; they said to him: ‘To whom do you wish to entrust your son?’ He said to them: ‘To the scribe.’ But, how many friends did he have, but he said: ‘To the scribe’? It is, rather, that he knew what their actions were, and that the scribe was much better than they were. So, how many wives did he have, and the verse says: “That were with her in the house”? It is because he knew what their actions were.
“And the hides of the goat kids, she placed on his arms and on the smoothness of his neck” (Genesis 27:16). “And the hides of the goat kids” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The two arms of our patriarch Jacob were like two pillars of marble, and you say “she placed on his arms”? It is, rather, that she sewed them.26Jacob's arms were very large, so his mother had to sew several skins together in order to have enough material to cover his arms. Rabbi Huna said in the name of Rabbi Yosei: The two daily offerings that Israel would sacrifice on the Festival,27Sukkot. they would place them on young camels, and their legs would drag on the ground. Rabbi Huna said in the name of Rabbi Yosei: This cinnamon tree that would grow in the Land of Israel, and goats and gazelles would reach the top of the tree and eat from it.28Thus, it is possible the the skin of the goats sufficed to cover the arms of Jacob, and Rebecca did not have to sew them. Rabbi Ḥanina said: But are calves not slaughtered in the Land of Israel, and olive trees hewn, and fertile soil on the mountains?29In our day we do not see such large animals and large trees, even though it is the same soil. Thus, it must be that these large trees and animals are miraculous (Radal). These were miraculous acts. Rabbi Mona said: They are all miraculous acts. “She gave the delicacies and the bread that she prepared into the hand of Jacob her son” (Genesis 27:17). “She gave the delicacies and the bread” – she accompanied him until the entrance. She said: ‘To this point I was obligated to you, from here on, your Creator will stand with you.’
“He came to his father, and said: My father, and he said: Here I am; who are you, my son?” (Genesis 27:18). “Jacob said to his father: I am Esau your firstborn; I did as you spoke to me. Arise please, sit and eat from my game, so that your soul will bless me” (Genesis 27:19). “He came to his father, and said…I am Esau your firstborn” – Rabbi Levi said: I am destined to receive the Ten Commandments, but Esau is your firstborn. “Arise please, sit” – the Holy One blessed be He said to Jacob: ‘You said: “Arise please, sit.”30Jacob asked his father politely to sit up. As you live, I will repay you,’ as it is stated: “Arise Lord, and may Your enemies be dispersed” (Numbers 10:35). “Some are swept away without justice” (Proverbs 13:23) – this is Esau.31Who was punished for his speech and not for his action. The Holy One blessed be He said to Esau: ‘You said: “let my father arise” (Genesis 27:31) – like an idolic talisman which you stand up?32Esau gave a command to his father to get up, which is considered rude behavior. As you live, with that same expression, I will exact retribution against you’: “May God arise and His enemies scatter” (Psalms 68:2).
“Isaac said to his son: How is it that you were so quick to find it, my son? And he said: Because the Lord your God coordinated it before me” (Genesis 27:20). “Isaac said to Jacob: Please approach, that I may feel you, my son, are you my son Esau or not?” (Genesis 27:21). “Isaac said to his son: How is it that you were so quick to find it, my son?” – you were so quick to find the blessing, my son? Your father was blessed at seventy five years old,33God blessed Isaac after Abraham’s death. Abraham died at age one hundred and seventy-five. Isaac was born when Abraham was one hundred years old. and you are sixty-three years old.34See Bereshit Rabba 62:5. “And he said: Because the Lord your God coordinated it before me” – Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish, one of them said: If for your offering, the Holy One blessed be He provided for you, as it is stated: “Abraham lifted his eyes and saw that behold, there was a ram” (Genesis 22:13); for your food, all the more so. The other said: If for your mate He provided for you, as it is stated: “Please arrange it for me today” (Genesis 24:12), and it is written: “Behold, he saw camels coming” (Genesis 24:63); for your food, all the more so. “And he said: Because the Lord your God coordinated it before me” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: This is analogous to a raven that brought fire to its nest. When he said: “Because the Lord your God coordinated it before me,” Isaac said: ‘I know that Esau would not mention the name of the Holy One blessed be He; this one mentions. This is not Esau, but Jacob.’ When Isaac said to Jacob: “Please approach, that I may feel you, my son,” water spilled on his [Jacob's] thighs,35He urinated in fear. and his heart was as soft as wax. The Holy One blessed be He appointed two angels for him, one to his right and one to his left, and they were holding his elbow so he would not fall. That is what is written: “Do not waver [tishta], as I am your God” (Isaiah 41:10) – do not become wax [tishva].
“Jacob approached Isaac his father and he felt him, and he said: The voice is the voice of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Esau” (Genesis 27:22). “Jacob approached Isaac…The voice is the voice of Jacob” – this voice is the voice of a wise man, but his hands are those that flay dead animals. Another matter, “the voice is the voice of Jacob” – Jacob rules only with his voice. “The voice is the voice of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Esau” – Esau rules only with his hands. Another matter, “the voice is the voice of Jacob” – Rabbi Pinḥas said: The voice of Jacob withdraws into itself.36When he does not use his voice for prayer and Torah study. The Matnot Kehuna suggests that the fact that the word hakol is without a vav it can be read as if the voice of Jacob is demeaned (kal). “But the hands are the hands of Esau” – He signals to him and he comes.37The Holy One blessed be He signals to Esau and he comes to attack Jacob. Another matter, “the voice is the voice of Jacob” – Rabbi Berekhya said: When Jacob murmurs with his voice,38Uses his voice for matters which are said quietly, such as slander. the hands of Esau dominate, as it is written: “the people complained,”39The specific words mentioned in the verse preceding the advent of Amalek are slightly different, see Exodus 17:3. (Exodus 15:24), “Amalek came” (Exodus 17:8). But when he calls loudly with his voice, the hands are not the hands of Esau, the hands of Esau do not dominate. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: No philosophers stood in the world like Bilam son of Beor and like Avnimos the weaver. All the idolaters gathered before him.40Avnimos (see Etz Yosef). They said to him: ‘Do you say that we can confront this nation?’ He said: ‘Go and circulate among their synagogues and study halls; if you find children there crying out,41Words of Torah. you will not be able to confront them, as this is what their ancestor promised them: “The voice is the voice of Jacob” – when the voice of Jacob is found in the synagogues, the hands are not the hands of Esau, but if not, “the hands are the hands of Esau” – you can overcome them.’ “The voice is the voice of Jacob” – in the case of the concubine in Giva –“cursed is he who gives a wife to Benjamin” (Judges 21:18).42The Etz Yosef explains that here the midrash is stating that there are instances in which the use of the voice of Jacob in an unwise manner can lead to behavior reminiscent of Esau. Because the Israelites issued a (spoken) curse forbidding the giving of any daughter in marriage to any man from the tribe of Benjamin, they had to later tell the men of Benjamin to "steal" women as wives for themselves, which is Esau-type behavior (see Judges 21:18–22). “The voice is the voice of Jacob” – in the days of Yerovam. The sound of weeping because they killed five hundred thousand among them, as it is written – “Yerovam did not gain strength again [in the days of Aviya; and the Lord afflicted him, and he died]” (II Chronicles 13:20). Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: What do you think; that Yerovam was afflicted? But was it not Aviya who was afflicted? Why was he afflicted? Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: It is because he defaced the identifying features of Israel’s faces, as it is written: “The expression of their faces testifies against them” (Isaiah 3:9). Rabbi Levi said: Because he positioned guards over them for three days until their form decayed, as we learned: One may testify43The reference is to giving testimony that a husband died so that his widow could remarry. only about the countenance of the face with the nose, even if there are distinguishing marks on his body and his belongings…and one may testify only up to three days.44Yevamot 120a. In their regard he says: “Their widows proliferated for Me beyond the sand of the seas” (Jeremiah 15:8). Rabbi Yoḥanan, Reish Lakish, and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Because he denigrated Aḥiya the Shilonite, as it is stated: "[Worthless and] wicked people [gathered around him]”45The Hebrew does not bring the exact quote of the verse. (II Chronicles 13:7) – he called Aḥiya the Shilonite wicked. Reish Lakish said: Because he humiliated them publicly, as it is stated: “You are a great multitude, and with you are the golden calves” (II Chronicles 13:8). The Rabbis said: It is because an idol came into his possession and he did not nullify it,46He did not destroy the golden calf which Yerovam had erected in Beit El. as it is stated: “Aviya pursued Yerovam” (II Chronicles 13:19), and it is written: “And captured cities from him: Beit El and its environs” (II Chronicles 13:19), and it is written: “He placed one in Beit El” (I Kings 12:29). The matters can be derived a fortiori: If a king, because he mistreated a king like him, the verse punished him and he was defeated, a commoner who mistreats a commoner, all the more so.
Another matter, “the voice is the voice of Jacob” – his voice silences the celestial beings and the earthly beings. Rabbi Reuven said: It is written: “When they stood, their wings would slacken” (Ezekiel 1:25). “When they stood” – is there sitting on High? Did Rabbi Shmuel not say: There is no sitting on High, as it is stated: “Their legs were a straight leg” (Ezekiel 1:7). They have no joints – “I approached one of those angels [kamaya]” (Daniel 7:16). What is this expression kamaya? It is standing [kayamaya]. “Seraphim were standing above Him” (Isaiah 6:2). “[He said: Therefore, hear the word of the Lord. I saw the Lord sitting on His throne,] and all the host of the heavens were standing [to His right and His left]” (II Chronicles 18:18), and you say: “When they stood”? I wonder. What is “when they stood [beomdam]”? When the nation comes, [there is] silence [ba am dom]. When Israel recites Shema Yisrael, the angels are silent, and then their wings would slacken. What do they recite? “Blessed is the glory of the Lord from His place” (Ezekiel 3:12), and blessed is the name of the glory of His kingdom. Rabbi Levi said: “When the morning stars sang together, and all the children of the great shouted” (Job 38:7) what the offspring of Jacob, who was likened to the stars, laud, as it is written in their regard: “Those who lead the multitudes to righteousness, like the stars” (Daniel 12:3). Then, “all the children of the great shouted” – these are the ministering angels. What do they recite? “Blessed is the glory of the Lord from His place” (Ezekiel 3:12). Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: It is written: “A wind lifted me, and I heard behind me the sound of a great noise…” (Ezekiel 3:12). “Great noise” – I wonder. Rather, after I and my counterparts lauded, then, “ I heard behind me the sound of a great noise: Blessed is the glory of the Lord from His place.” What do they recite? Blessed is the name. Rabbi Yehuda bar Ilai would expound: “The voice is the voice of Jacob” screaming because of what “the hands are the hands of Esau” did to him. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The voice [of Jacob, due to] the emperor Hadrian who killed eight hundred million people in Beitar.47The point is that a very large number of people were killed.
“He did not recognize him, because his hands were hairy like the hands of his brother Esau, and he blessed him” (Genesis 27:23). “He did not recognize him” – when wicked people were produced from him, he [Isaac] did not recognize them. “His father Isaac said to him: Approach and kiss me, my son” (Genesis 27:26). “Approach and kiss me” – he said to him: ‘You will be adjacent to me in burial, but no other will be adjacent to me in burial.’ “He approached and kissed him, and he smelled the scent of his garments, and blessed him, and said: See, the scent of my son is as the scent of a field that the Lord blessed” (Genesis 27:27). “He approached and kissed him, and he smelled the scent of his garments” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: There is nothing whose odor is viler than this goat hide, and you say: “He smelled the scent of his garments, and blessed him”? It is, rather, that when our patriarch Jacob entered to his father, the Garden of Eden entered with him. That is what he said to him: “See, the scent of my son is as the scent of a field.” But when Esau entered to his father, Gehenna entered with him, just as it says: “With the arrival of spite, disgrace arrives” (Proverbs 11:2). Another matter, “he smelled the scent of his garments [begadav],48This is expounded to mean “his traitors [bogedav]” have a good scent – they repent. and blessed him” – e.g., Yosef Meshita and Yakum of Tzerorot. Yosef Meshita, when the enemies sought to enter the Temple Mount, they said: ‘Let one of them enter, and it49The desecration. will begin with them.’ They said to him:50They wanted a Jew to enter the Temple Mount first, and chose Yosef Meshita, who agreed to enter. ‘Enter, and whatever you take out is yours.’ He entered and took out a golden candelabrum. They said to him: ‘It is not appropriate for a commoner to make use of this.51It should be given to the emperor. Instead, enter again, and what you take out is yours.’ He refused. Rabbi Pinḥas said: They offered him taxes for three years,52He could keep whatever taxes he would collect from the people. but he refused. He said: ‘Is it not enough that I angered my God once, that I would anger Him a second time?’ What did they do to him? They placed him on a carpenter’s sawhorse and were sawing him. He was shouting and saying: ‘Woe is me that I angered my Creator.’  Yakum of Tzerorot was the son of the sister of Rabbi Yosei ben Yoezer of Tzereida. He was riding a horse on Shabbat. In front of him, a cross on which Jews who observed Shabbat would be crucified was being dragged. He [Yakum of Tzerorot] said to him [Yosei ben Yoezer]: ‘Look at the horse on which my master has me riding, and look at the horse on which your Master has you riding.’53When the cross was too heavy to bear, very often they would drag it between their legs, so it looked like a horse. He told him: ‘If so it is for those who anger Him, all the more so for those who perform His will.’ He [also] said to him: ‘If it is so for those who perform his will, all the more so for those who anger him.’54Yosei ben Yoezer made two responses to his nephew. First, that if he had received a reward despite angering God, certainly, those who serve God will ultimately receive a reward. Second, if those who serve God suffer so much, certainly those who anger God will ultimately suffer more. It [his uncle’s words] penetrated him like the venom of a serpent. He went and fulfilled in himself the four court-imposed death penalties – stoning, burning, beheading, and strangulation. What did he do? He brought a beam and stuck it into the ground. He tied a string to it, arranged wood, and surrounded it with a stone fence.55The stone fence was supported by the wood which it surrounded. He kindled a bonfire before it,56The bonfire was kindled near the fence, and when the fire reached the fence it kindled the wood which was within the fence and partially under the fence. stuck a sword in the middle,57The sword was in the middle of the wood which was arranged within the fence near the beam. kindled the fire under the stones, hanged himself from the beam and was strangled. The fire reached him, it severed the string, he fell into the fire, the sword reached him, the fence fell on him, and he was burned. Yosei ben Yoezer of Tzereida dozed and saw his bier floating in the air. He said: ‘That one preceded me by a small amount of time into the Garden of Eden.’
Another matter, it teaches that the Holy One blessed be He showed him the Temple built and destroyed and built. “See, the scent of my son” – that is built, just as it says: “My pleasing aroma; you shall observe” (Numbers 28:2). “Like the scent of a field” – that is destroyed, just as it says: “Zion will be plowed as a field” (Micah 3:12). “That the Lord blessed” – built and enhanced in the future, as it is stated: “For there the Lord commanded the blessing of life, for eternity” (Psalms 133:3). ##“And may God give you from the dew of the heavens, and from the fat of the land, and an abundance of grain and wine” (Genesis 27:28).

=== 66 | 66 ===
“And may God give you from the dew of the heavens.” It is written: “My root will be open to water, and dew will lie on my branch” (Job 29:19) – Job said: ‘Because my doors were wide open, everyone would reap dry crops, and I would reap full, lush kernels.’ What is the source? “My root will be open to water.”1The verse is being interpreted as saying that the door was open and everything was available to a guest, just as water is freely available. The word root is interpreted as referring to the door since the house "begins" from the door and the tree begins from it's roots (Radal). Jacob said: ‘Because I was engaged in Torah that is likened to water, I was privileged to be blessed with dew,’ as it is stated: “And may God give you from the dew of the heavens.”
Rabbi Berekhya began: “Return, return, the Shulamite; return, return, and we will gaze upon you” (Song of Songs 7:1) – “return” is written four times, corresponding to the four kingdoms into which Israel entered whole and emerged whole. “The Shulamite” – it is a nation that the peace [shalom] of the One who lives forever moves with it, from tent to tent. “The Shulamite” – the nation that the priests instill peace into it every day, as it is stated: “They shall place My name” (Numbers 6:27), and it is written: “And grant you peace” (Numbers 6:26). “The Shulamite” – the nation that the One who is peace of the worlds resides in its midst, as it is stated: “They shall craft for Me a Sanctuary, and I will dwell in their midst” (Exodus 25:8). “The Shulamite” – the nation that I am destined to instill peace into it, as it is stated: “I will grant peace in the Land” (Leviticus 26:6). “The Shulamite” – the nation toward which I will direct peace; that is what is written: “So said the Lord: Behold, I will direct peace to her like a river” (Isaiah 66:12). Rabbi Shmuel bar Tanḥum and Rabbi Ḥana in the name of Rabbi Idi: A nation that made peace between Me and My world, as were it not for it, I would destroy My world. Rav Huna in the name of Rav Aḥa began: “The earth and all its inhabitants melted away” (Psalms 75:4) – just as it says: “All the inhabitants of Canaan have melted away” (Exodus 15:15). “I set firm” (Psalms 75:4) – I, once they accepted upon themselves, “I am the Lord your God” (Exodus 20:2), “I set firm its pillars, Selah” (Psalms 75:4) – and the world was filled with joy [venitbasem].2There is a variant reading: Venitbases – the world was firmed. Rabbi Elazar ben Maron says: The nation that preserves [meshalema] the stability of the world, both in this world, and in the World to Come. Rabbi Levi said: A nation that all the good that comes into the world comes only due to its merit. Rains fall only due to its merit, dews fall only due to its merit, as it is stated: “And may God give you from the dew of the heavens” – to you, due to your merit, and the matter is dependent upon you.
“May [God] give you [veyiten lekha]” – He will give, and give you again.3This is expounded from the fact that the word begins with a vav.  He will give you blessings and He will give you a hidden place.4A place where you can retain the blessings. Namely, peace, based on the statement (see Mishna Okatzin 3:12) that the vessel which can retain blessings is peace (Maharzu). “May [God] give you” – yours, and “may [God] give you” – your father’s. “May [God] give you” – yours, and “may [God] give you” – your brother’s.  Rabbi Aḥa said: May [God] give, “and may God give you” divine aid. When? It will be when you need it. That is what is written: “And said: My Lord God, please remember me and please strengthen me” (Judges 16:28) – he said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, remember for me that blessing that Father blessed me: May [God] give, “and may God give you” divine aid.’ “From the dew of the heavens” – this is the manna, as it is stated: “The Lord said to Moses: Behold, I am raining food for you from the heavens” (Exodus 16:4). “And from the fat of the land” – this is the well that would bring up for them types of fish that were exceedingly fat. “And from the fat of the land” – these are the offerings, as it is written: “I will offer up to You burnt offerings of fattened animals” (Psalms 66:15). “And an abundance of grain” – these are the lads, as it is written: “For how good and how beautiful it is, there will be grain for the young men” (Zechariah 9:17). “And wine” – these are the maidens, as it is written: “and new wine will make the maidens talk” (Zechariah 9:17). Another matter, “from the dew of the heavens” – this is Zion, as it is stated: “Like the dew of Hermon descending upon the mountains of Zion” (Psalms 133:3). “And from the fat of the land” – these are the offerings. “Grain” – these are the first fruits. “Wine” – these are the libations. Alternatively, “from the dew of the heavens” – this is the Bible; “and from the fat of the land” – this is Mishna; “grain” – this is Talmud; “wine” – this is aggada.
“Peoples will serve you, and nations will prostrate themselves to you. Be a lord to your brethren, and your mother’s sons will prostrate themselves to you. Cursed be one who curses you, and blessed be one who blesses you” (Genesis 27:29). “Peoples will serve you” – these are the seventy nations. “And nations will prostrate themselves to you” – these are the descendants of Ishmael and the sons of Ketura, in whose regard it is written: “Ashurim, Letushim, and Leumim” (Genesis 25:3). “Be a lord to your brethren” – this is Esau and his chieftains. “And your mother’s sons will prostrate themselves to you” – here it says: “And your mother’s sons will prostrate themselves to you,” but elsewhere it says: “And your father’s sons will prostrate themselves to you” (Genesis 49:8). It is that Jacob, because he took four wives, Leah, Rachel, Zilpa, and Bilha, he says: “Your father’s sons.” Isaac took Rebecca, he said: “Your mother’s sons.” “Cursed be one who curses you…” – and elsewhere it says: “Those who bless you are blessed, and those who curse you are cursed” (Numbers 24:9). It is that Bilam, because he was a hater, began with a blessing and concluded with a curse. Yitzḥak, who was a lover, opened with a curse and concluded with a blessing.  Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Rabbi Ḥiyya said: The wicked, because their beginning is tranquility and their end is suffering, they begin with blessing and end with curse. The righteous, because their beginning is suffering and their end is tranquility, they begin with curse and end with blessing: “Cursed be one who curses you, and blessed be one who blesses you.”
“It was when Isaac concluded to bless Jacob, and Jacob had just departed from the presence of Isaac his father, and Esau his brother came from his hunt” (Genesis 27:30). “It was when Isaac concluded to bless Jacob” – Rabbi Aivu said: The tent of our patriarch Isaac was open on all sides. One came from here and one came from there. The Rabbis say: It was hinged, and the doors would fold backward. Jacob stood behind the door until Esau entered, and then he went out. That is what is written: “Jacob had just departed [Akh yatzo yatza]” – he appeared to go out but was not going out. “And Esau his brother came from his hunt [mitzeido]” – he was armed to hunt for his life, just as it says: “But if one did not have intent [tzada]” (Exodus 21:13).5The verse appears in the context of murder.
Another matter, “blessed be one who blesses you” – it is taught: An idol worshiper who blesses the Name, one answers amen after him; with the Name, one does not answer amen after him.6If a gentile blesses God, one should answer ‘Amen.’ If he blesses a Jew using the name of God, one should not answer ‘Amen,’ to indicate that his blessing does not help (Etz Yosef). Rabbi Tanḥuma said: If one idolater blesses you, answer amen after him, as it is written: “You shall be blessed more than all the peoples [mikol haamim]” (Deuteronomy 7:14).7Literally – “from all the nations.” A certain idolater encountered Rabbi Yishmael and blessed him. He said to him: ‘The response is already stated.’ A certain idolater encountered Rabbi Yishmael and cursed him. He said to him: ‘The response is already stated.’ They said to him: ‘What you said to this one, you said to that one.’ He said to them: ‘So it is written: “Those who bless you are blessed, and those who curse you are cursed”’ (Numbers 24:9).
“He, too, prepared delicacies, and brought them to his father, and said to his father: Let my father arise, and eat from his son’s game, so that your soul will bless me” (Genesis 27:31). “He, too, prepared delicacies, and brought them to his father, and said to his father: Let my father arise” – that is what is written: “The spider grasps with hands” (Proverbs 30:28). Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: By virtue of what merit does the spider grasp?8A metaphor for the Roman Empire, that descended from Esau. It is due to the merit of those hands – “he, too, prepared delicacies.” “Let my father arise” – because he said to him: “Let [my father] arise,” I will exact retribution against him with that same expression: “May God arise…His enemies scatter” (Psalms 68:2).

=== 67 | 67 ===
“Isaac was overcome with great trembling, and he said: Who then is he who hunted game, and brought it me, and I ate from all before you came, and I blessed him? Indeed, he shall be blessed” (Genesis 27:33). “Isaac was overcome with great trembling.” It is written: “A man’s trembling sets a snare, and one who trusts the Lord will be exalted” (Proverbs 29:25) – the trembling that Ruth caused Boaz, as it is stated: “He trembled and recoiled” (Ruth 3:8), “sets a snare” – by right he should have cursed her. However, “one who trusts the Lord will be exalted” – he considered it, and blessed her: “He said: May you be blessed to the Lord, my daughter” (Ruth 3:10). The trembling that Jacob caused Isaac, as it is stated: “Isaac was overcome with great trembling,” “sets a snare” – by right he should have cursed him. However, “one who trusts the Lord will be exalted” – he blessed him and said: “Indeed, he shall be blessed.”
“Isaac was overcome with great trembling” – Rabbi Ḥama ben Rabbi Ḥanina said: “Great” – more than the trembling that he trembled atop the altar.  He said: “Who [then], is” the one who became an intermediary between me and the Omnipresent so that Jacob would receive the blessings? He said it regarding Rebecca. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: One who has two sons, one leaving and one entering,1One receiving a blessing and one not receiving a blessing. trembles? I wonder. It is, rather, that when Esau entered to his father, Gehenna entered with him. Rabbi Aḥa said: The walls of the house began seething. That is what is written: “Who then [mi efo],” who is that who is destined to be baked here, is it me, or my son Jacob? The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘It is neither you nor your son, but rather, “he who hunted game.”’2Esau. “He who hunted game” – Rabbi Elazar bar Shimon said: Hunter, how did they trap you? Conqueror of gates, how are your gates conquered and ruined? That is what is written: “The deceitful will not scorch [yaḥarokh] his prey” (Proverbs 12:27). The Rabbis say: The Holy One blessed be He does not delay [yeaḥer] and does not extend [yaarikh] for the deceitful one and his deceit. Rabbi Eliezer the son of Rabbi Yosei said: What is “will not scorch [lo yaḥarokh]”? the Holy One Blessed be He does not extend [yaarikh] for the deceitful one and his deceit, as Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: That entire day, Esau was trapping gazelles and binding them, and an angel came and untied them, [trapping] birds, and tied their wings, and an angel would come and free them. Why to that extent? “But the wealth of a worthy [yakar] man is precious” (Proverbs 12:27) – so that Jacob, who was the glory of [yekaro] the world, would come and take the blessings, as from the outset of the world they were designated [ḥarutzot] for him. Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa asked Rabbi Aḥa, he said to him: ‘What is what is written: “But the wealth of a worthy [yakar] man is precious [ḥarutz]”?’ He said: ‘It is designated [ḥarutza] in the hands of the righteous, who do not receive in this world any of the glory they have coming to them in the World to Come.’ “And I ate from all [mikol]” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: Of everything [mikol] that was created during the six days of Creation. Rabbi Neḥemya says: Of all [mikol] the goodness that is reserved for the World to Come. He [Esau] said to him [Isaac]: ‘What was the main course that he fed you?’ He said to him: ‘I do not know, but I tasted the taste of bread, the taste of meat, the taste of fish, the taste of grasshoppers, the taste of all the delicacies of the world.’ Rabbi Berekhya said: When he [Isaac] mentioned meat, he [Esau] immediately cried. He said: ‘He fed me one bowl of lentils and took my birthright. You, to whom he fed meat, all the more so.’ Rabbi Levi said: Because our patriarch Isaac was afraid and saying: ‘Did I, perhaps, not act properly, in that I rendered one who was not firstborn, firstborn?’ When he said: “He took my birthright” (Genesis 27:36), he said: ‘I gave the blessing properly.’ Rabbi Elazar said: Ratification of a document is only by its signatories, so that you will not say that had Jacob not deceived Isaac, he would not have received the blessings. The verse states: “Indeed, he shall be blessed.”
Rabbi Yitzḥak said: He [Isaac] sought to curse him [Jacob]. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Be careful, if you curse him, you are cursing yourself, as you said: “Cursed be one who curses you”’ (Genesis 27:29). Rabbi Levi said: Six items serve a person; three are in his control, and three are not in his control. The eye, the ear, and the nose are not in his control – he sees what he does not wish, he hears what he does not wish, and he smells what he does not wish. The mouth, the hand, and the foot are in his control – [the mouth,] if he wishes he toils in Torah; if he wishes, [he speaks] evil speech; if he wishes, he curses and blasphemes. The hand, if he wishes, he performs a mitzva; if he wishes, he steals; if he wishes, he kills. His foot, if he wishes, he goes to theaters and circuses; and if he wishes, he goes to synagogues and study halls. When he merits, the Holy One blessed be He renders the ones in his control to be not in his control. The hand – “his hand that he had extended toward him shriveled” (I Kings 13:4); the mouth, “indeed, he shall be blessed” (Genesis 27:33); the foot, “My son, do not walk on the way with them…for their feet run to evil” (Proverbs 1:15–16).
“When Esau heard the words of his father, he cried out, a very great and bitter cry, and he said to his father: Bless me too, my father” (Genesis 27:34). “When Esau heard the words of his father” – Rabbi Ḥanina said: Anyone who says that the Holy One blessed be He is lax, may his intestines become lax. Rather, He shows patience and collects His due. Jacob caused Esau to cry out one cry, as it is written: “When Esau heard the words of his father, he cried out.” Where did He punish him [Jacob]? It was in the Shushan citadel, as it is stated: “[When Mordekhai learned what had happened…] and cried out an exceedingly loud and bitter cry” (Esther 4:1). “He said: Your brother came in cunning, and he took your blessing” (Genesis 27:35). “Your brother came in cunning [bemirma]” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: He came with the wisdom of his Torah.3This is expounded from the fact that the Torah used the word mirma, not sheker, rama’ut, or honaa. Cunning [mirma] is not necessarily negative. “He said: It is for this that his name was called Jacob [Yaakov], as he deceived me these two times; he took my birthright and, behold, now he took my blessing. And he said: Have you not reserved a blessing for me?” (Genesis 27:36). “He said: It is for this [hakhi] that his name was called Jacob [Yaakov], as he deceived me [vayakveni]” – Reish Lakish said: He began clearing his throat, like one who clears his throat [meḥakekh] and expectorates from his mouth. “He said: Hakhi.”4Hakhi which literally means "is it for this" is expounded as though it should be read ḥiki – as in the word meḥakekh. “He deceived me…he took my birthright” – and I said nothing to him. “Behold, now he took my blessing” – shall I say nothing to him? “Have you not reserved a blessing for me?” – from the inferior ones.5A less important blessing.
“Isaac answered and said to Esau: Behold, I have placed him a lord to you, and all his brethren I have given to him as servants, and I have supported him with grain and wine, and for you then, what shall I do, my son?” (Genesis 27:37). “Isaac answered and said to Esau: Behold, I have [placed him] a lord” – Rabbi Berekhya said: “Behold, I have placed him a lord to you” – that was the seventh blessing,6The blessing "be master over your brothers" is the seventh blessing. why does he say it to him first? He said to him: ‘I rendered him king over you, and your blessings are his.’ The slave belongs to whom, his belongings belong to whom? A slave, everything that is his belongs to his master. “All his brethren I have given to him as servants…and for you, then [lekha efo]” – however, for you, your bread is baked [afuya].7You will always have enough to eat, at the expense of your master. Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: [“Lekha efo”] Let me be,8The word lekha is being interpreted as meaning lekh – leave. as an oven is baking for you everywhere.9You will be burned by him. Reish Lakish said: Let me be, as fury and wrath [af veḥema]10Efo is an acronym for af veḥema. are within his purview. Rabbi Simlai and some say in the name of Rabbi Abahu: The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Did you say to him: “For you, then”?’11God asked Isaac: Did you intend to bless Esau? He said to Him: “Grant him grace”12Let me bless him. (Isaiah 26:10). He said to him: ‘He is “wicked”’ (Isaiah 26:10). He said to Him: ‘“Did he not learn righteousness?” (Isaiah 26:10) – did he not honor his parents?’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘“In the land of the upright he will perform evil” (Isaiah 26:10) – he is destined to extend his hand against the Temple.’ He said to Him: ‘If so, grant him tranquility in this world, “and let him not see the majesty of the Lord” (Isaiah 26:10) – in the future.’
“Isaac his father answered and said to him: Behold, from the fat of the earth will be your dwelling, and from the dew of the heavens from above” (Genesis 27:39). “Isaac [his father] answered and said [to him: Behold, from the fat of the earth will be your dwelling” – this is Italy.13Rome is viewed as being the descendant of Esau. “And from the dew of the heavens from above” – this is Beit Guvrin. Another matter, “Behold, from the fat of the earth” – from the fat cats of the earth. What renders the earth fat? It becomes fat from the dew. Antoninos sent [an emissary] to Rabbeinu [Yehuda HaNasi], he said to him: ‘Because my royal treasuries are depleted, what can we do to fill them?’ He took the emissary and brought him into a garden. He began uprooting large radishes and planted small ones. He said to him: ‘Give me an answer.’ He said: ‘You do not need one.’ He ascended to him.14The emissary returned to Antoninos. He said to him: ‘Where is the response?’ He said to him: ‘He did not give me anything.’ He said to him: ‘What did he say to you?’ He said to him: ‘He did not say anything.’ He said to him: ‘Did he not do anything in your presence?’ He said to him: ‘He took me and had me enter into a garden. He uprooted large radishes and planted small ones; large beets and planted small ones; large lettuce, and planted small ones.’ He understood immediately. He began dismissing officers and appointing officers, until the coffers were filled.15Both the dismissed officers and the appointed officers paid higher taxes because they feared him, and the coffers were filled.
“By your sword you will live, and you will serve your brother; it will be when you will revolt, you will remove his yoke from your neck” (Genesis 27:40). “By [ve’al] your sword you will live” – Rabbi Levi said: Insert [ul] your sword and you will live.16Insert your sword into its sheath and do not draw it, because if you attack Jacob you will be defeated.  “And you will serve your brother” – Rav Huna said: If he merits, you will serve; if not, you will eradicate. “It will be when you will revolt” – you have fairs and markets and he has markets; you have laws and customs and he has laws and customs. Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta said: If you see your brother throwing the yoke of Torah from upon him, decree upon him persecutions and you will dominate him. That is what is written: “For You are our Father; although Abraham does not know us and Israel does not recognize us” (Isaiah 63:16). Where is Isaac? One who says to him:17Isaac said to Esau. ‘Decree upon him persecutions,’ do you18The prophet. mention him along with the [other] patriarchs?
“Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing that his father blessed him. Esau said in his heart: The days of mourning for my father will approach, and I will kill my brother Jacob” (Genesis 27:41). “Esau hated [vayistom]” – Rabbi Elazar bar Rabbi Yosei said: A senator19Senator is an acronym for soneh, nokem, noter, which the midrash will go on to explain. – he became toward him a hater [soneh], an avenger [nokem], and a bearer of a grudge [noter]; to this day they are called the senators of Rome. “Esau said in his heart” – the wicked are subject to the heart. “The scoundrel says in his heart” (Psalms 14:1); “Yerovam said in his heart” (I Kings 12:26); “Haman said in his heart” (Esther 6:6). But the righteous, their heart is subject to them. “Hannah, she was speaking in her heart” (I Samuel 1:13); “David said in his heart” (I Samuel 27:1); “Daniel resolved in his heart” (Daniel 1:8). They are like their Creator: “The Lord said in his heart” (Genesis 8:21). “The days of mourning for my father will approach” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: Esau acted with patience. He said: ‘What, will I cause my father to break down?’ Instead, “the days of mourning for my father will approach, and I will kill” him. Rabbi Neḥemya said: A Divine Voice said: ‘Many young donkeys have died and their hides have been spread over their mothers.’ The Rabbis say: [Esau said:] ‘If I kill him, there are Shem and Ever who will sit in judgment over me, and say to me: Why did you kill your brother? Instead, I will go and marry into Ishmael’s family, and he will come and dispute with him [Jacob] over the birthright and kill him, and I will stand against him [Ishmael] as a blood redeemer and kill him, and I will be the heir of two families.’ That is what is written: “Because you said: The two nations and the two countries will be mine, and we will inherit it, and the Lord was there” (Ezekiel 35:10). Who is it that said so? Rabbi Yudan said: It was the Holy One blessed be He: “and the Lord was there.” Rabbi Berekhya said: Esau denied and said: ‘I did not say that statement.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Do you not know that I am the prober of hearts? “I, the Lord, probe the heart”’ (Jeremiah 17:10).
“The words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebecca, and she sent and summoned Jacob her younger son, and said to him: Behold, your brother Esau consoles himself [mitnaḥem] in your regard to kill you” (Genesis 27:42). “Were told to Rebecca…” – who told her? Rabbi Ḥagai in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: The matriarchs were prophets, and Rebecca was one of the matriarchs. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Even a layman does not plow a furrow within a furrow, but prophets plow a furrow within a furrow?20Since a layman does not plow once and then plow a second time in a manner that destroys the first furrow, certainly the prophets do not perform an action which would be followed by an action which causes destruction. Rebecca told Jacob to take the blessings, and this led Esau to plan to kill him. Therefore, Rebecca, who was a prophetess, had been told by God of Esau's plan, and knew that what she did would not cause destruction (Matnot Kehuna). And you say: “Do not touch My anointed ones; do not harm My prophets” (Psalms 105:15). “She sent and summoned Jacob” – she said to him: ‘This wicked one, how much he regrets about you, how much he is accepting condolences [mitnaḥem] in your regard, and he has already drunk a cup of consolation over you.’
“Now my son, heed my voice and arise, flee to Laban my brother, to Haran” (Genesis 27:43).  “Live with him a few years, until your brother’s anger will subside” (Genesis 27:44). “Now my son, heed my voice and arise, flee…live with him a few [aḥadim] years.” It is written: “Jacob worked seven years for Rachel; they were in his eyes but a few [aḥadim] days, in his love of her” (Genesis 29:20). Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pazi said: Aḥadim is written here and aḥadim is written elsewhere. Just as elsewhere, aḥadim is seven years, so, too aḥadim that is stated here is seven years.  “Until your brother’s anger will subside from you, and he will forget that which you did to him, and I will send and take you from there; why should I be bereaved of both of you on one day?” (Genesis 27:45). “Until your brother’s anger will subside” – his mother in her righteousness said: “Until your brother’s anger will subside,” but he did not do so, but rather: “His wrath mauled perpetually and his fury kept forever” (Amos 1:11). Reish Lakish said: His fury and his wrath did not move from his mouth – “why should I be bereaved of both of you?”
“Rebecca said to Isaac: I loathe my life due to the daughters of Ḥet. If Jacob takes a wife from the daughters of Ḥet, like these, from the daughters of the land, why do I need life?” (Genesis 27:46). “Rebecca said to Isaac: I loathe my life [due to the daughters of Ḥet]”21Esau’s wives. See Genesis 26:34–35. – Rav Huna said: She began collecting mucus from her nose and casting it down. “If Jacob takes…from the daughters of Ḥet, like these” – she was striking this one, then that one, and that one, then this one.22Esau’s wives were standing there.
“Isaac summoned Jacob and he blessed him. He commanded him and said to him: Do not take a wife from the daughters of Canaan” (Genesis 28:1). “Isaac summoned Jacob and he blessed him” – Rabbi Abahu said: Because the blessings were uncertain in his hand.23The blessings which Jacob received when Isaac thought he was Esau were considered uncertain by Jacob. Where were they reinforced in his hand? It is here, “Isaac summoned Jacob.”24Isaac blessed him at his own initiative. Rabbi Elazar said: Ratification of a document is only by its signatories, so that you will not say that had Jacob not deceived Isaac, he would not have received his blessings. The verse states: “Isaac summoned Jacob and he blessed him.” Rabbi Berekhya said: This is analogous to the son of kings who was digging to take a pound of gold. He [the king] said to him: ‘Why clandestinely? Come and take it openly.’ “Isaac summoned Jacob and he blessed him.” “He commanded him” – he cautioned him against the daughters of Aner, Eshkol, and Mamre.25He cautioned him not to marry them. They were allies of Abraham. See Genesis 14:24. “Jacob heeded his father and his mother, and he went to Padan Aram” (Genesis 28:7). “Jacob heeded his father and his mother.” That is what is written: “Every way of a man is fitting in his own eyes” (Proverbs 21:2). Every way of a man is fitting in his own eyes – this is Samson: “Samson said to his father: Take her for me, as she is fitting in my eyes” (Judges 14:3). “And one who heeds counsel is wise” (Proverbs 12:15) – this is Jacob: “Jacob heeded his father and his mother, and he went.”
“Esau saw that the daughters of Canaan were objectionable in the eyes of Isaac his father” (Genesis 28:8). “Esau went to Ishmael, and took Maḥalat the daughter of Ishmael, son of Abraham, sister of Nevayot, in addition to his wives, as his wife” (Genesis 28:9). “Esau saw that the daughters of Canaan26Ḥet was considered a Canaanite.…Esau went to Ishmael” – Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: He gave consideration to converting.27The reference is to repenting. “Maḥalat” – as the Holy One blessed be He forgave [mahal] him for his iniquities. “Basmat” (Genesis 36:3) – as his mind was now satisfied [nitbasma]. Rabbi Elazar said: Had he divorced the first ones, it would have been correct, but, “in addition to his wives” – pain upon pain. Another matter, thorn upon thorn – it was an addition to a full house. “Jacob departed from Beersheba, and went to Haran” (Genesis 28:10). Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Rabbi Aivu: “In the transgression of the lips is an evil snare, but the righteous emerges from trouble” (Proverbs 12:13). “In the transgression of the lips is an evil snare” – due to the rebellion that Esau and Ishmael rebelled against the Holy One blessed be He, and angered him, and, likewise, his wives angered Him, they encountered a snare. “But the righteous emerges [vayetze] from trouble” – this is Jacob, “Jacob departed from Beersheba, and went to Haran.”

=== 68 | 68 ===
“Jacob departed from Beersheba, and went to Ḥaran” (Genesis 28:10) – Rabbi Pinḥas in the name of Rabbi Huna bar Pappa began: “Then you will walk on your way securely…. When you lie down, you will not be afraid” (Proverbs 3:23–24). “Then you will walk on your way securely” – this is Jacob, as it is written: “Jacob departed.” “When you lie down, you will not be afraid” – of Esau and Laban. “You will lie down and your sleep will be sweet” (Proverbs 3:24) – “and lay down in that place” (Genesis 28:11).
Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman began:1The verse in Psalms is being interpreted as referring to Jacob. “A song of ascents. I lift my eyes to the mountains [heharim]” (Psalms 121:1) – I lift my eyes to the parents [hahorim], to my teachers, and to those who raised me. “From where will my help come?” (Psalms 121:1) – Eliezer, when he went to bring Rebecca, what is written in his regard: “The slave took ten camels…” (Genesis 24:10), but I [Jacob] do not have even one nose ring or one bracelet. Rabbi Ḥanina said: He [Isaac] sent him empty-handed. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: He sent with him,2And did not send him empty-handed. but Esau arose and took it from him. He then said: ‘What, will I lose my confidence in my Creator? God forbid, I will not lose my confidence in my Creator.’ Instead, “My help is from the Lord” (Psalms 121:2). “He will not let your foot give way; He who watches over you will not slumber” (Psalms 121:3). “Behold, [the Guardian of Israel] neither slumbers nor sleeps…” (Psalms 121:4). The Lord will guard you from all evil" (Psalms 121:7) – from Esau and from Laban; “He will guard your life” (Psalms 121:7) – from the angel of death. “The Lord will guard your going and your coming” (Psalms 121:8) – “Jacob departed.”
Rabbi Abbahu began: “House and wealth are the inheritance of fathers, but a capable wife is from the Lord” (Proverbs 19:14) – Rabbi Pinḥas in the name of Rabbi Abbahu: We find in the Torah, the Prophets, and the Writings that a person’s match is only from the Holy One blessed be He. In the Torah, from where is it derived? “Laban and Betuel answered and said: The matter comes from the Lord” (Genesis 24:50). In the Prophets: “His father and his mother did not know that it was from the Lord” (Judges 14:4). In the Writings, that is what is written: “But a capable wife is from the Lord.” There are instances where one goes to his match and there are instances where one’s match comes to him. Isaac, his match came to him: “Behold, he saw camels coming” (Genesis 24:63). Jacob went to his match, as it is written: “Jacob departed.”
Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon began: “God settles the individuals in a home” (Psalms 68:7) – a noblewoman asked Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta, she said to him: ‘In how many days did the Holy One blessed be He create His world?’' He said to her: ‘In six days, as it is written: “For in six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth”’ (Exodus 20:11). She said to him: ‘From that time until now, what has He been doing?’ He said to her: ‘He is sitting and matchmaking; the daughter of so-and-so to so-and-so, the wife3Referring to someone who has been widowed or divorced. of so-and-so to so-and-so, the property of so-and-so to so-and-so.' She said to him: ‘That is his vocation. I, too, can do so. I have several slaves and I have several maidservants and I can make matches between them in a single moment.’ He said to her: ‘If it appears simple in your eyes, before the Holy One blessed be He, it is as difficult as the parting of the Red Sea.’ Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta went on his way. What did she do? She took one thousand slaves and one thousand maidservants and stood them in several lines. She said: ‘So-and so-man shall marry so-and-so woman, and so-and-so woman shall marry so-and-so man.’ She made matches between them in one night. The next day, they came to her. This one, his head was wounded, this one, his eye was gouged, this one, his leg was broken. She asked them ‘What do you want?’ This one said: ‘I do not want that one.’ That one said: ‘I do not want this one.’ Immediately, she sent and brought Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta. She said to him: ‘There is no God like your God. Your Torah is True, [it is] fine and praiseworthy, You spoke well.’ He said to her: ‘Is that not what I said to you? If it appears simple in your eyes, before the Holy One blessed be He it is as difficult as the parting of the Red Sea.’ What does the Holy One blessed be He do for them? He matches them against their will, not to their liking,4They marry appropriate spouses even though they are not aware of that at the time of the wedding. as it is stated: “God settles the individuals in a home; He liberates prisoners in chains [bakosharot]” (Psalms 68:7). What is “bakosharot”? It is with weeping [bekhi] and with song [veshirot]. One who is willing, with song, and one who is unwilling, weeps. Rabbi Berekhya said: In this language, Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta answered her: ‘The Holy One blessed be He sits and crafts ladders, and humbles this one and raise that one, lowers this one and elevates that one.’ As it says: “But it is God who is the Judge; He humbles this one and raises that one” (Psalms 75:8). There are instances where one goes to his match and there are instances where one’s match comes to him. Isaac, his match came to him, as it is stated: “Isaac went out walking in the field…[Behold, he saw camels coming]” (Genesis 24:63). Jacob went to his match, as it is written: “Jacob departed from Beersheba.”
Ḥizkiya said: Our patriarch Jacob was sixty-three years old when he took the blessings, [and] spent another fourteen years [during which] he was hidden in the house of Ever.5See Megillah 17a. He spent another seven years that he worked for Rachel. The result is that he married a wife at the age of eighty-four years. Esau was at the age of forty years. We learned that the Holy One blessed be He delays for the righteous and moves forward for the wicked. Rabbi Hoshaya said: It is already written: “Jacob heeded his father and his mother” (Genesis 28:7), why does the verse state: “Jacob departed from Beersheba.” It is, rather, that he said [to himself]: [My] father, when he sought to depart outside the Land of Israel, from where did he seek permission? Was it not from Beersheba?6It is not clear what the midrash is referring to here. I, too, will go to Beersheba. If He gives me permission, I will depart, but if not, I will not depart. That is why it was necessary for the verse to say: “Jacob departed from Beersheba.”
“[Jacob] departed” – was he the only one who departed? Did several donkey drivers and several camel drivers not depart, and you say: “Jacob departed”? Rabbi [Ze’eira] Azarya said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon: When the righteous man is in the city, he is its aura, he is its glory. Once he emerged from there, its aura has vacated, its glory has vacated. Similarly, “she departed from the place where she had been…” (Ruth 1:7). “She departed” – was she the only one who departed from the place? Did several donkey drivers and several camel drivers not depart, and is says: “She departed”? Rabbi Azarya in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon, and Rabbi Ḥanin in the name of Rabbi Shmuel the son of Rabbi Isaac said: When the righteous person is in the city, he is its aura, he is its glory. Once he emerged from there, its aura has vacated, its glory has vacated. There it works out well, as there was no one there other than that righteous woman. But here, Isaac and Rebecca were there. Rabbi Azarya said in the name of Rabbi Simon: The merit of one righteous person is not comparable to the merit of two righteous people.
“From Beersheba” – Rabbi Yudan and Rav Huna, Rabbi Yudan said: From the source [be’er] of the oath [shevua]. He [Jacob] said: So that Avimelekh will not stand over me and say: ‘Take an oath to me just as your grandfather took an oath to me,’ and I will delay the joy of my descendants for seven generations.7Abraham's oath caused a delay of seven generations. See Bereshit Rabba 54:4. Rav Huna said: [He departed] from the source of the birthright. He [Jacob] said: ‘So that Esau will not stand over me, challenge the birthright, and say: This is how you deceived me and took my birthright.’ The result will be that I will lose that oath, as it is stated: “Take an oath to me this day” (Genesis 25:33). “From Beersheba” – Rabbi Berekhya said: From the source of the blessings. He [Jacob] said: ‘So that Esau would not stand over me and say to me: This is how you deceived me and took the blessings.’ The result will be that I will ruin all the toil that my mother toiled on my behalf.
“And went to Ḥaran [Ḥarana]” – the Rabbis said: On the same day. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: As people say: So-and-so went to Caesarea, and until now he has the provisions he set out with. Ḥarana – it is taught in the name of Rabbi Neḥemya: Any word that requires a lamed at its start, a heh is placed at its end: Sedoma, Se’ira, Mitzraima, Ḥarana.8Both the lamed and the heh mean “to.” The lamed which appears at the beginning of the word can be replaced with a heh at the end of the word. They raised an objection: But is it not written: “The wicked will return to the netherworld [lishola]”9There is both a lamed at the beginning and a heh at the end. (Psalms 9:18)? Rabbi Abba bar Zavda said: It is to the lowest compartment in the netherworld.10Both letters are used to emphasize how low it is.
“He encountered the place and spent the night there because the sun had set; he took from the stones of the place, which he placed beneath his head, and lay down in that place” (Genesis 28:11). “He encountered [vayifga] the place” – Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Ami: Why do they change the name of the Holy One blessed be He and call Him the Omnipresent [hamakom]? It is because He is the place [mekomo] of the world, and His world is not His place. From what is written: “Behold, there is a place [makom] with Me” (Exodus 33:21) – the Holy One blessed be He is the place of the world, and His world is not His place.11God is not contained in the world, he does not "live" there. He is the "place" of the world. The world exists because of Him. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: It is written: “An abode of the God of eternity” (Deuteronomy 33:27). We do not know whether the Holy One blessed be He is the abode of the world, or whether the world is His abode. From what is written: “You are an abode for us” (Psalms 90:1) – that is, the Holy One blessed be He is the abode of the world, but His world is not His abode. Rabbi Abba bar Yudan said: This is analogous to a warrior who was riding on a horse, and his garments were flowing to both sides. The horse is secondary to the rider, but the rider is not secondary to the horse, as it is stated: “You will ride on Your horses” (Habakkuk 3:8). Another matter, what is vayifga? He prayed. “In the place” – he prayed in the Temple. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: The early patriarchs instituted three prayers: Abraham instituted the morning prayer, as it is stated: “Abraham arose early in the morning to go to the place where he stood…” (Genesis 19:27), and standing is nothing other than prayer, as it is stated: “Pinḥas stood and prayed” (Psalms 106:30). Isaac instituted the afternoon prayer, as it is stated: “Isaac went out walking [lasuaḥ] in the field” (Genesis 24:63), and siḥa is nothing other than prayer, as it is stated: “I will pour out [eshpoḥ] my woe before Him” (Psalms 142:3). Jacob instituted the evening prayer, as it is stated: “He encountered [vayifga] the place,” and pegia is nothing other than prayer, as it is stated: “You, do not raise a cry [or a prayer] on their behalf, and do not plead with [tifga] Me” (Jeremiah 7:16). Likewise it says: “If they are prophets, and if the word of the Lord is with them, please, let them plead [yifge’u] with the Lord of hosts” (Jeremiah 27:18). Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: It is corresponding to the three times that the day changes. In the evening, a person must say: ‘May it be Your will, Lord my God, to take me out from darkness to light.’ In the morning, he must say: ‘I give thanks before You, Lord my God, that You have taken me from darkness to light.’ In the afternoon, a person must say: ‘May it be Your will, Lord my God, that just as you accorded me the privilege of seeing the sun in its rising, so You will accord me the privilege to see it in its setting.’ Another matter, “he encountered the place” – the Rabbis say: It is corresponding to the daily offerings.12The midrash is giving an alternative source for the three daily prayers. The morning prayer, corresponding to the daily morning offering; the afternoon prayer, corresponding to the daily afternoon offering; the evening prayer is not obligatory. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: Even the evening prayer is obligatory – corresponding to the limbs and fats that were consumed in the fire on the altar.13The limbs and fats were also consumed in the fire at night.
“He encountered the place” – he sought to pass, but the entire world became a barrier of sorts before him.14So he could not continue on his way. “Because the sun had set” – the Rabbis say: “Because the sun had set” – it teaches that the Holy One blessed be He caused the orb of the sun to set not at its proper time, in order to speak with Jacob privately. This is analogous to a king’s friend who would come to him on occasion. The king said: ‘Extinguish the lamps, extinguish the lanterns, as I wish to speak with my friend privately.’ So, the Holy One blessed be He caused the orb of the sun to set not at its proper time, in order to speak with Jacob privately. Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanin of Tzippori: He heard the voices of the ministering angels saying: ‘The sun has arrived, the sun has arrived.’15This was a reference to the fact that Jacob had come. When Joseph said: “Behold, the sun and the moon” (Genesis 37:9), Jacob said: ‘Who revealed to him that My name is “sun”?’ Those two hours that the Holy One blessed be He caused the orb of the sun to set when he left his father’s house, when did He restore them? It was when he returned to his father’s house. That is what is written: “The sun rose for him” (Genesis 32:32). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You are a model for your descendants; just as you, when you departed, I caused the sun to set, and upon your return, I restored the orb of the sun for you, so, your descendants, upon their departure: “The one who bore seven is miserable…[her sun set while still day]” (Jeremiah 15:9), and upon their return: “But the [sun of righteousness] will shine for those who fear My name…”’ (Malachi 3:20).
“He took from the stones of the place” (Genesis 28:11) – Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Neḥemya, and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yehuda said: He took twelve stones. So, the Holy One blessed be He decreed that he would produce twelve tribes. He [Jacob] said: ‘Abraham did not produce them, Isaac did not produce them, I, if these twelve stones join with one another, I know that I will produce twelve tribes.’ When the twelve stones joined together one to another, he knew that he would produce twelve tribes. Rabbi Neḥemya said: He took three stones. He said: ‘Abraham, the Holy One blessed be He designated His name upon him; Isaac, the Holy One blessed be He designated His name upon him; I, if these three stones join with one another, I know that He will designate His name upon me.’ When the three stones joined with one another, he knew that the Holy One blessed be He would designate His name upon him. The Rabbis said: The minimum number of “stones” is two. Abraham, waste emerged from him – Ishmael and all the sons of Ketura. Isaac, Esau and all his chieftains emerged [from him]. I, if these two stones join with one another, I will know that waste will not emerge from me. Rabbi Levi and Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Zimra: He made them in the shape of a roof gutter and placed it beneath his head because he feared the beasts. Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina: It is written: “For, behold, the Lord emerges from His place, and will descend and tread on the heights of the earth. [The mountains will melt under Him, and the valleys will burst like wax before the fire, like waters poured down a slope]” (Micah 1:3–4).16Even in a place where God only ‘passes through,’ valleys burst like wax. All the more so for one in a place where the Holy One blessed be He has revealed Himself.17The stones melt and are joined together in a place where God's presence is not transient. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Those stones that Jacob placed under his head became like a bed and a feather pillow under him. What blossoming did he blossom there? “The beams of our houses are cedars, [and our rafters are junipers]” (Song of Songs 1:17) – the righteous men and women that emerged from him. “And lay in that place” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: He lay here, but all fourteen years that he was hidden in the house of Ever, he did not lie. Rabbi Neḥemya said: He lay here, but all twenty years that he stayed in Laban’s house, he did not lie. What would he recite? Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: The fifteen songs of ascent in the book of Psalms.18Psalms 120–134. What is his source? “A song of ascents, by David. [If the Lord had not been with us,] Let Israel now say” (Psalms 124:1) – Israel the elder.19Jacob. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: He would say the entire book of Psalms. What is the source? “Yet You are holy, enthroned in the praises of Israel” (Psalms 22:4) – Israel the elder.
“He dreamed, and behold, a ladder was set on the earth, its top was reaching the heavens, and behold, the angels of God were ascending and descending on it” (Genesis 28:12). “He dreamed, and behold, a ladder” – Rabbi Abbahu said: The content of dreams has no effect.20The dream should not be taken literally (Yedei Moshe). There was a certain person who came before Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta. He said to him: ‘I saw in my dream that they were saying to me: Go and inherit your father’s business in Cappadocia.’ He said to him: ‘Has your father ever gone to Cappadocia?’ He said to him: ‘No.’ He said to him: ‘Go and count twenty beams in the roof of your house and you will find it.’ He said to him: ‘There are not twenty of them.’ He said to him: ‘If there are not twenty of them, count from their beginning to their end, and from their end to their beginning, and you will find it.’ He went, counted, and found it there. From where did Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta derive it? It is from Cappadocia [Kappodekiya].21Kappa is the letter kaf, whose numerical value is twenty; dokiya means beams in Greek. Bar Kappara taught: There is no dream that does not have an interpretation. “Behold, a ladder” – this is the ramp;22In the Temple the priests ascended to the altar on a ramp. “was set on the earth” – this is the altar; “you shall make for Me an altar of earth” (Exodus 20:21). “Its top was reaching the heavens” – these are the offerings whose fragrance reaches the heavens. “Behold, the angels of God” – these are the High Priests; “were ascending and descending on it” – as they ascend and descend on the ramp. “And, behold, the Lord was standing over him” (Genesis 28:13) – “I saw the Lord standing upon the altar” (Amos 9:1). The Rabbis interpret it regarding Sinai. “He dreamed, and behold, a ladder” – this is Sinai. “Was set [mutzav] on the earth” – “they stood [veyityatzvu] at the foot of the mountain” (Exodus 19:17). “Its top was reaching the heavens” – “the mountain was burning with fire to the heart of the heavens” (Deuteronomy 4:11). Another matter, “behold, a ladder” – this is Sinai. The letters of this equals the letters of that.23The numerical value of sulam (ladder) are samekh – 60 + lamed – 30 + mem – 40 = 130, equals the numerical value of Sinai, samekh – 60 + yod – 10 + nun – 50 + yod – 10 = 130.  “And behold, the angels of God,” after: “The chariots of God are myriad, thousands upon thousands of companies. [My Lord is among them, at Sinai]” (Psalms 68:18). We learned that prophets are called angels [malakhim], as it is written: “Haggai, the messenger [malakh] of the Lord, on a mission from the Lord, spoke to the people” (Haggai 1:13). “And behold, the angels of God” – this is Moses and Aaron. “Ascending” – “Moses ascended to God” (Exodus 19:3). “And descending” – this is Moses “Moses descended” (Exodus 19:14). “Behold, the Lord was standing over him” (Genesis 28:13) – “the Lord descended upon Mount Sinai to the top of the mountain” (Exodus 19:20). Rabbi Salmoni said in the name of Reish Lakish: He [God] showed him [Jacob] a three-legged Throne of Glory. Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: [God told Jacob] ‘You are the third leg.’ This is his opinion, as Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: “For the portion of the Lord is His people; Jacob, the allotment of His inheritance” (Deuteronomy 32:9) – just as a rope is not woven with fewer than three, so, the patriarchs are no fewer than three. Rabbi Berekhya said: He showed him the world and one-third of the world. “Ascending [olim]” – are no fewer than two; “and descending” – two. From where is it derived that an angel is one-third of the world? It is as it is stated: “His body was like beryl [tarshish], his face like the appearance of lightning, his eyes like torches of fire, his arms and his legs like burnished bronze” (Daniel 10:6).24The Sea of Tarshish is two thousand cubits and the area of the world is six thousand cubits, meaning that the body of each angel was one-third of the world. (Matnot Kehuna) Rabbi Ḥiyya and Rabbi Yanai, one said: “Ascending and descending” on the ladder, and one said: “Ascending and descending” regarding Jacob. The one who said: “Ascending and descending” on the ladder, it works out well. The one who said: “Ascending and descending” regarding Jacob, they were [both] exalting his honor and denigrating his honor. They were dancing and leaping before him, and denigrating him, as it is stated: “Israel, in whom I glory” (Isaiah 49:3); It is you, whose likeness is etched on High. “Ascending” on High and seeing his likeness,25They lauded him because of his cosmic role. descending below, and finding him asleep.26They denigrated him because he was a frail human who needed sleep. This is analogous to a king who was sitting in judgment. They ascend to the basilica and find him in judgment, and go out to the courtyard and find him asleep. Another matter, on High, anyone who speaks to his27One who speaks to the credit of Jacob and his descendants. credit, ascends; to his discredit, descends. Below, anyone who speaks to his credit, descends, to his discredit, ascends.28On earth, anyone who praises Israel is lowered, anyone who denigrates them, is elevated. Another matter, “ascending and descending on it” – those who accompanied him in the Land of Israel were ascending; “descending” – those who would accompany him outside the Land of Israel. Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: The ministering angels, because they revealed the secrets of the Holy One blessed be He,29They revealed to Lot that the city of Sodom was going to be destroyed. they were banished from their place for one hundred and thirty eight years. Rabbi Tanḥuma would derive it from the demeaning expression.30They said: “For we are destroying this place” (Genesis 19:13) and did not attribute the action to God. Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: It is because they were boastful and said: “For we are destroying this place” (Genesis 19:13). Where did they return? It was here. “Ascending and descending” – ascending and then descending.
Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi interpreted the verse regarding the exile. “Jacob departed [vayetze] from Beersheba” (Genesis 28:10) – just as it says: “Send them from My presence, and let them go [veyetze’u]” (Jeremiah 15:1). “And went to Ḥaran” (Genesis 28:10) – just as it says: “With which the Lord has tormented me on the day of His enflamed wrath [ḥaron apo]” (Lamentations 1:12).  “He encountered the place” (Genesis 28:11) – “until there is no more place” (Isaiah 5:8). “And stayed the night there because the sun had set” (Genesis 28:11) – “the one who bore seven is miserable…[her sun set while still day]” (Jeremiah 15:9). “He took from the stones from the place” (Genesis 28:11) – “The sacred stones are spilled at the head of every street” (Lamentations 4:1). “Which he placed beneath his head” (Genesis 28:11) – “[splendor] has come down from your heads” (Jeremiah 13:18). “And lay in that place” (Genesis 28:11) – “we will lie in our shame, and our humiliation will cover us” (Jeremiah 3:25).  “He dreamed, and behold, a ladder [sulam]” (Genesis 28:12) – this is Nebuchadnezzar’s dream. “Behold, a ladder” – this is Nebuchadnezzar’s idol; it is a symbol [semel], and it is a [sulam] – The letters of this are the letters of that.31Sulam – samekh, lamed, mem. Semel - samekh, mem, lamed. “Was set on the earth” (Genesis 28:12) – “he erected it in the valley of Dura” (Daniel 3:1). “Its top was reaching the heavens” – “its height was sixty cubits, and its width six cubits. He erected it in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylonia” (Daniel 3:1). “And behold, the angels of God” – this is Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya. “Were ascending and descending on it” – they were exalting his32Nebuchadnezzar’s. honor and denigrating his honor;33They said to him: ‘You are our king for taxes and land taxes, but as far as engaging in idol worship, you and a dog are equal’ (Bemidbar Rabba 15:14). dancing and leaping before him and denigrating: “Let it be known to you, king, that we will not worship your gods, and we will not prostrate ourselves to the golden image that you have erected” (Daniel 3:18). “Behold, the Lord was standing over him” (Genesis 28:13) – he said to Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya: “Servants of God Most High, emerge and come” (Daniel 3:26). Another matter, “and behold, the angels of God” (Genesis 28:12) – this is Daniel. “Were ascending and descending on it” (Genesis 28:12) – he ascended and removed what it had swallowed from its mouth. That is what is written: “I will reckon with Bel in Babylon, and I will remove what it swallowed from its mouth” (Jeremiah 51:44). Nebuchadnezzar had a serpent and it would swallow everything that was cast before it. Nebuchadnezzar said to Daniel: ‘How great is its power, in that it swallows everything that is cast before it.' Daniel said to him: 'Give me permission and I will exhaust it.' He gave permission. What did he do? He took straw, concealed nails in it, cast it before it, and the nails perforated its innards. That is what is written: “I will remove what it swallowed from its mouth.”
Another matter, “behold, a ladder” (Genesis 28:12) – this is Nebuchadnezzar’s dream: “Behold, a giant image was set on the earth…its radiance surpassing, stood before you” (Daniel 2:31). “Its top was reaching the heavens” (Genesis 28:12)  – “the image, which was great” (Daniel 2:31). “Behold, the angels of God” (Genesis 28:12) – two ascending and two descending; these are the angels of the four kingdoms, whose dominion ends with them. “Ascending and descending” (Genesis 28:12) – “descending and ascending” is not written, but rather, “ascending and descending.” They ascend; it will be an ascent for them, but each of them is lower than its predecessor. It is written: “That image, its head was of [fine] gold, [its breast and its arms of silver]…” (Daniel 2:32). Babylon was above them all, as it is written: “You are the head of gold” (Daniel 2:38). And it is written: “After you, will arise another kingdom, inferior to yours” (Daniel 2:39), and it is written: “And afterward a third kingdom, of bronze” (Daniel 2:39). And it is written at the end: “The toes of the feet, some of them iron, and some of them earthenware – part of the kingdom will be strong, and some of it will be brittle” (Daniel 2:42). “Behold, the Lord was standing over him” (Genesis 28:13) – it is written: “In the days of those kings, the God of the heavens will establish a kingdom that will be eternal…” (Daniel 2:44).

=== 69 | 69 ===
“And, behold, the Lord was standing over him, and said: I am the Lord, God of Abraham your father, and God of Isaac. The land upon which you lie, to you I will give it, and to your descendants” (Genesis 28:13). “And, behold, the Lord was standing over him, and said: I am the Lord…” – Rabbi Yosei bar Zimra began: “My flesh yearns for You, in a parched and thirsty land without water” (Psalms 63:2). Rabbi Elazar in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Zimra: “My soul thirsts for You…yearns [kama] for You” (Psalms 63:2) – like these truffles1This is referring to a fungus which grows mainly underground. that long for water. The Rabbis say: Just as my soul thirsts for You, so, too, my two hundred and forty-eight limbs thirst for You. Where? “In a parched and thirsty land without water.” “Indeed, in the Sanctuary I have seen You” (Psalms 63:3) – in sanctity I have seen You; “beholding Your power” (Psalms 63:3) – this is Your entourage; “and Your glory” (Psalms 63:3) – “and, behold, the Lord was standing over him.”
Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina began: “Iron sharpens iron” (Proverbs 27:17) – Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: [Just as] a knife is sharpened only on the side of its counterpart, so, a Torah scholar is sharpened only by his counterpart. “Iron sharpens iron, and a man in the presence of another” (Proverbs 27:17). “A man” – this is Jacob. When our patriarch Jacob stood, ”a man in the presence of another” – as the Divine Presence was associated with him; “and, behold, the Lord was standing over him.”
Rabbi Abahu said: This is analogous to the son of kings, who would sleep in his cradle and flies would alight on him. When his nursemaid came, she bent over him and suckled him and they flew away from upon him. So, initially, “behold, the angels of God were ascending and descending on it” (Genesis 28:12). When the Holy One blessed be He revealed Himself they fled from on it. Rabbi Ḥiyya Rabba and Rabbi Yanai, one said: “On it” – on the ladder; and one said: “On it” – on Jacob. The one who said: “On it,” on the ladder, it works out well. However, according to the one who said: “On it,” regarding Jacob, does He stand over him? Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The wicked stand over their gods – “Pharaoh was dreaming, and behold, he stood over the Nile” (Genesis 41:1).2The Egyptians worshipped the Nile. But the righteous, their God stands over them, as it is stated: “Behold, the Lord was standing over him, and said: I am the Lord, God of Abraham.”
Rabbi Ḥanina said in the name of Rabbi Pinḥas: It mentions the patriarchs eighteen times in the Torah, and corresponding to it, the Sages instituted the eighteen blessings in prayer. Were a person to say to you: ‘There are nineteen,’3Nineteen times that the patriarchs are mentioned in the Torah. say to him: “Behold, the Lord was standing over him […God of Abraham your father, and the God of Isaac]” is not included in the tally.4Because Jacob is not mentioned in the verse. Were a person to say to you: ‘There are seventeen,’ say to him: “And let my name and the name of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac, be called upon them”5Because although Jacob is not mentioned by name, he is the speaker of this verse and he says: “My name.” (Genesis 48:16) is one of them. “The land upon which you lie, to you I will give it, and to your descendants” – Rabbi Shimon said in the name of bar Kappara: He folded it like a notepad and placed it under his head, like a person who says: ‘Whatever is under your head is yours.’ Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Elazar: Provided that he will be buried there.
“Your descendants will be as the dust of the earth, and you shall spread out to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south. And all the families of the earth shall be blessed in you and your descendants” (Genesis 28:14). “Your descendants will be as the dust” – just as the dust is blessed only by means of water, so, your descendants will be blessed only by means of Torah, that is likened to water. Just as the dust of the earth outlasts all metal vessels and endures forever, so, your descendants will outlast the entire world and endure forever. Just as dust is trodden upon by all, so, your children will be trodden upon. That is what is written: “I will place it into the hand of your oppressors [mogayikh]” (Isaiah 51:23). What is mogayikh? It is those that cause your wounds to liquefy [memagin], torment you, and sap your strength. Nevertheless, it is for your benefit, as they purify and cleanse you from your iniquities, just as it says: “Soften [temogegena] it with showers, bless its vegetation” (Psalms 65:11). “Who said to your soul: Bow, and we will pass” (Isaiah 51:23) – what would they do to them?6The oppressors to the Jews. They would lie them down in the streets and pass wagons with plows over them. Rabbi Azarya said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: It is a fortuitous sign; just as this street outlasts the passersby and endures forever, so, your descendants outlast the nations of the world and they endure forever. “You shall spread out to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: It is you7Due to your merit, the sea split. who split the sea, just as is it stated: “The one who breaks through went up before them…[their king passed before them, and the Lord is at their head]” (Micah 2:13).8The reference is to the splitting of the Red Sea, as it is written: “Tremble, O earth, before the Lord, before the God of Jacob” (Psalms 114:7).  Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: He also showed them the divisions of Ezekiel.9The reference is to the more expansive borders of the Land of Israel as prophesied by Ezekiel. See Ezekiel 48:1–29. But did Ezekiel not articulate only from east to west? Isaiah came and articulated: “For you will spread out to the right and the left…” (Isaiah 54:3).10When facing east, “right and left” are north and south.
“And, behold, I am with you, and will keep you wherever you will go, and will bring you back to this land; for I will not leave you until I have done that which I spoke to you” (Genesis 28:15). “And, behold, I am with you, and will keep you wherever you will go” – the Rabbis say: He answered him regarding everything, but regarding sustenance,11See Jacob’s request, later: “And if God will be with me…and will give me bread to eat, and a garment to wear” (Genesis 28:20). he did not answer him. “If God will be with me” (Genesis 28:20) – He said to him: “Behold I am with you”; “and He will keep me on this way” (Genesis 28:20) – “and will keep you wherever you will go”; “and I return to my father’s house in peace” (Genesis 28:21) – “and will bring you back to this land.” But regarding sustenance, he did not answer him. Rabbi Isi said: He answered him regarding sustenance as well, as it is stated: “For I will not leave you [e’ezovkha],” just as it says: “I have never seen a righteous man forsaken [ne’ezav], [or his children seeking bread]” (Psalms 37:25).
“Jacob awoke from his sleep, and he said: Indeed, the Lord is in this place and I did not know” (Genesis 28:16). “Jacob awoke from his sleep [mishenato]” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: From his studies [mimishnato].12He did not sleep. “He said: Indeed, the Lord is in this place” – indeed, the Divine Presence is resting in this place, and I did not know. “He was frightened, and he said: How awesome is this place; this is nothing other than the house of God, and this is the gate of the heavens” (Genesis 28:17). “He was frightened, and he said: How awesome is this place” – Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Yosei ben Zimra: The ladder was standing in Beersheba, and its incline reached the Temple. What is the source? “Jacob departed from Beersheba…he dreamed and behold, a ladder…he was frightened, and he said: How awesome is this place.” Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: The ladder was standing at the Temple and its incline reached Beit El. What is the source? “He was frightened, and he said: How awesome is this place…He called the name of that place Beit El” (Genesis 28:17–19). “This is nothing other than the house of God, and this is the gate of the heavens” – Rav Aḥa said: This gate is destined to open for many righteous men like you. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: The supernal Temple is only eighteen mil13Mil is a measure of distance. higher than the earthly Temple. What is the source? “And this is [vezeh] the gate of the heavens” – the numerical value of vezeh.14Vav – 6 + zayin – 7 + heh – 5 = 18. Another matter, the Holy One blessed be He showed him the Temple destroyed and built. “He was frightened, and he said: How awesome is this place” – that is built, just as it says: “God, You are awesome from Your Temple” (Psalms 68:36). “This is nothing [ein zeh]” – that is destroyed, just as it says: “For this [al zeh] our heart suffers; for these our eyes are dim” (Lamentations 5:17). “Other [ki] than the house of God” – built and enhanced in the future, just as it says: “For [ki] He has strengthened the bolts of your gates” (Psalms 147:13).
“Jacob awoke early in the morning, and he took the stone that he had placed beneath his head, and established it as a monument, and poured oil on the top of it” (Genesis 28:18). “Jacob awoke early in the morning, and he took the stone…and poured oil on the top of it” – He provided to him, from the heavens, enough to fill a jug to its mouth. “He called the name of that place Beit El; however, Luz was the name of the city initially” (Genesis 28:19). “However, Luz” – this is Luz, in which they dye sky blue wool. This is Luz that Sennacherib attacked but did not transfer its population; [that] Nebuchadnezzar [attacked], but he did not destroy it. This is Luz, over which the angel of death never had dominion. What would the elderly among them do? When they would become very old, they would take them outside the walls and they would die. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Why is it called Luz? Anyone who would enter it would proliferate mitzvot and good deeds like an almond tree [luz]. The Rabbis say: Just as a luz has no opening,15The shell has no clear place from which to crack it. so, too, no man could ascertain the location of the city entrance. Rabbi Simon said: Luz was located at the entrance of a city. Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Pinḥas bar Ḥama: Luz was located at the entrance of a cave. There was a hollow almond tree and they would enter the cave through the almond tree and through the cave to the city. That is what is written: “The sentries saw a man emerging from the city, and they said to him: Show us now the way into the city, and we will act benevolently with you. He showed them the way into the city, and they smote the city by the sword, but the man and his entire family they released” (Judges 1:24–25). Rabbi Yanai and Rabbi Yishmael employed this as a conclusion:16Used this as a conclusion to what they said, ending with a statement praising the host. If this one, who did not go with his hands or with his feet, but because he showed them with his finger, was saved from suffering, Israel, who perform acts of kindness with their great ones17And their lesser ones. with their hands and with their feet, all the more so.

=== 70 | 70 ===
“Jacob took a vow, saying: If God will be with me, and He will keep me on this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and a garment to wear” (Genesis 28:20). “Jacob took a vow, saying: If God will be with me…and will give me bread to eat.” It is written: “Those uttered by my lips and spoken by my mouth when I was in distress” (Psalms 66:14) – Rabbi Yitzḥak HaBavli said: “And spoken by my mouth when I was in distress” – as he vowed to perform a mitzva in his time of distress. What is “saying”? It is: Saying to the generations, so they would take vows in their time of distress. Jacob began with a vow first; therefore, anyone who takes a vow will ascribe the vow only to him. Rabbi Abbahu said: It is written: “Who took an oath to the Lord and took a vow to the Champion of Jacob” (Psalms 132:2) – to the Champion of Abraham or to the Champion of Isaac is not written here, but rather, “took a vow to the Champion of Jacob” – he ascribed the vow to the one who began with it first.
Rav Huna said in the name of Rav Idi: It is written: “The people rejoiced in their donation, because they donated to the Lord wholeheartedly, and King David too rejoiced with great joy” (I Chronicles 29:9) – because they were engaged in the mitzva of donation and they were successful, that is why they rejoiced. Therefore, what does it say? “David blessed the Lord before the eyes of the entire congregation [and David said: Blessed is the Lord, God of Israel our father]…” (I Chronicles 29:10). It does not say here: “God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel,” but rather, “God of Israel our father” – he ascribed the vow to the one who began with it first. Rabbi Yehuda said: This place is also not lacking.1There is no need to go to Chronicles for proof, as there is proof elsewhere in the Bible. “Israel took a vow [vayidru]2Plural.” is not written here, but rather, “Israel took a vow [vayidar]3Singular.” (Numbers 21:2) – Israel the elder.
There are four who took vows; two took vows and lost, and two took vows and profited. Jacob took a vow4Genesis 28:20–22. and lost.5Rachel died because Jacob was tardy in fulfilling his vow (see Shabbat 32b). Yiftaḥ took a vow and lost.6He took a vow that he would offer up to the Lord what would emerge first from his house, and it was his daughter. (See Judges 11:30–34). Hannah took a vow and profited.7She took a vow that she would give a son born to her to God (I Samuel 1:11). Samuel the prophet was born to her.  Israel took a vow and profited, as it is stated: “Israel took a vow…” (Numbers 21:2).8They overcame the Canaanites.
Rabbi Abbahu and Rabbi Yoḥanan, one said: The portion is out of order. The other said: It was stated in order. The one who said: The portion is out of order, as the Holy One blessed be He had already promised him, as it is stated: “Behold, I am with you” (Genesis 28:15), and he says: “If God will be with me”? The one who says: It was stated in order, how do I understand: “If God will be with me”? It is, rather, that this is what Jacob said: ‘If the conditions that He said, to be with me and to keep me, will be fulfilled, I will fulfill my vow.’ “And I return to my father’s house in peace, the Lord will be my God” (Genesis 28:21). Rabbi Abbahu and the Rabbis, Rabbi Abbahu said: “If God will be with me, and He will keep me on this way [derekh] that I go” (Genesis 28:20) – from evil speech, just as it says: “They drew [vayadrekhu] their tongues, their bows of falsehood” (Jeremiah 9:2). “And will give me bread to eat” (Genesis 28:20) – from illicit sexual relations, just as it says: “He did not know anything with him except the bread that he eats” (Genesis 39:6) – a euphemism.9A euphemism for Potiphar’s wife. “And I return to my father’s house in peace” (Genesis 28:21) – from bloodshed. “The Lord will be my God” (Genesis 28:21) – from idol worship. The Rabbis interpret all the matters from it: “If God will be with me, and He will keep me on this way [derekh] that I go” – from idol worship, from illicit sexual relations, from bloodshed, from evil speech. Derekh is nothing other than idol worship, just as it says: “Those who take an oath by the sin of Samaria, and say: As your god lives, Dan, and: As the way [derekh] of Beersheba lives” (Amos 8:14). Derekh is nothing other than illicit sexual relations, as it is stated: “So is the way [derekh] of an adulterous woman…” (Proverbs 30:20). Derekh is nothing other than bloodshed, as it is stated: “My son, do not walk on a way with them; prevent your foot from their pathway […and they are quick to spill blood]” (Proverbs 1:15–16). Derekh is nothing other than evil speech,10This is derived from the verse cited above: “They drew [vayadrekhu] their tongues, their bows of falsehood” (Jeremiah 9:2). as it is stated: “He heard the words of Laban’s sons, saying: Jacob has taken…” (Genesis 31:1).11Lavan’s sons slandered Jacob.
“And will give me bread to eat, and a garment to wear” (Genesis 28:20) – Akilas the proselyte entered to Rabbi Eliezer, he said to him: ‘Is this all the benefit of the proselyte, as it is stated: “And loves the stranger, to give him food and a garment”?’ (Deuteronomy 10:18). He said to him: ‘Is it insignificant in your eyes, the item regarding which this elder pondered, as it is stated: “And will give me bread to eat, and a garment to wear”? But this proselyte comes and He extends it to him on a reed.’12With no effort on his part. He entered to Rabbi Yehoshua. [Variant reading: Akilas the proselyte came and asked Rabbi Eliezer, he said to him: ‘The fondness that the Holy One blessed be He was fond of the proselyte, as it is stated: “And loves the stranger, to give him food and a garment.” How many peacocks do I have, how many pheasants do I have? I pay no attention even to my servants.’ He reprimanded him, and he went to Rabbi Yehoshua. His students said to him: ‘The item regarding which this elder pondered, you extend it to him on a reed? He came before Rabbi Yehoshua]. He began placating him with words: “Bread” – this is Torah, as it is written: “Come, partake of my bread” (Proverbs 9:5). “Garment” – this is a cloak. If a person merits Torah, he merits a cloak.13The cloak of a Torah scholar. Moreover, they marry their daughters into the priesthood, and their descendants were High Priests and would offer up burnt offerings upon the altar. Another matter, “bread” – this is the showbread; “and a garment” – these are the priestly vestments. That was in the Temple, but in the outlying areas, “bread” – this is ḥalla, “and a garment” – these are the first shearing. They said: ‘Were it not for the forbearance that Rabbi Yehoshua demonstrated with Akilas the proselyte, he would have returned to his evil ways. He read in his regard: “One who is slow to anger is better than the mighty”’ (Proverbs 16:32).
“And I return to my father’s house in peace” – Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin in the name of Rabbi Levi: The Holy One blessed be He took the conversations of the patriarchs and rendered them the key to the redemption of the descendants. The Holy One blessed be He said to him [Jacob]: ‘You said: “[The Lord] will be [vehaya] my God,” as you live, all the goodness, blessings, and consolations that I give to your children, I give it to them only in this language,’ as it is stated: “It will be [vehaya] on that day that spring water will emerge from Jerusalem” (Zechariah 14:8). “It will be [vehaya] on that day that the Lord will continue, setting His hand a second time to acquire the remnant of His people” (Isaiah 11:11). “It will be [vehaya] on that day, that the mountains will drip nectar” (Joel 4:18). “It will be [vehaya] on that day that a great shofar will be sounded…” (Isaiah 27:13).
“This stone that I have established as a monument will be the House of God and everything that You will give me I will tithe to You” (Genesis 28:22). “This stone that I have established as a monument will be the House of God and everything that You will give me I will tithe to You.” One idolater asked Rabbi Meir, he said to him: ‘The first issue of your donkey, with what is it redeemed?’ He said to him: ‘With a lamb, as it is written: “The first issue of a donkey you shall redeem with a lamb [seh]”’ (Exodus 34:20). He said to him: ‘If he does not have a lamb?’ He said to him: ‘With a goat.’ He said to him: ‘From where do you derive this?’ He said to him: ‘It is as it is written: “You shall take it from the sheep or from the goats”’ (Exodus 12:5). He said to him: ‘That is for the paschal lamb.’ He said to him: ‘A goat is also called seh.’ [He said:] ‘From where do you derive this?’ He said to him: ‘“These are the animals that you may eat: An ox, a sheep [seh khevasim], and a goat [seh izim]”’ (Deuteronomy 14:4). He stood and kissed him on his head. Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: A certain Samaritan asked Rabbi Meir, he said to him: ‘Do you not say that Jacob is truthful, as the verse says “Give truth to Jacob”?’ (Micah 7:20). He said to him: ‘Yes.’ He said to him: ‘But did he not say: “Everything that You will give me I will tithe to You”?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ He said to him: ‘He separated the tribe of Levi as a tithe. Why did he not separate one from the other two tribes?’14There were twelve tribes. One tenth of twelve would be 1.2 tribes, but Jacob set aside only one tribe, which is a tenth of ten, and not a tenth of twelve. He said to him: ‘Were they twelve? Were they not fourteen? “Ephraim and Manasseh will be for me like Reuben and Simeon”’ (Genesis 48:5). He said to him: ‘All the more so – if you add water, add flour.’15If you add more tribes, you should increase the tithe. He said to him: ‘Do you not concede to me that there were four matriarchs? The firstborn is sacred, and sacred does not produce sacred.’16Deduct one tribe for the firstborn of each of the matriarchs; therefore, tithes need be taken only from ten. He said to him: ‘Happy are you, and happy is your nation, that you are found in its midst.’
“Jacob lifted his feet, and went to the land of the people of the east” (Genesis 29:1). “Jacob lifted his feet” – Rabbi Aḥa said: “A healing heart is the life of the flesh [besarim]” (Proverbs 14:30) – when one is the recipient of good tidings [shenitbaser besorot], his heart bears his feet. That is what is said: The stomach bears the feet. “He saw, and behold, a well in the field, and, behold, three flocks of sheep lying there alongside it, since from that well they watered the flocks and the great stone was on the mouth of the well” (Genesis 29:2). “All the flocks would gather there, they would roll the stone from the well’s mouth, and water the sheep, and return the stone onto the well’s mouth in its place” (Genesis 29:3). “He saw, and behold, a well in the field” – Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina interpreted it in six ways: “Behold, a well in the field” – this is the well;17The well which accompanied Israel in the desert when they left Egypt. “behold, three flocks of sheep” – Moses, Aaron, and Miriam; “since from that well they watered the flocks” – as from there, each and every one would draw water for his banner, for his tribe, and for his family; “and the great stone was on the mouth of the well” – it was the size of the contents of a small sieve;18It was called “great” because of the water that miraculously flowed from it. “All the flocks would gather there” – at the time of the encampments; “and return the stone onto the well’s mouth in its place” – during the journeys it would be restored to its original state. “Behold, a well in the field” – this is Zion; “behold, three flocks of sheep” – these are the three pilgrimage festivals; “since from that well they watered” – as from there they would draw the Divine Spirit; “and the great stone” – this is the Celebration of the Place of the Drawing of the Water.19See Sukkah 51a. Rabbi Hoshaya said: ‘Why would they call it the “Place of the Drawing”? It is because they would draw the Divine Spirit from there.’ “All the flocks would gather there” – coming from Levo Ḥamat20In the north. to the Ravine of Egypt;21In the south. “and they would roll the stone…” – as they would draw the Divine Spirit from there.  “And return the stone…” – it was replaced for the next pilgrimage festival. Another matter, “he saw, and behold, a well in the field” – this is Zion; “behold, three flocks of sheep” – these are the three courts, as we learned: Three courts were there; one on the Temple Mount, one at the entrance of the courtyard, and one in the Chamber of Hewn Stone. “Since from that well…” – as from there, they would hear the ruling; “and the great stone” – this is the High Court that was in the Chamber of Hewn Stone. “All the flocks would gather there” – these are the courts in the Land of Israel; “they would roll the stone…” – as they would hear the ruling from there; “and return the stone” – they would deliberate regarding the ruling until they would establish it properly. Another matter, “behold, three flocks of sheep,” “behold, a well,” – this is Zion; “behold, three flocks of sheep” – these are the first three kingdoms,22Babylon, Persia, and Greece, kingdoms that ruled over Israel when there was a Temple. “since from that well they watered the flocks” – as they became wealthy from the consecrations in the chambers; “and the great stone was on the mouth of the well” – this is the merit of the patriarchs. “All the flocks would gather there” – this is the Roman Empire, that conscripted troops from all the nations of the world; “they would roll the stone” – as they became wealthy from the consecrations in the chambers; “and return the stone onto the well’s mouth in its place” – in the future, the merit of the patriarchs will prevail. Another matter, “behold, a well in the field” – this is the Sanhedrin; “behold, three flocks of sheep” – these are the three rows of students who would sit before them; “since from that well they watered the flocks” – as from there, they would hear the halakha; “and the great stone was on the mouth of the well” – this is the most distinguished member of the Sanhedrin, who would analyze the halakha. “All the flocks would gather there” – these are the Torah scholars in the Land of Israel; “they would roll the stone” – as from there, they would hear the halakha; “and return the stone onto the well’s mouth” – they would deliberate regarding the halakha until they would establish it properly. Another matter, “He saw, and behold, a well in the field” – this is the synagogue; “behold, three flocks of sheep” – these are the three called to the Torah;23During morning prayers on Mondays and Thursdays and afternoon prayers on Shabbat, the Torah is read, and three people are called up to the Toah. “since from that well…” – as from there, they would hear the Torah; “and the great stone” – this is the evil inclination. “All the flocks would gather there” – this is the congregation; “they would roll the stone”– as from there, they would hear the Torah; “and return the stone…” – when they would exit, the evil inclination would return to its place.24Hearing the Torah keeps the evil inclination in check.
Rabbi Yoḥanan interpreted it regarding Sinai. “He saw, and behold, a well” – this is Sinai; “behold, three…there” – priests, Levites, and Israelites; “since from that well…” – as from there, they heard the Ten Commandments; “and the great stone” – this is the Divine Presence. “All the flocks would gather there” – Rabbi Shimon ben Yehuda of Kefar Akko said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel: Had Israel been lacking even one, they would not have received the Torah; “they would roll the stone”– as from there, they would hear the voice, and heard the Ten Commandments; “and return the stone…” – “you saw that from the heavens I spoke…” (Exodus 20:19).
“Jacob said to them: My brethren, from where are you? They said: We are from Ḥaran” (Genesis 29:4). “He said to them: Do you know Laban, son of Naḥor? They said: We know” (Genesis 29:5). “He said to them: Is he well? They said: He is well, and here is Rachel his daughter, coming with the sheep” (Genesis 29:6). “Jacob said to them: My brethren…” – Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina interpreted the verses regarding the exile. “Jacob said to them…we are from Ḥaran” – we are fleeing from the wrath [ḥaron af] of the Holy One blessed be He. “He said to them: Do you know Laban, son of Naḥor?” – do you know who is destined to cleanse your iniquities like snow? “He said to them: Is he well? They said: He is well” – by what merit? “Here is Rachel his daughter, coming with the sheep” – that is what is written: “So said the Lord: A voice is heard in Rama, wailing, bitter weeping, Rachel weeping for her children; she refuses to be consoled…So said the Lord: Restrain your voice from weeping…there is hope for your future” (Jeremiah 31:15–17).
“He said to them: Is he well [hashalom lo]?” – is there peace [hashalom] between you and him? “They said: He is well,” – but if it is prattle that you seek: “Here is Rachel his daughter, coming with the sheep.” That is what is said: Speech is found among women. “He said: Behold, the day is still great, it is not time for the livestock to be gathered; give the sheep to drink, and go and herd” (Genesis 29:7). “He said: Behold, [the day] is still…” – he said to them: ‘If you are hired watchmen, “the day is still great.” If you are herding your own, “it is not time for the livestock to be gathered.”’ “He was still speaking with them, and Rachel came with her father’s flock; for she was a shepherdess” (Genesis 29:9). “He was still speaking with them, and Rachel came” – come and see the difference between neighborhood and neighborhood. Elsewhere, they were seven,25Jethro had seven daughters. and the shepherds sought to confront them. That is what is written: “The shepherds came and drove them away” (Exodus 2:17). However, here, it was one, and no person touched her, because: “The angel of the Lord encamps around those who fear Him, and rescues them” (Psalms 34:8) – to those who are proximate to those who fear him.
“It was when Jacob saw Rachel, the daughter of Laban his mother’s brother, and the flock of Laban his mother’s brother, Jacob approached, rolled the stone from the mouth of the well, and watered the sheep of Laban his mother’s brother” (Genesis 29:10). “It was when Jacob saw…Jacob approached, rolled the stone” – like one who is removing a stopper from the mouth of a jug. “Jacob kissed Rachel, and raised his voice, and wept” (Genesis 29:11). “Jacob kissed Rachel” – every kiss is for promiscuity except for three: A kiss of greatness; a kiss of reunion; a kiss of parting. A kiss of greatness – “Samuel took the flask of oil, poured onto his head, and kissed him” (I Samuel 10:1). A kiss of reunion – “He went and he met him at the mountain of God and he kissed him” (Exodus 4:27). A kiss of parting – “Orpa kissed her mother-in-law, but Ruth clung to her” (Ruth 1:14). Rabbi Tanḥuma said: A kiss of kinship as well, as it is stated: “Jacob kissed Rachel,” who was his relative. “And raised his voice, and wept” – why did he weep? He said: ‘Eliezer, when he went to bring Rebecca, what is written in his regard? “The servant took ten camels from the camels of his master…” (Genesis 24:10), but I do not have even one nose-ring or one bracelet.’ Another matter, why did he weep? It is because he saw that she would not enter into the grave with him. That is what she [Rachel] said to her [Leah]: “That is why he will lie with you tonight” (Genesis 30:15) – he will lie with you, and he will not lie with me.26Lie, in the sense of burial. Another matter, why did he weep? It is because he saw people whispering to one another because he kissed her, [saying]: ‘What, has this one come to introduce a matter of lewdness in our midst?’ This is because from the time that the world was stricken in the generation of the Flood, the nations of the world stood and distanced themselves from lewdness. That is what is said: The people of the East are distanced from lewdness.
“Jacob told Rachel that he was her father’s brother, and that he was Rebecca’s son, and she ran and told her father” (Genesis 29:12). “Jacob told Rachel that he was [her father’s] brother, and that he was Rebecca’s son” – if being deceitful, “that he was her father’s brother”; if being righteous, “that he was Rebecca’s son.” “And she ran and told her father” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: A woman is always accustomed only to her mother’s house. He27One of the students. raised an objection: ‘But is it not written: “She ran and told her father”?’ He said to him: ‘It is because her mother had died. Who should she have told if not her father?’  “It was when Laban heard the news of Jacob his sister’s son, he ran to meet him, embraced him, kissed him, and brought him to his house. He related to Laban all these matters” (Genesis 29:13). “It was when Laban heard…” – he [Laban] said: ‘Eliezer was the most defective one of the household, as it is written: “The servant took ten camels” 28The verse states that he was only a servant. (Genesis 24:10); this one, who is the most beloved of the household, all the more so.29He will have riches with him.’ When he did not see even a knapsack, “he embraced him” – he said: ‘They are dinars and they are in his belt.’ When he found nothing, “he kissed him” – he said: ‘Perhaps they are gems and they are in his mouth.’ When he did not see anything, Jacob said to him: ‘What do you think, that I came bearing money? I came only bearing words’ – “He related to Laban.”
“Laban said to him: Indeed, you are my bone and my flesh, and he stayed with him a month’s time” (Genesis 29:14). “Laban said to him: Indeed, you are my bone and my flesh…” – he said to him: ‘I was thinking to render you a king over me, but now that you have nothing with you, “indeed, you are my bone and my flesh.” I will strip you bare like this bone.’ “He stayed with him a month’s time” – Rabbi Ami said: The Torah teaches you etiquette. For how long must a person tend to his relatives? It is up to a month. “Laban said to Jacob: Because you are my brother, shall you work for me for nothing? Tell me, what is your salary?” (Genesis 29:15). “Laban said to Jacob: Because…shall you work for me for nothing?” Is that possible?30Did Laban really plan on paying Jacob fairly for his work? It is, rather, if he performed a task for ten silver coins, he would give him five silver coins, and if his delivery was worth six silver pieces, he would give him three silver pieces.31That is what Laban wanted to give as payment for Jacob's work. He said to him: ‘What do you think, that I came because I want your money? I came only because of your two young women.’
“Laban had two daughters; the name of the elder was Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel” (Genesis 29:16). “Laban had two daughters” – like two beams that reach from one end of the world to the other: this one produced chieftains and that one produced chieftains; this one produced kings and that one produced kings; from this one, lion-killers arose32David was from the tribe of Judah, who was the son of Leah. See I Samuel 17:36. and from that one lion-killers arose;33Samson from the tribe of Dan, the son of Rachel's maidservant. See Judges 14:5–6. from this one prophets arose and from that one prophets arose; from this one judges arose and from that one judges arose; from this one conquerors of lands arose34Moses was from the tribe of Levi, son of Leah. Moses conquered the lands of Siḥon and Og. See Numbers 21:21–35. and from that one conquerors of lands arose;35Joshua was from the tribe of Ephraim, son of Joseph, son of Rachel. from this one distributers of lands arose36Moses. and from that one distributers of lands arose;37Joshua. the offering of this one’s son overrides Shabbat38King Solomon during the dedication of the Temple. See Etz Yosef on Bereshit Rabba 35:3. and the offering of that one’s son overrides Shabbat;39Elishama ben Amihud prince of the tribe of Ephraim. See Bemidbar Rabba 14:1. the war of this one’s son overrides Shabbat,40Joshua conquered Jericho on Shabbat. See Bemidbar Rabba 14:1. and the war of that one’s son overrides Shabbat;41David's war in Ke'ila. See Eiruvin 45a. two nights were given to this one, and two nights were given to that one: Pharaoh’s night42The plague of the firstborn. and Sennacherib’s night43When he laid siege to Jerusalem. See II Kings 19:35. for Leah; Gideon’s night44Gideon attacked the Midyanite camp at night. See Judges chapter 7. and Mordekhai’s night for Rachel – “on that night, the king’s sleep was disturbed” (Esther 6:1). “The name of the elder [hagedola] was Leah” – greater [gedola] in her gifts, eternal priesthood and eternal kingship, as it is written: “Judah will be inhabited forever” (Joel 4:20), and it is written: “This is My resting place forever” (Psalms 132:14). “And the name of the younger [haketana] was Rachel” – lesser [ketana] in her gifts; Joseph was temporary, Saul was temporary, Shilo was temporary: “He rejected the tent of Joseph and did not choose the tribe of Ephraim” (Psalms 78:67).
“Leah’s eyes were delicate and Rachel was of beautiful form and of beautiful appearance” (Genesis 29:17). “Leah’s eyes were delicate” – Rabbi Yoḥanan’s disseminator interpreted: Leah’s eyes were weak.45From birth. He said to him: ‘Your mother’s eyes were weak.’ What is delicate? They were delicate from weeping, as they46People would say. would say: ‘These were the stipulations: The elder to the elder and the younger to the younger.’47Leah was to be married to Esau and Rachel to Jacob. She would weep and say: ‘May it be His will that I will not fall to the lot of that wicked man.’ Rav Huna said: Prayer is powerful, as it nullified the decree. Moreover, she preceded her sister. “Rachel was of beautiful form” – the primary distinctive characteristic of Rachel was that she was fair – “Rachel was…”
“Jacob loved Rachel, and he said: I will work for you seven years for Rachel, your younger daughter” (Genesis 29:18).  “Jacob loved Rachel” – [Jacob said to Laban:] ‘Because I know that the residents of your place are deceitful, that is why I am clarifying my deal with you. “He said: I will work for you…for Rachel, your…daughter” – Rachel but not Leah. “Your daughter” – so you will not bring another from the marketplace whose name is Rachel. “Younger” – so you will not exchange their names for one another. Even if you place a wicked one in a carpenter’s vise, it will be of no avail to you.’ “Laban said: Better that I give her to you, than give her to another man; remain with me” (Genesis 29:19). “Jacob worked seven years for Rachel; they were in his eyes but a few days, in his love of her” (Genesis 29:20). “Laban said: Better that I give her to you…Jacob worked…for Rachel [they were in his eyes but a few [aḥadim] days]” – Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pazi said: Aḥadim is stated here and aḥadim is stated elsewhere: “Live with him a few [aḥadim] years” (Genesis 27:44). Just as here, it is seven years, so, too, elsewhere, it is seven years.
“Jacob said to Laban: Give me my wife, as my time is fulfilled, and I will consort with her” (Genesis 29:21). “Jacob said to Laban: Give me my wife” – Rabbi Aivu said: Even a dissolute person does not use that language, but Jacob said so: “Give me my wife…and I will consort with her”? Rather, this is what he said to him: ‘The Holy One blessed be He said to me that I would produce twelve tribes. Now, I am approximately eighty-four years old, and if I do not produce them now, when will I produce them?’ That is why it was necessary for the verse to say: “Jacob said to Laban: Give me my wife.”
And Laban gathered the residents of the place and made a feast (Genesis 29:22). When the night came he took his daughter Leah and brought her to Jacob, and he had relations with her (Genesis 29:23). And Laban gave his maidservant Zilpa to his daughter Leah as a maidservant (Genesis 29:24). “It was in the morning and, behold, she was Leah; he said to Laban: What is this that you did to me? Did I not work with you for Rachel, and why did you deceive me?” (Genesis 29:25). “Laban gathered all the people of the place, and made a feast” (Genesis 29:22). He gathered all the people of his place. He said to them: ‘You know that we were hard-pressed for water, but once this righteous man came here, the water was blessed.’ [They said to him:] ‘What can we do for you?’ He said to them: ‘If you wish, I will deceive him, and give him Leah, as he loves this Rachel greatly, and he will spend another seven years with you.’ They said to him: ‘Do as you please.’ He said to them: ‘Give me collateral that no one of you will disclose it.’ They gave him collateral and he obtained with it wine, oil, and meat. That is why he is called Laban the Aramean; because he deceived [sherima] the people of his place. All day they were praising him.48Jacob. When night fell, he said to them: ‘What is this?’ They told him ‘You performed an act of kindness with your merit.’ They were lauding before him, and saying: ‘It is fitting, it is fitting [ha laya ha laya] – she is Leah, she is Leah.’49They were hinting to the fact that the bride was Leah. At night, they brought the bride and covered the lamps. He said to them: ‘What is this?’ They said to him: ‘What, do you think that we are rams like you?’50We are modest, not like you, who kissed Rachel in public like an animal. All that night he called her Rachel and she answered him. “In the morning, and behold, she was Leah.” He said to her: ‘What, you are a deceiver, daughter of a deceiver, did I not call you Rachel at night and you answered me?’ She said to him: 'Is there a barber without disciples?51Who can cut his hair. In this context she means: I am your disciple since you answered to your brother's name. Did your father not call you Esau and you answered him?' “Laban said: So will not be done in our place, to give the younger before the elder” (Genesis 29:26). “Complete the week for this one, and we will give you that one too, for the work that you will work with me another seven additional years” (Genesis 29:27). “He told Laban: What is this that you did to me…?" (Genesis 29:25). “Laban said: So will not be done…complete the week for this one…” – Rabbi Yaakov bar Aḥa said: From here we learn that one does not mix joy with joy, but rather, “complete the week for this one…”
“He also consorted with Rachel; he also loved Rachel more than Leah. He worked with him another seven additional years” (Genesis 29:30). “He also consorted with Rachel; he also loved Rachel more than Leah…” – Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: The way of the world is that a worker performs labor faithfully with the employer for two or three hours, but ultimately, he becomes lazy in his labor. However, here, just as the first ones were complete, so, the latter ones were complete. Just as the first ones were performed faithfully, so, the latter ones were performed faithfully. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It is written: “Jacob fled to the field of Aram, and Israel worked for a wife…” (Hosea 12:13). He [Hosea] said to them: ‘Your redemption is modeled after your patriarch Jacob. Just as your patriarch Jacob, before he took a wife he was put to work, after he took a wife, he was put to work, you, too, before your redeemer is born, you were enslaved, after your redeemer is born, you are enslaved.’52Even after the redeemer is born the redemption will not be immediate.

=== 71 | 71 ===
“The Lord saw that Leah was unloved, and He opened her womb, and Rachel was barren” (Genesis 29:31). “The Lord saw that Leah was unloved…” “For the Lord hears the impoverished and does not despise His prisoners” (Psalms 69:34) – Rabbi Binyamin ben Levi said: The beginning of this verse does not correspond with its end, nor does its end correspond to its beginning. The verse should have said only: “For the Lord hears the impoverished and does not despise the prisoners” or: “For the Lord hears His impoverished and…His prisoners.” Rather: “For the Lord hears the impoverished” – this is Israel, as Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Every place that impoverished [dal], poor [ani], and indigent [evyon] is stated, the verse is speaking of Israel. “And does not despise His prisoners” – these are the barren women, who are prisoners in their homes, and forlorn. But when the Holy One blessed be He remembers them with children, they stand erect. Know that Leah was the unloved one of the household, but when the Holy One blessed be He remembered her, she stood erect. That is what is written: “The Lord saw that Leah was unloved.”
Another matter, “The Lord supports all those who fall” (Psalms 145:14) – these are the barren women, who fall inside their houses. “And He straightens all who are hunched” (Psalms 145:14) – when the Holy One blessed be He remembers them with children, they stand erect. Know that it is so, as Leah was the unloved one of the household, but when the Holy One blessed be He remembered her, she stood erect. That is what is written: “The Lord saw that Leah was unloved.” “That Leah was unloved [senua]” – she performed the action of the hated [hasenuim],1Sinners, who spend their time praying for repentance. as she would say that she would marry the enemy [lasoneh],”2Esau. . These were the stipulations: The elder to the elder, and the younger to the younger. She would weep and say: ‘May it be His will that I will not fall in the portion of that wicked man.’ Rav Huna said: Prayer is powerful, as it nullified the decree. Moreover, she preceded her sister. Everyone would mock her – seafarers would mock her, wayfarers would mock her, even those sitting in the pits behind the loom would mock her. They said: ‘This Leah, her inside is not like her outside; she appears like a righteous woman, but she is not a righteous woman. Were she a righteous woman, she would not have deceived her sister.’ Rabbi Ḥanin said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Rabbi Yitzḥak: When Jacob our patriarch saw the actions that Leah deceived her sister, he set his mind to divorce her. When the Holy One blessed be He remembered her with children, he said: ‘Am I divorcing the mother of these?’ Ultimately, he gave thanks for this matter. That is what is written: “Israel prostrated himself at the top of the bed [al rosh hamita]” (Genesis 47:31). Who is the rosh mitato3The mother of the majority of his children. of our patriarch Jacob? Is it not Leah? “And Rachel was barren [akara]” – Rachel was the primary of the household, just as it says: “Rachel was akara” – the primary [ikara] was Rachel. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Most of the participants in the feast4The reference is to the wedding feast of Boaz and Ruth. were primarily from Leah; that is why Rachel is rendered primary5“May the Lord grant that the woman who is coming into your house will be like Rachel and like Leah” (Ruth 4:11). – Rachel was barren [akara]” – Rachel was the primary of the household. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: Because all the matters are dependent on Rachel, that is why Israel is called by her name: “Rachel weeps for her children” (Jeremiah 31:15). Not only is it by her name, but also by her son’s name: “Perhaps the Lord, God of hosts, will be gracious to the remnant of Joseph” (Amos 5:15). And not only by her son’s name, but by the name of her grandson, as it is stated: “Is Ephraim a dear son to me?” (Jeremiah 31:20).
“Leah conceived and bore a son, and she called his name Reuben; she said: Because the Lord saw [raa] my affliction; for now my husband will love me” (Genesis 29:32). “Leah conceived and bore a son” – Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: Four qualities were stated regarding names: There are those whose names are fair and their actions are fair; some whose names are foul and their actions are foul; some whose names are foul and their actions are fair; and some whose names are foul and their actions are fair.  Their names are fair and their actions are foul – Esau. His name is Esau, but he did not perform [oseh].6He did not perform the will of God. Ishmael is his name, listen,7Ishmael means he will listen to God. but he did not listen. Their names are foul and their actions are fair – these are the members of the exile: “The children of Bakbuk,8This is an earthenware vessel. the children of Ḥakufa,9Ḥok kof – the law of the monkey. the children of Ḥarḥur”10Leḥarḥer means to incite. (Ezra 2:51), but they merited, ascended, and built the Temple. Their names are foul and their actions are foul – these are the spies: “Setur” (Numbers 13:13) – one who performs actions clandestinely [seturim]; “Gadi” (Numbers 13:11) – deserving of gallows [geradim] and lashes for rebelliousness [umeradin]. Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: Their names are fair and their actions are fair – these are the tribes. Reuben – see this son [re’u ven] among the sons. Simeon [Shimon] – listens [shome’a] to the voice of his Father in Heaven. Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: The names of the tribes are not inappropriate for them, but rather, they are appropriate for them.
“She conceived again, and bore a son, and said: Because the Lord heard that I am hated, He gave me this as well. She called his name Simeon” (Genesis 29:33). “She conceived again, and bore a son, and said: Because the Lord heard [shama] that I am hated, He gave me this as well. She called his name Simeon [Shimon]” – this one is destined to produce an enemy.11Zimri ben Salu (see Numbers 25:14). Who will heal his wound? It is Pinḥas, who is destined to be produced from Levi. “She conceived again, and bore a son, and said: Now, this time, my husband will accompany [yillaveh] me, as I have borne him three sons; therefore, he called his name Levi” (Genesis 29:34). “She conceived again, and bore a son…therefore, he called his name Levi” – Rabbi Yudan said: This Levi is destined to accompany the children to their Father in Heaven. “Therefore [al ken], he called his name” – everywhere that al ken is stated, it is a large population. “She conceived again, and bore a son, she said: This time I will thank the Lord. Therefore, she called his name Judah, and she ceased bearing” (Genesis 29:35). “She conceived again, and bore a son; she said: This time I will thank [odeh] the Lord. [Therefore, she called his name Judah [Yehuda]]” – Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Levi: This is analogous to a priest who descended to the threshing floor. One gave him a kor12A kor is 30 seim. The equivalent of about 250 liters. of tithe, but he showed him no gratitude. And one gave him a handful of non-sacred produce, and he showed him gratitude. He [the first man] said to him: ‘My lord priest, I gave you a kor, and that one gave you only a handful, and you show gratitude to him?’ He said to him: ‘You gave me from my portion, but that one gave me from his own; that is why I showed him gratitude.’ So, because the matriarchs believed that this one would have three, and that one would have three, when Leah bore a fourth son, she said: “This time I will thank the Lord.”
That is what is written: “Take from them one staff for each [mateh mateh] patrilineal house” (Numbers 17:17) – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: My children have stumbled [matu matu]; they stumbled with the calf, they stumbled with the spies. Rabbi Levi said: Two tribes ascended to greatness – the tribe of priesthood and the tribe of kingship. You find that everything that is written regarding this one is written regarding that one: Anointment for this one, anointment for that one; mateh for this one13Numbers 17:23. and mateh for that one;14Psalms 110:2. covenant of salt for this one,15Numbers 18:19. covenant of salt for that one;16II Chronicles 13:5. “this time”17Genesis 29:34. for this one and “this time”18Genesis 29:35. for that one; crown [nezer] for this one,19Leviticus 8:9. crown [nezer] for that one;20II Kings 11:12. approach for this one21Exodus 28:1. and approach for that one;22Jeremiah 30:21. pedigree for this one23Numbers 3:1–-4. and pedigree for that one;24Ruth 4:18–22. frontplate for this one25Leviticus 8:9. and frontplate for that one.26Psalms 132:18. Rabbi Levi said: “He will not withdraw His eyes [einav] from the righteous” (Job 36:7) – “His eyes” – his likeness [eino]27He has descendants who are in his likeness. See Maharsha Megillah 13b., like the person who says: ‘The sample of [einohi] fruit.’28Somebody who wants to sell fruit shows a sample. The sample shows the quality of the entire stock. “And kings upon the throne” (Job 36:7)29This is the end of the verse quoted above, but it is not part of the flow of this passage. – Leah adopted the wisdom of thanks [hodaya], and masters of thanks [hodaya] were produced from her. Judah – “Judah recognized them, and said: She is more righteous than I”30Hodaya can also mean to acknowledge. (Genesis 38:26); David said: “Give thanks [hodu] to the Lord, for He is good,” (Psalms 136:1); Daniel said: “I thank and praise [mehoda] You, God of my fathers” (Daniel 2:23). Rachel adopted the wisdom of silence, and masters of silence were produced from her. Benjamin: “chalcedony [yashefe]” (Exodus 28:20),31This stone on the breastpiece of the High Priest had the name of Benjamin inscribed on it. there is a mouth [yesh peh]; he knew of the sale of Joseph, but did not tell. Saul: “But the matter of the kingship…he did not tell him” (I Samuel 10:16). Esther: “Esther did not disclose her birthplace or her people” (Esther 2:20). “Therefore [al ken], she called his name” – everywhere that al ken is stated, it is a large population.  “And she ceased [vataamod] bearing” – who establishes [maamid] the woman’s standing in her house? It is her children.
“Rachel saw that she did not bear children for Jacob; Rachel envied her sister and she said to Jacob: Give me children, and if not, I am dead” (Genesis 30:1). “Rachel saw that she did not bear children…Rachel envied her sister” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: It is written: “Let your heart not envy sinners; rather, be in fear of the Lord all day” (Proverbs 23:17), and you say: “Rachel envied her sister”? Rather, it teaches that she was envious of her good deeds. She said: ‘Were it not that she was a righteous woman, she would not have borne children.’ “She said to Jacob: Give me children, and if not, I am dead” – Rabbi Ishmael said: Four are considered as though they were dead: A leper, a blind person, one who has no children, and one who became impoverished. A leper, as it is written: “Please, let her not be like a corpse” (Numbers 12:12).32Aaron said this to Moses, imploring him to pray on behalf of Miriam who was afflicted with leprosy. A blind person, as it is written: “He settled me in darkness, like those long dead” (Lamentations 3:6). One who has no children, as it is stated: “Give me children, and if not, [I am] dead.” And one who became impoverished, from where is it derived? It is from the verse: “[Go, return to Egypt,] as all the men who seek your life have died” (Exodus 4:19). Were they dead? Were they not Datan and Aviram?33Datan and Aviram died with the assembly of Koraḥ, a few years later. It is, rather, that they became impoverished.
“Jacob’s wrath was enflamed at Rachel; he said: Am I in place of God, who withheld from you fruit of the womb?” (Genesis 30:2). “She said: Here is my maidservant Bilha, consort with her and she shall bear upon my knees, and I shall be built through her” (Genesis 30:3). “Jacob’s wrath was enflamed at Rachel” – the Rabbis of the South said in the name of Rabbi Alexandri in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: “Should the wise answer with empty counsel” (Job 15:2) – this is Abraham: “Abram heeded Sarah’s voice” (Genesis 16:2).34Abraham did not conclude from Sarah's request that he should pray on her behalf, as she intended. Rather, he took her literally, and took Hagar for a wife (Etz Yosef). “And have the east wind35The east wind can refer to a strong wind. Anger is being compared to a wind. fill his belly” (Job 15:2) – this is Jacob: “Jacob’s wrath was enflamed at Rachel; he said…” The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Is that the way one answers the distressed? As you live, your sons are destined to stand before her son.’36Joseph. “Am I in place of God, who withheld from you fruit of the womb?” – He has withheld from you, He has not withheld from me. She said to him: ‘Did your father do thus to your mother? Did he not gird his loins opposite her?’37Did he not pray for her to bear a child? He said to her: ‘My father had no children, but I have children.’ She said to him: ‘But your grandfather did not have children, and he girded his loins opposite her.’ He said to her: ‘You can do just as she did for my grandfather.’ She said to him: ‘What did she do?’ He said to her: ‘She introduced her rival wife into her household.’ She said to him: ‘If that is the matter that is preventing it: “Here is my maidservant Bilha, consort with her”’ – just as that one was built through her rival wife, this one too was built through her rival wife. “Rachel said: God judged me, and also heard my voice, and gave me a son; therefore, she called his name Dan” (Genesis 30:6). “Rachel said: God judged me” – He judged me and convicted me; He judged me and exonerated me. He judged me and convicted me, as it is stated: “And Rachel was barren” (Genesis 29:31). He judged me and exonerated me – “He gave me a son.”  “Therefore [al ken], she called his name Dan” – everywhere that al ken is stated, it is a large population.
“And she conceived again, and Rachel’s maidservant Bilha gave birth to a second son to Jacob” (Genesis 30:7). “Rachel said: I engaged in a great struggle with my sister, and also prevailed; she called his name Naphtali” (Genesis 30:8). “Rachel said: I engaged in a great struggle [naftulei]” – I adorned myself, I persuaded, I exalted my sister over me. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: [Rachel said:] ‘I should have been a bride [ninafa] before my sister. Had I sent and said to him: Be aware that they are deceiving you, would he not have left? Instead, I said: If I am not worthy that the world will be built from me, let it be built from my sister.’ Another matter, naftulei – ‘Were all the maneuvers [pitulaya] not for me? Did Jacob not go to Laban only for me?’ Another matter, ‘is the juice [nofet] not mine? – The matters of Torah, in whose regard it is stated: “And the juice [nofet] of ripe fruit” (Psalms 19:11), will be stated in the portion of Naphtali.38The city of Tiberias.
“Zilpa, Leah’s maidservant, bore Jacob a son” (Genesis 30:10). “Zilpa, Leah’s maidservant, bore” – regarding all of them, “she conceived” is written, but here, “bore.” It is that she was a young woman, and her pregnancy was not conspicuous. “Leah said: Fortune has come; she called his name Gad” (Genesis 30:11). “Leah said: Fortune [gad] has come” – the fortune of the house has come; the fortune of the world has come; the one who is destined to come and cut down the foundation of the idol worshippers. Who is it? It is Elijah. From whom did Elijah descend? Rabbi Eliezer said: From Benjamin, as it is written: “Yaareshya, Eliya, and Zikhri were the sons of Yeroḥam…all these are the children of Benjamin” (I Chronicles 8:27, 40). Rabbi Nehorai said: He descended from Gad. That is what is written: “Elijah the Tishbite, of the residents of Gilad” (I Kings 17:1). Rabbi Pilipi bar Nehorai said:39The proper reading is: Rabbi Pilipi said to Rabbi Nehorai. What40The proper reading is: Mai – what, not man – who. did you see that led you to say so? He said to him: It is as it is written: “Their41The previous verse states: “Moses gave to the tribe of Gad, to the children of Gad, according to their families” (Joshua 13:24). border was Yazer, and all the cities of the Gilad” (Joshua 13:25). How does Rabbi Eliezer understand the verse of Rabbi Nehorai: “From the residents of Gilad”? It is from those who sat in the Chamber of Hewn Stone.42It was in the Temple – a memorial [gal ve’ed] for the nations of the world (Shir HaShirim Rabba 4:4). How does Rabbi Nehorai realize the verse of Rabbi Eliezer: “Yaareshya, Eliya”? These are to be expounded as midrash. When the Holy One blessed be He would cause His world to quake [leharish], he43Elijah [Eliya]. would mention the merit of the patriarchs. ”The sons of Yeroḥam” – the Holy One blessed be He would become filled with mercy upon His world. One time, our Rabbis disputed regarding the matter: These say: 'Descended from Gad, and these say: Descended from Benjamin. He came and stood before them. He said to them: ‘Our Rabbis, why are you disputing in my regard? I am from the children of the children of Rachel.’
"Zilpa the maidservant of Leah gave birth to a second son to Jacob" (30:12). “Leah said: In my happiness, as women will be happy for me; she called his name Asher” (Genesis 30:13). “Leah said: In my happiness [beoshri], as women will be happy for me” – saying: ‘Happy is the one who merited this.’ Rabbi Levi said: Asher never stayed the night in an inn.44Asher’s portion in the Land of Israel was able to provide his tribe with all their needs; they did not need to travel to earn a livelihood. He inherited peaks with castles, what Judah did not inherit in his lands.  That is what is written: “The sons of Asher: Yimna, Yishva, Yishvi, Beria, and Serah their sister…he was the father of Birzayit” (I Chronicles 7:30–31). Rabbi Levi and Rabbi Simon, Rabbi Levi said: It is because their daughters were beautiful and were married to priests who were anointed with the anointing oil, olive [zayit] oil. Rabbi Simon said: They were married to kings who were anointed with olive [zayit] oil.

=== 72 | 72 ===
“Reuben went during the days of wheat harvest, found mandrakes in the field, and brought them to Leah, his mother. Rachel said to Leah: Please give me from your son’s mandrakes” (Genesis 30:14). “Reuben went during the days of wheat harvest.” “Train the lad in accordance with his way; even when he grows old, he will not turn from it” (Proverbs 22:6). “May this land be given to your servants…” (Numbers 32:5). “The sated were hired for bread, but the hungry have ceased; while the barren has borne seven, the one with many children is miserable” (I Samuel 2:5). “The sated were hired [niskaru] for bread” – this is Leah, who was sated with sons and was rewarded [niskara]. “But the hungry have ceased [ḥadelu]” – this is Rachel, who was hungry for children but was stymied [ḥadela]. “While the barren [akara] has borne seven” – this is Leah, who was the primary one [ikara] in the household, and bore seven. “The one with many children is miserable” – this is Rachel, who was worthy to have the majority of the children emerge from her, and was miserable. Who did this? It is: “The Lord puts to death and brings to life” (I Samuel 2:6).
“Reuben went during the days of wheat harvest, found mandrakes” – Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: Mandrakes; Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Barley; Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: The hackberry tree. Both according to these and according to those, everyone agrees that he brought only from the ownerless. According to the one who said barley, during the days of the wheat harvest, barley is ownerless, as the barley harvest has already concluded. Know that he went at the time of the harvest, at the time of the ripening of all kinds of summer fruits, but brought only an item that was from the ownerless. This is to inform you that they would distance themselves from robbery of the land.1They would not pick fruit off of trees. If they would distance themselves in that manner from robbery of the land, all the more so, they distanced themselves from all types of robbery.  “And brought them to Leah, his mother” – to inform you to what extent his mother’s honor was important to him, as he did not taste them until he brought them to his mother.
She said to her: Is the taking of my husband insignificant, that you take my son’s mandrakes, as well? Rachel said: Therefore, he will lie with you tonight in exchange for your son’s mandrakes” (Genesis 30:15). “Rachel said to Leah: Please give me from your son’s mandrakes…is the taking of my husband insignificant” – will you take from my beard for my grandfather?2My grandfather’s beard is full and mine is sparse, will you take from mine for his? This is a metaphor; Leah was saying: Jacob loves you more than he loves me. Will you take my mandrakes, which will afford me some time with him, so that he will spend even more time with you? Rabbi Shimon taught: Because she demeaned the righteous one,3Rachel forfeited being with Jacob in return for mandrakes. that is why she will not enter the grave with him. That is what she said to her: “Therefore, he will lie with you tonight” – he will lie in death with you; he will not lie in death with me. Rabbi Elazar said: This one lost and that one lost, this one gained and that one gained. Leah lost mandrakes and gained two tribes and primacy.4She became the mother to the greatest number of Jacob’s sons. Rachel gained mandrakes and lost tribes and primacy. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: This one lost mandrakes and gained tribes and burial with him. Rachel gained mandrakes and lost tribes and burial with him.
“Jacob came from the field in the evening, and Leah went out to meet him and said: You will consort with me, for I have hired you with my son’s mandrakes. He lay with her that night” (Genesis 30:16). “God listened to Leah and she became pregnant and gave birth to Jacob, a fifth son” (Genesis 30:17). “Jacob came from the field in the evening” – there we learned: One who hires laborers and stipulates with them to rise early and to continue late, in a place where they are accustomed not to rise early or to continue late, he is not permitted to compel them. Rabbi Muna said: In a place where there is no custom, it is a stipulation of the High Court that going out will be at the expense of the employer,5The laborer is not required to go to work until sunrise. and coming in will be at the expense of the laborer.6The laborer is required to work until dark. Going out is at the expense of the employer, from where is it derived? “When the sun rises, they will gather” (Psalms 104:22). From then on: “A person goes out to his work” (Psalms 104:23). Coming in will be at the expense of the laborer, from where is it derived? “And to his labor until evening [adei erev]” (Psalms 104:23) – “ad erev” is not stated, but rather, “adei erev,” meaning until dark, just as it says: “until complete darkness [adei neshef]” (Job 7:4).7Erev can mean until sunset, and it can mean until it is dark. Neshef means when it is dark. A verbal analogy is being used to teach that the worker returns home when it is dark, and does not return home by sunset. Rabbi Ami said in the name of Reish Lakish: They imposed upon the employer that if it was the day before Shabbat, the coming in would be at his expense. To what extent? It is so each and every one would fill a barrel of water for himself and roast a fish for himself while it is still day, in deference to Shabbat, and to kindle a lamp, as it is stated: “Jacob came from the field in the evening.” That is what is written: “And to his labor until evening.”
“Leah went out to meet him” – it teaches that she did not allow him to wash his feet.8After coming in from labor in the field she did not allow him to go to his tent, which he shared with Rachel, to wash himself. “And said: You will consort with me” – Rabbi Abahu said: The Holy One blessed be He saw that her intention was exclusively for the sake of Heaven, to produce tribes. That is why it was necessary for the verse to say: “God heeded Leah” (Genesis 30:17). “And said: You will consort with me” – Rabbi Levi said: Come and see how pleasing the mediation of mandrakes was before the One who spoke and the world came into being, as, by means of the mandrakes, two great tribes in Israel were produced – Issachar and Zebulun. Issachar sits and engages in Torah study, Zebulun sets out to the seas and comes and provides for Issachar’s mouth, and the Torah proliferates in Israel – “the mandrakes emitted fragrance” (Song of Songs 7:14).9They emitted a pleasant fragrance before the Lord. “Leah said: God has given me my reward, because I gave my maidservant to my husband. She called his name Issachar” (Genesis 30:18). “Leah said: God has given me my reward [sekhari]…She called his name Issachar.” Issachar was the ninth of the tribes, but he brought his offering second to the king. That is what is written: “On the second day, Netanel ben Tzuar, prince of Issachar, presented his offering” (Numbers 7:18). Why was that? It is because he was a Torah personality. That is what is written: “From the children of Issachar, possessors of understanding of the times” (I Chronicles 12:33). What is “of the times”? Rabbi Tanḥuma said: Of the propitious time for everything. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: Of intercalations.10Intercalations of years and months  “Their leaders were two hundred, and all their brethren at their command” (I Chronicles 12:33) – Issachar would produce two hundred heads of the Sanhedrin, and all their brethren in accordance with them, and they all agreed to rule halakha in accordance with them, and he would answer them with halakha like a halakha transmitted to Moses at Sinai. From where did Issachar come to all this prominence? It was from Zebulun, who would engage in his commerce, and would feed Issachar, who was a Torah personality. That is what is written: “Zebulun will dwell at the shore of seas” (Genesis 49:13). When Moses came to bless the tribes, he had the blessing of Zebulun precede the blessing of Issachar: “Of Zebulun he said: Rejoice, Zebulun, in your departure, and, Issachar, in your tents” (Deuteronomy 33:18) – Rejoice, Zebulun, in your departure11Departure on business trips. from the fact that Issachar is in your tents. Some say: There is reward [yesh sakhar] in the tents of Zebulun.
“Leah became pregnant again and gave birth to a sixth son to Jacob” (Genesis 30:19). “Leah said: God has granted me a fine gift; now my husband will reside with me, because I bore him six sons. She called his name Zebulun” (Genesis 30:20). “Leah said: God has granted me a fine gift” – this field, as long as you fertilize it and hoe it, it produces produce. “Then she bore a daughter, and she called her name Dina” (Genesis 30:21). “Then she bore a daughter” – it is taught:12This is a baraita. How so? One whose wife was pregnant, and he says: ‘May it be God’s will that my wife will give birth to a male,’ it is a vain prayer. The school of Rabbi Yanai said: This baraita is when she is sitting on the travailing chair. Rabbi Yehuda ben Pazi said: Even for one sitting on the travailing chair, it can change. That is what is written: “House of Israel, can I not do to you like this potter? [The utterance of the Lord]. Behold, like the clay in the hand of the potter, so you are in My hand, house of Israel” (Jeremiah 18:6). Just as this potter, who formed the jug, breaks it and crafts another, I, too, can do so, even on the travailing chair.  He13Rabbi Yehuda ben Pazi. raised an objection: But is it not written: “Then she bore a daughter”?14Only at the birth it was a daughter, but not before. He said to him: Its primary creation was male, but due to Rachel’s prayer: “May the Lord add another son for me” (Genesis 30:24) – it became a female.15At an early stage in the pregnancy. Rabbi Ḥanina ben Pazi said: The matriarchs were prophets, and Rachel was one of the matriarchs. “May the Lord add other sons for me” is not written here, but rather, “another son.” She said: ‘He is destined to produce one more; if only it will be from me.’  Rabbi Ḥanina said: All the matriarchs gathered and said: ‘We have enough [dayenu]16This is expounded from the name Dina. The letters of Dina are: dalet, yod, nun, heh. The letter of dayenu are dalet, yod, nun, vav. males. Remember this one again.’

=== 73 | 73 ===
“God remembered Rachel, and God heeded her, and He opened her womb” (Genesis 30:22). “God remembered Rachel.” “Remember me, Lord, when You favor Your people; be mindful of me in Your salvation” (Psalms 106:4) – Rabbi Elazar said: Sarah, Rachel, and Hannah were remembered on Rosh Hashanah.1Rosh Hashanah is also known as the Day of Remembrance.
“God remembered Rachel.” “He remembered His kindness and His faithfulness to the house of Israel; all the ends of the earth beheld the salvation of our God” (Psalms 98:3). “He remembered His kindness” – this is Abraham, as it is stated: “Kindness to Abraham” (Micah 7:20). “And his faithfulness” – this is Jacob, as it is stated: “Give truth to Jacob” (Micah 7:20); “To the house of Israel” – Israel the elder. Who was the house of our patriarch Jacob? Was it not Rachel? Regarding all of them it is written: “The children of Leah, the firstborn of Jacob, Reuben” (Genesis 35:23); “the children of Zilpa, maidservant of Leah, Gad and Asher” (Genesis 35:26); “the children of Bilha, maidservant of Rachel, Dan and Naphtali” (Genesis 35:25). But regarding Rachel it is written: “The children of Rachel, Jacob’s wife” (Genesis 46:19). Another matter, “He remembered His kindness and His faithfulness to the house of Israel” – “God remembered Rachel, and God heeded her.”
“He redeemed me unharmed from the battle waged against me [mikerav li], for there were many with me” (Psalms 55:19) – this is Jacob. “Mikerav li” – so that the counsel of that wicked one [Laban] will not come near me [shelo tikrav li],2Will not affect me. so that he [Laban] will not say: ‘He [Jacob] will take with him this one, who bore children, and that one, who did not bear children, he will not take with him,’ as Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Rabbi Aivu: Rachel was remembered due to many prayers, as it is stated: “God remembered Rachel [et Raḥel],” “Rachel” – by her merit; “et Rachel” – by the merit of her sister.3Leah also prayed on her behalf. “God heeded her” – by the merit of Jacob; “and he opened” – by the merit of the matriarchs.4The reference is to Leah, Bilha, and Zilpa. See Bereshit Rabba 72:6. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Woe to the wicked, who transform the attribute of mercy into the attribute of justice. Everywhere that “the Lord” is stated – [it is] the attribute of mercy, as it is stated: “The Lord, the Lord, God merciful and gracious, slow to anger and abounding in kindness” (Exodus 34:6), and it is written: “The Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great on the earth…. The Lord regretted…. The Lord said: I will obliterate” (Genesis 6:5–7).5The decision to destroy the world with the Flood was made with the attribute of mercy, which was transformed by the wicked into the attribute of justice. Happy are the righteous, who transform the attribute of justice into the attribute of mercy. Everywhere that “God [Elohim]” is stated, it is the attribute of justice – “you shall not curse God” (Exodus 22:27); “the statement of the two of them shall come before God” (Exodus 22:8). “God heeded Leah”(Genesis 30:17); “God heard their groan” (Exodus 2:24); “God remembered Noah” (Genesis 8:1).
“God remembered Rachel.” What remembrance did he remember for her? It was her silence for her sister, when they were giving him [Jacob] Leah. She knew, and she was silent. “God remembered Rachel.” Thus it should be, as she introduced her rival wife into her house.6Since her desire for children was so great that she introduced a rival into her house, it could lead to God having mercy on her. Rav Huna and Rav Aḥa said in the name of Rabbi Simon: “Dan, Joseph, and Benjamin” (I Chronicles 2:2). By the merit of Dan, [Bilha’s son], Rachel was remembered; by the merit of Dan, Joseph and Benjamin were produced. “He opened her womb” – Rabbi Tanḥuma said in the name of Rabbi Beivai: There are three keys in the hand of the Holy One Blessed be He: The key of burial, the key of rains, and the key of the womb. The key of burial, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “Behold, I am opening your graves, and I will take you up from your graves” (Ezekiel 37:12). The key of rains, from where is it derived? “The Lord will open for you His good storehouse, the heavens, to provide the rain…” (Deuteronomy 28:12). The key to the womb, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “He opened her womb.” Some say, the key to sustenance, as well, as it is stated: “You open Your hand, [and satisfy the desire of every living thing]” (Psalms 145:16).
“She conceived, and bore a son, and said: God has removed my disgrace” (Genesis 30:23). “She conceived, and bore a son, and said: God has removed my disgrace” – Rabbi Levi bar Zechariah said: Until the woman bears a child, the sin is attributed to her, after she bears a child; it is attributed to her child. Who ate this item? It is your son. Who broke this item? It is only your son. “God has removed my disgrace” – in the incident of the concubine in Giva, “cursed is one who gives a wife to Benjamin” (Judges 21:18).7The story of the concubine of Giva is in Judges chapters 19–21. Judges 21:13–23 specifically relates to the oath, and the solution that enabled those who were left from Benjamin to remarry. “God has removed my disgrace” – “Yerovam did not gain strength again in the days of Aviya; and the Lord afflicted him, and he died” (II Chronicles 13:20). Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Do you think that it was Yerovam who was afflicted? It was no one other than Aviya who was afflicted.8He was punished for causing disgrace to the descendants of Rachel. Yerovam was from the tribe of Ephraim (the son of Joseph). Why was he afflicted? Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: It is because he mutilated the identifying features of Israel’s faces, as it is written: “The expression of their faces testifies against them” (Isaiah 3:9). Rabbi Levi said: Because he positioned guards over them for three days until their form decayed, as we learned: One may testify only about the countenance of the face with the nose, even if there are distinguishing marks on his body and his belongings…and one may testify only up to three days.9See Yevamot 120a. If a dead man cannot be identified, his wife cannot remarry. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It is because he humiliated them publicly, as it is stated: “Now you presume to withstand the kingdom of the Lord…and with you are the golden calves that Yerovam made for you for gods” (II Chronicles 13:8). Reish Lakish said: Because he denigrated Aḥiya the Shilonite, as it is stated: “Idle and wicked men gathered around him” (II Chronicles 13:7) – he called Aḥiya the Shilonite wicked. The Rabbis said: It is because idol worship came into his possession and he did not nullify it, as it is stated: “And captured cities from him: Beit El and its environs” (II Chronicles 13:19), and it is written: “He placed one [golden calf] in Beit El…” (I Kings 12:29). The matters can be derived a fortiori: If a king, because he mistreated a king like him, was afflicted, a commoner who mistreats a commoner, all the more so.
“She called his name Joseph, saying: May the Lord add another son for me” (Genesis 30:24). “She called his name Joseph, saying: May the Lord add another son for me” – another in terms of exile. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: The tribes of Judah and Benjamin were not exiled to the place that the ten tribes were exiled. The ten tribes were exiled beyond the Sambatyon River. The tribes of Judah and Benjamin are scattered in all the lands. “Another [aher] son” – other [aher] in terms of division; Rabbi Pinḥas said: From Rachel’s prayer, the tribe of Judah and Benjamin did not take a portion with the ten tribes.10Benjamin remained with Judah when the kingdom was divided. “Another” – that performed "other [aherim] actions,"11This is a reference to idol worship. like Yerovam and his cohorts.
“It was when Rachel bore Joseph, Jacob said to Laban: Release me, and I will go to my place and to my land” (Genesis 30:25). “It was when Rachel bore Joseph” – when Joseph was born, Esau’s adversary was born,12Joseph is Esau's adversary. See Bava Batra 123b. as it is stated: “Jacob said to Laban: Release me, and I will go to my place and to my land,” as Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: It is a tradition that Esau will fall only into the hand of the descendants of Rachel. That is what is written: “Will the young of the flock not drag them?”13"Them" in the verse refers to Edom. (Jeremiah 49:20) – why does it call them “the young of the flock”? It is because they were the youngest of the tribes.
“Laban said to him: If now I have found favor in your eyes, I have divined, and the Lord has blessed me on your account” (Genesis 30:27). “Laban said to him: If now I have found favor in your eyes, [I have divined]” – I attempted and examined,14“Divined” could not refer to divination, as that is abhorrent in the eyes of God and Jacob. The proper interpretation is that he examined the differences in his household between the pre-Jacob era and since Jacob arrived. “and the Lord has blessed me on your account.”  “He said: Stipulate your wages for me, and I will give them” (Genesis 30:28). “He said: Stipulate your wages for me” – calculate, quantify, and state <what your="" wages="" are="">. “He said to him: You know how I have served you, and how your livestock was with me” (Genesis 30:29). “For the little that you had before me has increased abundantly and the Lord has blessed you on my account and now, when will I, too, provide for my household?” (Genesis 30:30). “He said to him: You know…For the little [me’at] that you had…has increased abundantly” – Rabbi Yehuda said in the name of Rabbi Simon in the name of Rabbi Ḥizkiya: Me’at – seventy heads [of livestock]. Me’at is stated here and me’at is stated elsewhere: “[He went down to Egypt with] few in number [bimtei me’at]” (Deuteronomy 26:5). Just as there it is seventy people,15“All the people of the house of Jacob who came to Egypt were seventy” (Genesis 46:27). so, too, here, it is seventy heads. “The Lord has blessed you on my account” – everywhere the righteous go, blessing is sent. Isaac descended to Gerar, blessing came on his account, as it is stated: “Isaac planted in that land and found in [that] year…and God blessed him.” (Genesis 26:12). Jacob descended to Laban and blessing came on his account, as it is stated: “The Lord has blessed you on my account.” Joseph descended to Potiphar, blessing came on his account, as it is stated: “The Lord blessed the household of the Egyptian” (Genesis 39:5). “Now, when will I, too, provide for my household?” – Reuben requires a house, Simeon requires a house.
“My honesty will speak on my behalf on a future day, when you will review my wages before you: every one among the goats that is not speckled and spotted, or brown, among the sheep, was stolen by me” (Genesis 30:33). “My honesty will speak on my behalf on a future day” – Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: It is written: “Do not glory in a future day” (Proverbs 27:1). You said: “My honesty will speak on my behalf on a future day” – in the future, your daughter will go out and be violated, as it is stated: “Dina, Leah’s daughter, went out” (Genesis 34:1). “Laban said: Indeed, if only it will be in accordance with your statement” (Genesis 30:34).  “Laban said: Indeed, if only [hen lu] it will be in accordance with your statement” – Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Rabba said: Each and every matter that Laban would stipulate with Jacob, he would renege upon it ten times retroactively, as it is stated: “Hen lu.”16Hen means yes, lu indicates uncertainty, which constitutes the first step toward reneging on his agreement. The Rabbis say: One hundred times, as it is stated: “But your father has cheated me, and changed my wages ten times [monim]” (Genesis 31:7) – ten times ten, as a quorum [minyan] is no fewer than ten. “He established a distance of three days’ journey between himself and Jacob. Jacob herded the remaining flock of Laban” (Genesis 30:36). “He established a distance of three days…Jacob herded the remaining [notarot] flock of Laban” – Reish Lakish said: Notarot – among them of poor quality, among them barren, and among them ill. Nateret is written <just as="" it="" says:="" the="" front="" and="" the="" back="" teeth="" of="" the="" emperor="" fell="" [<i="">natur]>.17Ḥullin 59b.
“Jacob took for himself rods of fresh poplar, and almond, and plane; he peeled white streaks in them, exposing the white that was in the rods” (Genesis 30:37). “Jacob took for himself rods of fresh poplar [livne], and almond, and plane” – a white [lavan] rod of almond and plane.  This is what our patriarch Jacob would do: He would place the rods in the water troughs and an animal would come to drink. It would see the rods and recoil backward. The male would copulate with it and it would bear an offspring like that.18Like the rod. Rabbi Hoshaya said: The water was transformed into semen in their innards, and all that was lacking was only the form of the offspring. There was an incident involving an Ethiopian man who married an Ethiopian woman and fathered a white son from her. The father seized the child and came to the rabbi, he said to him: ‘Is he, perhaps, not my child?’ He said to him: ‘Did you have any portraits in your house?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ He said to him: ‘Black or white?’ He said to him: ‘White.’ He said to him: ‘It is from there that you had a white son.’  Rabbi Huna of Beit Ḥoron said: The ministering angels were carrying from Laban’s flock and coming and placing in the midst of Jacob’s flock. That is what is written: “He said: Please lift your eyes, and see, all the males that mount [haolim] the flock” (Genesis 31:12) – “olim on the flock” is not written here, but rather, “haolim” – they mounted involuntarily.19The angel did not merely show him that males were mounting the flock, but rather he was shown that the angels were ensuring that it happened. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: Torrential rain.20Torrential rain transported the males from Laban’s flock. The Rabbis say: Clouds of glory. “When the flocks were feeble, he would not place them; the feeble were for Laban and the strong for Jacob” (Genesis 30:42). “When the flocks were feeble, he would not place them [the rods]; the feeble were for Laban” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Those born earlier were Laban’s. Reish Lakish said: Those born later were Laban’s.
“The man became exceedingly prosperous, and he had many flocks, and maidservants and slaves, and camels and donkeys” (Genesis 30:43). “The man became…prosperous” – Rabbi Shimon bar Abba said: It teaches that a breach was opened for him that was a microcosm of the World to Come, just as it says: “The one who breaks through21This is a reference to the messianic king. ascended before them” (Micah 2:13). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Our patriarch Jacob had one million twenty-seven thousand two hundred flocks. Rabbi Levi said: Six hundred thousand dogs. The Rabbis said: One million two hundred thousand. They do not disagree. The one who said six hundred thousand, there was one dog for each and every flock. The one who said: One million two hundred thousand, there were two dogs for each and every flock.
“He heard the words of Laban’s sons, saying: Jacob has taken everything that is our father’s, and from that which is our father’s he has accumulated all this wealth” (Genesis 31:1). “He heard the words of Laban's sons” – Ḥizkiya said: Until our patriarch Jacob descended there, he [Laban] was not remembered to beget males. When Jacob descended there, he was remembered to beget males. That is what is written: “He heard the words of Laban's sons.”22If Laban had had sons before Jacob’s arrival, they would have herded the flocks, not Rachel. “All this wealth [hakavod]” – Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Kavod is nothing other than silver, just as it says: “Loot silver, loot gold; there is no limit to the amount, wealth [kavod] of all vessels of delight” (Nahum 2:10). “Jacob saw the countenance of Laban, and, behold, it was not toward him as in the past” (Genesis 31:2).  “Jacob saw the countenance of Laban” – Bar Sira said: A person’s heart affects his countenance for both good and bad. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Your father-in-law is not welcoming to you and you remain here? “Return to the land of your fathers…and I will be with you”’ (Genesis 31:3).

=== 74 | 74 ===
“The Lord said to Jacob: Return to the land of your fathers, and to your birthplace, and I will be with you” (Genesis 31:3). “The Lord said to Jacob: Return to the land of your fathers, and to your birthplace.” It is written: “I cried out to You, Lord, and said: You are my refuge, my portion in the land of the living” (Psalms 142:6) – but is “the land of the living” not Tyre and its environs; there is plenty there, there are low prices there, and you say: “My portion in the land of the living”?1Regarding Israel. It is, rather, the land whose dead come to life first in the messianic era. Reish Lakish in the name of bar Kappara cites it from here: “Who gives breath to the people upon it, and spirit to those who walk in it” (Isaiah 42:5). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You said: “My portion in the land of the living.” “Return to the land of your fathers” – your father is awaiting you; your mother is awaiting you, I, Myself am awaiting you.’ Rabbi Ami said in the name of Reish Lakish: Possessions outside of the Land of Israel, there is no blessing in them. But, ‘When you return to the land of your fathers, I will be with you.’ Elsewhere it says: “I have been with you wherever you have gone” (II Samuel 7:9). It is, rather, that David, because he led Israel, He would say to him: “I have been with you wherever you have gone.” But Jacob, because he led his family, he says to him: “Return to the land of your fathers…”
“Jacob sent and summoned Rachel and Leah to the field, to his flocks” (Genesis 31:4). “Jacob sent and summoned Rachel and Leah…” – Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel said: Regarding three matters, I prefer the peoples of the East:2There is a variant reading: The people of Media. They do not bite and eat, but rather, they cut and eat; they cut meat only on the table, they kiss only on the hand, and they take counsel only in an open area, similar to what is stated: “Jacob sent and summoned Rachel and Leah” – to an open place. The parable says: In a field in which there are mounds, do not say discreet matters.
“He said to them: I see your father's countenance, and it is not toward me as in the past, and the God of my father was with me” (Genesis 31:5). “And you know that I worked for your father with all of my strength” (Genesis 31:6). “But your father has cheated me, and changed my wages ten times; but God did not allow him to harm me” (Genesis 31:7). “He said to them: I see…But your father has cheated me” – Rabbi Ḥiyya Rabba said: Each and every matter that Laban would stipulate with Jacob, he would renege upon it ten times retroactively, as it is stated: “Hen lu”3Hen means yes, lu indicates uncertainty, which constitutes the first step toward reneging on his agreement. (Genesis 30:34). The Rabbis say: One hundred times, as it is stated: “But your father has cheated me, and changed my wages ten times [monim]” (Genesis 31:7); as a quorum [minyan] is no fewer than ten. “If he said this: The speckled will be your wages, then all the flocks bore speckled, and if he said that: The streaked will be your wages, all the flocks bore streaked” (Genesis 31:8). “God has diverted the livestock of your father, and given it to me” (Genesis 31:9). “If he said this [im ko yomar]: The speckled will be your wages, then all the flocks bore [speckled]” – Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: The Holy One blessed be He foresaw what Laban was destined to do to our patriarch Jacob, and He shaped a corresponding form.4A form that corresponds with Laban’s final position. Im ko yomar – amar5Past tense. The first does not say that after Laban said which animals would be Jacob's salary, then all the births would be of that type. is not written here, but rather, yomar.6Future tense, as the Holy One blessed be He foresaw what Laban was going to do in the future, and before Laban said to Jacob what the new salary would be, the animals born were in accordance with the new salary. Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Aivu said: “For I have seen everything that Laban did to you” is not written here, but rather, “everything that Laban is doing to you” (Genesis 31:12). “The angel of God said to me in the dream: Jacob, and I said: Here I am” (Genesis 31:11). “The angel of God said to me in the dream…” – Rabbi Elazar ben Yaakov said: To him and to his generations. There is no generation that does not have one like Abraham. There is no generation that does not have one like Jacob. There is no generation that does not have one like Samuel. “He said: Please lift your eyes and see, all the males that mount the flock are streaked, speckled, and mottled, for I have seen all that Laban is doing to you” (Genesis 31:12). “He said: Please lift your eyes and see, all the males that mount the flock are…streaked, speckled…” – Rabbi Huna of Beit Ḥoron said: “Olim” is not written here, but rather, “haolim” – they mounted involuntarily.7The angel did not merely show him that males were mounting the flock, but rather he was shown that the angels were making sure that the right males were mounting the females. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: Torrential rain.8Transported the males from Laban’s flock. The Rabbis said: Clouds of glory. 9Transported the males from Laban’s flock. “God has diverted the livestock of your father, and given it to me” – like one who saves items from refuse.
“Rachel and Leah answered and said to him: Is there still a share or inheritance for us in our father's house?” (Genesis 31:14). “Rachel and Leah answered and said to him” – why did Rachel die first? Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Yosei, Rabbi Yudan said: Because she spoke before her sister. Rabbi Yosei said to him: ‘Have you ever seen a person call Reuben, and Simeon answer him? Did he not call Rachel, and Rachel answered him?’10Jacob called Rachel first, see Genesis 31:4. According to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda,11Rabbi Yudan. it works out well. According to the opinion of Rabbi Yosei, she died only from the curse of the elder [Jacob], as it is stated: “With whomever you find your gods, he shall not live” (Genesis 31:32); it was “like an error that emerges from the ruler” (Ecclesiastes 10:5). “Rachel stole [the household idols that were her father’s]” (Genesis 31:19); “Rachel died…” (Genesis 35:19). “Are we not considered foreigners by him, as he sold us, and he also consumed our silver?” (Genesis 31:15). “Are we not considered foreigners by him, as he sold us…[consumed our silver?]” – is that possible?12That he forcibly took their belongings. Rather, if there was a fine sheep, he would take it. If there was a tasty dish, he would take it.13He was more subtle in taking their belongings.
“Truly, all the wealth that God salvaged from our father, it is for us and for our children. And now, everything that God said to you, do” (Genesis 31:16). “Jacob arose, and placed his sons and his wives upon the camels” (Genesis 31:17). “Truly, all the wealth that God salvaged from our father…arose and placed his children” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: “The heart of the wise inclines to his right, and the heart of a fool to his left” (Ecclesiastes 10:2). “The heart of the wise inclines to his right” – this is Jacob, as it is stated: “Jacob arose, and placed his sons” and then, “and his wives.” “And the heart of a fool to his left” – this is Esau: “Esau took his wives” (Genesis 36:6), and then, “and his sons, and his daughters” (Genesis 36:6).  “He led all his livestock, and all his property that he attained, his acquisitions that he acquired, which he attained in Padan Aram, to come to Isaac his father, to the land of Canaan” (Genesis 31:18). “He led all his livestock, and all his property that he attained, his acquisitions that he acquired” – what he acquired from the acquisitions of Laban. “Laban had gone to shear his sheep, and Rachel stole the household idols that were her father’s” (Genesis 31:19). “Had gone to shear his sheep” – everywhere that shearing is stated, it makes an impression.14It leaves a negative impression, as was the case with Judah (Genesis 38:12), Naval (I Samuel 25:4), and Absalom (II Samuel 13:23). “Rachel stole the household idols that were her father’s” – but her intentions were only for the sake of Heaven. She said: ‘What, am I going to go on my way and leave this elder in his corruption?’ That is why it was necessary for the verse to say: “Rachel stole the household idols that were her father’s.”15She took them for his sake, to remove idolatry from him, not because she wanted them herself.
“It was told to Laban on the third day that Jacob had fled” (Genesis 31:22). “He took his brethren with him, and pursued him a distance of seven days; he reached him in the highlands of Gilad” (Genesis 31:23). “It was told to Laban on the third day” – Rabbi Abbahu said: What Jacob went in three days, Laban went in one day. “It was told to Laban on the third day” – the third day after the flight. Rabbi Ḥiyya Rabba said: What Jacob traversed in seven days, Laban traversed in one day. Whichever way you look at it, whether you agree or do not agree, it is already written: “He placed a distance of three days’ journey between himself and Jacob” (Genesis 30:36), and it is written: “It was told to Laban on the third day” – the third day after the flight, as it is stated: “He took his brethren with him, and pursued him a distance of seven days” – on that same day. That is, what Jacob traversed in seven days, Laban traversed in one day.
“God came to Laban the Aramean in a night dream, and He said to him: Beware, lest you speak to Jacob, good or bad” (Genesis 31:24). “God came to Laban the Aramean in a night dream.” What is the difference between the prophets of the idolaters and the prophets of Israel? Rabbi Ḥama ben Rabbi Ḥanina, and Rabbi Yisakhar of Kefar Mandi, Rabbi Ḥama said: The Holy One blessed be He appears to the prophets of the nations of the world only with truncated speech, just as it says: “God happened [vayikar] upon Bilam” (Numbers 23:4).16The midrash views the word vayikar as a truncated version of the word vayikra – He called, which is typically employed regarding the prophets of Israel. Rabbi Yisakhar of Kefar Mandi said: This expression vayikar is nothing other than an expression of impurity, just as it says: “If there will be among you a man who will not be pure due to an incident [mikre] at night” (Deuteronomy 23:11). But to the prophets of Israel [God speaks] with complete speech, with expressions of endearment, with expressions of sanctity, with expressions with which the ministering angels laud Him, as it is stated: “And this one called to that one and said: Holy…” (Isaiah 6:3). Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: The Holy One blessed be He appears to the prophets of the nations of the world only at a time that people typically take their leave from one another, as it is written: “In thoughts from visions of the night, when slumber falls on men” (Job 4:13), “a matter stealthily came to me…” (Job 4:12). Rabbi Elazar ben Rabbi Menaḥem said: “The Lord is far from the wicked” (Proverbs 15:29) – these are the prophets of the nations of the world; “and He hears the prayer of the righteous” (Proverbs 15:29) – these are the prophets of Israel. What distinguishes between the prophets of Israel and the prophets of the idol worshippers? Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa and Rabbi Simon, Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa said: [This is analogous] to a king and his friend who are together in a great hall. Whenever he wishes, he speaks with his friend.  Rabbi Simon says: It is analogous to a king who has a wife and a concubine. When he comes to his wife, he comes publicly, but when he comes to his concubine, he comes clandestinely. So, the Holy One blessed be He appears to the idolaters only at night. “God came to Bilam at night” (Numbers 22:20). “God came to Avimelekh in a dream at night” (Genesis 20:3). “God came to Laban the Aramean in a night dream.”  “He said to him: Beware” – even if you say it is for his benefit, he considers it for his detriment. “Beware of speaking with Jacob, good or bad.”
“And Laban caught up with Jacob, and Jacob pitched his tent on the mountain, and Laban with his brethren pitched on the mountain of Gilad” (Genesis 31:25). “And Laban said to Jacob: What did you do, that you misled me, and you carried away my daughters as though they were captives taken by sword?” (Genesis 31:26). “Why did you flee surreptitiously and deceive me and you did not tell me? I would have sent you with joy and with songs, with drum and with harp” (Genesis 31:27). “Why did you flee surreptitiously…and you did not tell me? I would have sent you…” – he said:17Laban thought to himself, that if he spoke in this manner maybe Jacob would reconsider. Perhaps he will reconsider. “You did not allow me to kiss my sons and my daughters; now you have acted foolishly” (Genesis 31:28). “You did not allow me to kiss my sons and my daughters” – he said to him: ‘Even now you intend to leave.’18And you are not reconsidering. The difficulty here is why does Laban say: “Now you have acted foolishly,” when he is speaking about the past?   “It is in my power to do you harm, but the God of your father said to me last night, saying: Beware of speaking with Jacob, good or bad” (Genesis 31:29). “It is in my power to do you harm; but the God of your father said to me last night, saying” – he [Laban] said: ‘It is not from Him.’19It is not because God told me not to harm you that I am not harming you; it is my own decision (Yefe Toar).  “Now you have gone because you longed for your father's house, why did you steal my gods?” (Genesis 31:30). “Now you have gone because you longed for your father's house, why did you steal my gods?” – you desired to go to your father’s house, why did you steal my gods? Rabbi Aivu said: When the tribes heard this, they said: ‘We are ashamed of you, our mother’s father. In the time of your old age,20You should be thinking logically and intelligently, not about your idols. you say: “Why did you steal my gods”?’
“And Jacob answered, and said to Laban: Because I was afraid, because I said that you might steal your daugters from me” (Genesis 31:31). “With whomever you find your gods, he shall not live; before our brethren, identify what is with me, and take them for yourself. And Jacob did not know that Rachel stole them” (Genesis 31:32). “With whomever you find your gods, he shall not live” – and so it was, “like an error that emerges from the ruler” (Ecclesiastes 10:5). “Rachel stole…” (Genesis 31:19); “Rachel died…” (Genesis 35:19).  “Laban came into Jacob’s tent, and into Leah’s tent, and into the tent of the two maidservants, but he did not find; he emerged from Leah's tent, and came into Rachel’s tent” (Genesis 31:33). “Laban came into Jacob’s tent, and into Rachel’s tent” – “into Jacob’s tent,” which was Rachel’s tent; “and into Leah’s tent, and into the tent of the two maidservants…he emerged from Leah’s tent, and came into Rachel's tent.” Why into Rachel’s tent twice? It is because he was familiar with her, that she was a toucher.21She had a tendency to touch items that did not belong to her and take them. “Rachel had taken the household idols, placed them in the cushion of the camel, and she sat upon them. Laban felt throughout the tent and did not find” (Genesis 31:34). “Rachel had taken the household idols, placed them in the cushion of the camel” – in the camel’s saddle. “She said to her father: Let my lord not be angry, as I cannot arise before you because the manner of women is upon me. He searched, but did not find the household idols” (Genesis 31:35). “And she sat upon them…she said to her father: Let my lord not be angry, as I cannot…” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: He did not find household idols, but he found jugs. The household idols were transformed into jugs so as not to embarrass Rachel.
“Jacob was angry and quarreled with Laban. Jacob responded and said to Laban: What is my transgression, what is my sin, that you have pursued after me?” (Genesis 31:36). “For you felt all my vessels, what have you found of all your household vessels? Place it here before my brethren and your brethren, and they will determine between the two of us” (Genesis 31:37). “Jacob was angry and quarreled with Laban” – Rabbi Azarya in the name of Rabbi Ḥagai and Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Maron, and taught in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina bar Yitzḥak: The combativeness of the patriarchs, and not the humility of the descendants. The combativeness of the patriarchs, from where is it derived? “Jacob was angry and quarreled with Laban. Jacob responded and said to Laban: What is my transgression, what is my sin that you have pursued?” Do you, perhaps, think that there would be blows or wounds there? There were, rather, words of appeasement, Jacob placated his father-in-law: “For you felt all my vessels, what have you found of all your household vessels?” Rabbi Simon said: In the way of the world, a son-in-law who resides with his father-in-law, is it possible for him not to benefit from even one vessel, even one knife? However, here, “you felt all my vessels” – you did not find even a needle, even a hook. And not the humility of the descendants, from David, as it is stated: “David fled from Nayot in Rama, and he came and said before Jonathan: What have I done? What is my iniquity and what is my sin before your father that he seeks my life?” (I Samuel 20:1). He mentions bloodshed in his words of appeasement, matters of murder; however, here, “that you have pursued me.”
“These twenty years, I have been with you; your ewes and your female goats have not miscarried, and the rams of your flock I have not eaten” (Genesis 31:38). “I did not bring a mauled animal to you, I bore its loss; from me you could demand it, whether stolen from me by day, or stolen from me by night” (Genesis 31:39). “These twenty years…I did not bring a mauled animal to you” – that was killed. “I bore its loss [aḥatena]; from me you could demand it” – I would betray [hoteh] the lion, as so the Holy One blessed be He decreed for the lion, that it would maul and consume from Laban’s flock each day. If you say that were another shepherd there he would have saved them, the verse states: “Just as the lion or the young lion will roar over its prey, although a multitude of shepherds will be called against it, it will not be disheartened from their voice and it will not respond to their commotion” (Isaiah 31:4). “Whether stolen from me by day or stolen from me by night” – they call me a thief during the day and a thief at night.22Because there were no sheep missing from your flock, everyone assumed that I stole from the flocks of others to replace those that were missing. What would he recite?23What did Jacob recite all those nights that he did not sleep? Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: He would recite the fifteen Songs of Ascent that are in the book of Psalms.24Psalms 120–134. That is what is written: “Had it not been for the Lord, who was with us, let Israel now say” (Psalms 124:1) – Israel the elder. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: He would recite the entire book of Psalms: “You are holy, enthroned in the praises of Israel” (Psalms 22:4) – Israel the elder. “These twenty years, I” – Rabbi Ḥiyya Rabba said: Each and every matter that Laban would stipulate with Jacob, he would renege upon it ten times retroactively, as it is stated: “Hen lu.”25See subsection 3 above. The Rabbis say: One hundred times, as it is stated: “And changed my wages ten times [monim]” (Genesis 31:7), as a quorum [minyan] is no fewer than ten.26See subsection 3 above.
“Had the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the Fear of Isaac, not been with me, then now you would have sent me away empty-handed. God saw my hardship and the toil of my hands, and proved it last night” (Genesis 31:42). “Had the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the Fear of Isaac not been [lulei]” – Zavdi ben Levi and Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, Zavdi ben Levi said: Everywhere that lulei is stated, it came by the merit of the patriarchs. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said to him: But is it not written: “For, had we not [lulei] tarried”? (Genesis 43:10).27Judah said it to Jacob while trying to convince him to send Benjamin with them to Egypt. He said to him: Their very ascent was by the merit of the patriarchs, as had it not been for the merit of the patriarchs, they would not have ascended from there28From Egypt. in peace. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: There are those who express the statement of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi to Zavdi ben Levi: Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Everywhere that lulei is stated, it came by the merit of the patriarchs, except for this one.29The one from Genesis 43:10 which was just mentioned. He said to him: This one, too, was by the merit of the patriarchs. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Due to the sanctity of the Name.30God saved them so they could sanctify His name. Rabbi Levi said: By the merit of faith and by the merit of Torah. By the merit of faith – “had I not [lulei] believed” (Psalms 27:13); by the merit of Torah – “had Your Torah not been my delight” (Psalms 119:92). “God saw my hardship and the toil of my hands” – Rabbi Yirmeya said: Labor is more beloved than the merit of the patriarchs, as the merit of the patriarchs salvaged money, while labor saved lives. The merit of the patriarchs salvaged money, as it is stated: “Had the God of my father…not been…[then now you would have sent me away empty-handed].” Labor saved lives – “God saw my hardship and the toil of my hands, and proved it last night.”31When God warned Laban not to harm Jacob.
“Laban responded and said to Jacob: The girls are my daughters, and the boys are my sons, and the flocks are my flocks, and everything that you see is mine, and to my daughters, what can I do to them today, or to their children whom they have borne?” (Genesis 31:43). “Laban responded and said to Jacob: The girls are my daughters, and the boys are my sons” – Rabbi Avin said: All of them were his daughters: “The girls are my daughters” – that is two; “And to my daughters, what can I do” – that is four.32Bilha and Zilpa too. The Rabbis cite it from here: “If you afflict my daughters” (Genesis 31:50) – that is two; “or if you take wives in addition to my daughters” (Genesis 31:50) – that is four. “And now let us, me and you, make a covenant, and let it be a witness between me and you” (Genesis 31:44).  “Jacob took a stone, and established it as a monument” (Genesis 31:45). “Jacob took a stone” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It was like that protruding stone of Tiberias. “Jacob said to his brethren: Gather stones, and they took stones and made a pile, and they ate there on the pile” (Genesis 31:46). “Jacob said to his brethren: Gather stones” – how many brothers did he have? He had one, if only he had buried him. It is, rather, his sons, who are called his brethren in the sacred tongue. Rav Huna said: They were mighty like him; righteous like him. Rabbi Yudan said: When a person dons his father’s garments, he is like him.
“Laban called it Yegar Sahaduta and Jacob called it Galed” (Genesis 31:47). “Laban called it Yegar Sahaduta” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Let this Persian language33This is a reference to Aramaic. not be insignificant in your eyes, as in the Torah, in the Prophets, and in the Writings, we find that the Holy One blessed be He pays tribute to it. In the Torah: “Laban called it Yegar Sahaduta”; in the Prophets: “So you shall say to them…” (Jeremiah 10:11);34The entire verse is written in Aramaic. in the Writings: “The Chaldeans spoke Aramaic to the king” (Daniel 2:4).  “And Laban said: This pile is a witness between me and you today, therefore he called it Galed” (Genesis 31:48). “And the Mitzpa, as he said: The Lord will observe between me and you, because we will be concealed one from the other” (Genesis 31:49). “And the Mitzpa, as he said: The Lord will observe [between me and you, because we will be concealed [ki nisater]]” – Rabbi Abbahu said: “Ki yisater” is not written here, but rather, “ki nisater.”35The singular – yisater – can mean that one hides from the other. The plural – nisater – infers that both of them maintain their distance from each other. Until now we have been seeing one another, from now on we will not be seeing one another. “If you afflict my daughters, or if you take wives in addition to my daughters, though no one else be about; see, God is witness between me and you” (Genesis 31:50). “If you afflict my daughters” – Rabbi Reuven said: They were all his daughters – “the girls are my daughters” (Genesis 31:43).36See subsection 13. “If you afflict my daughters” – you will not take [other] wives during their lifetime; “if you take wives in addition to my daughters” – after their deaths;37Even after their deaths you should not take another wife. “see, God is witness between me and you.”
“Laban said to Jacob: Here is this pile and here is the monument that I have established between me and you” (Genesis 31:51). “Laban said to Jacob […the monument that I have established [yariti]]” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Like one who throws a spear.38Yariti can also mean to cast a stone in a threatening manner.  “This pile is witness, and the monument is witness, that I will not pass this pile toward you, and that you will not pass this pile and this monument toward me, for harm” (Genesis 31:52). “This pile is witness…” – for harm, you will not pass, but you will pass for commerce. When David dispatched Yoav to Aram Naharayim and Aram Tzova, he encountered Edomites.39The midrash is stating that despite the covenant between Jacob and Laban, David was justified in attacking the Arameans, who are descendants of Laban, because they violated the convenant first. It brings as an example the case of Edom and Moav. He sought to attack them.40The way north went through their western border. They produced for him their epistle: “Enough for you circling this mountain…[You are entering the border of your brothers, the children of Esau…Do not provoke them]” (Deuteronomy 2:3–5). He encountered the Moavites, he sought to attack them. They produced for him their epistle: “The Lord said to me: Do not besiege Moav, and do not provoke war with them” (Deuteronomy 2:9). At that moment, Yoav sent to David, he said to him: ‘I encountered the Edomites. I sought to attack them, but they produced their epistle: “Enough for you.” I encountered the Moavites. I sought to attack them, but they produced their epistle: “Do not besiege Moav.”’ At that moment, David did not conduct himself with the requisite royal dignity. He removed his royal garment of purple wool and the crown from his head, wrapped himself in his cloak and went to the Sanhedrin. He said to them: ‘My masters: I came here only to teach. If you give me permission, I will teach. I sent Yoav to Aram Naharayim and to Aram Tzova. He encountered the Edomites, but they produced their epistle: “Enough for you.” But, did they not breach the fence first? “He41Eglon king of Moav. gathered to him the children of Amon [and Amalek]” (Judges 3:13).42The Amalekites, like the Edomites, are descendants of Esau. He encountered the Moavites. He sought to attack them, but they produced their epistle: “Do not besiege Moav.” But, did they not breach the fence first? “He sent messengers to Bilam…now, please come curse this people for me”’ (Numbers 22:5–6). That is what is written: “A letter [for David to teach]” (Psalms 60:1). How many letters did he write? Rabbi Aivu said: He wrote two; one regarding the Edomites and one regarding the Moavites. Rabbi Ḥanina said: He wrote one letter. That is what is written: “Yoav returned [and smote twelve thousand Edomites]” (Psalms 60:2); he returned and learned regarding the Edomites, from the Moavites. That is what is written: “For the chief musician on shushan edut” (Psalms 60:1) – to the assembly [le’eda] that speaks in the language of God.43This phrase refers to the Sanhedrin. The word shushan refers to the Sanhedrin. See Rashi on Psalms 60:1. “A letter [mikhtam] for David to teach” (Psalms 60:1) – poverty [makhut] and faultlessness [tamut];44Miktam is an acronym for makhut and tamut, and it is interpreted as referring to David, who behaved with humility before the Sanhedrin. “when he contended with Aram Naharayim…and smote [twelve thousand] Edomites in the Salt Valley” (Psalms 60:2). One verse says: “Eighteen thousand” (I Chronicles 18:12), and one verse says: “Twelve thousand.” It is, rather, that there were two wars, one with twelve thousand and one with eighteen thousand.
“The God of Abraham, and the god of Naḥor, the god of their father, will judge between us. Jacob took an oath by the Fear of his father Isaac” (Genesis 31:53). “The God of Abraham” – sacred, “and the god of Naḥor” – profane, “the god of their father” – its connotation is both sacred and profane. “Jacob slaughtered for a feast on the mountain, and summoned his brethren to eat bread. They ate bread and stayed the night on the mountain” (Genesis 31:54). “Laban awoke early in the morning, kissed his sons and his daughters, and blessed them. Laban went and returned to his place” (Genesis 32:1). “Jacob slaughtered for a feast on the mountain…Laban awoke early in the morning…and blessed them…” – Rabbi Aivu said: They were miserable and deprived against their will, and they gave gifts only with their words. That is what is written: …“Laban awoke early in the morning.”45He was unsentimental regarding his daughters and grandchildren, and could not wait to leave. “Laban went and returned to his place” – to his evil ways. It teaches that robbers entered his house and were vandalizing  in it all night.46This is expounded from the fact that the verse said that he went to his place and not to his house.
“Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God encountered him” (Genesis 32:2). “Jacob said when he saw them: This is the camp of God. He called the name of that place Maḥanayim” (Genesis 32:3). “Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God encountered him” – how many angels were dancing and prancing before our patriarch Jacob upon his entry into the Land? Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Aivu: Six hundred thousand angels were dancing before Jacob our patriarch upon his entry into the Land. That is what is written: “Jacob said when he saw them: This is the camp [maḥaneh] of God,” and the Divine Presence does not rest on fewer than six hundred thousand. The Rabbis say: One million two hundred thousand – “He called the name of that place Maḥanayim.” Maḥaneh is six hundred thousand. Maḥanayim 47Two camps. is one million two hundred thousand. Rabbi Yudan said: He took from these and took from those and sent messengers ahead of him. That is what is written: “Jacob sent messengers ahead of him” (Genesis 32:4).

=== 75 | 75 ===
“Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother, to the land of Se’ir, the field of Edom” (Genesis 32:4). “Jacob sent messengers before him” – Rabbi Pinḥas in the name of Rabbi Reuven began: “Arise, Lord, confront him and subdue him. Rescue me from the wicked with Your sword” (Psalms 17:13) – Rabbi Pinḥas said: Five times in the book of Psalms, David calls for the Holy One blessed be He to arise: “Arise, Lord; save me, my God” (Psalms 3:8); “Arise, Lord, in Your anger” (Psalms 7:7); “Arise, Lord God, raise Your hand. Do not forget” (Psalms 10:12); “Arise, Lord; let man not be arrogant” (Psalms 9:20); “Arise, Lord, confront him” (Psalms 17:13). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘David, my son, even if you call for Me to rise many times, I will not rise. When will I rise? It is when the poor are robbed and the indigent are groaning.’ That is what is written: “Because of the robbery of the poor and the groans of the indigent [now I will arise]” (Psalms 12:6). Rabbi Yona said: “Now I will arise” (Psalms 12:6) – as long as it is wallowing in the ashes, as it were….1The Holy One blessed be He is, as it were, also wallowing in the ashes. Rather, when [comes] the day in whose regard it is written: “Shake the dust from you, arise and sit, Jerusalem” (Isaiah 52:2), at that moment: “Be silent, all flesh, before the Lord” (Zechariah 2:17). Why? “For He is roused from His abode of sanctity” (Zechariah 2:17). Rabbi Aḥa said: Like this rooster that moves itself  from the ashes. “Confront him [kadma panav]” (Psalms 17:13) – give the wicked early, before he comes to greet You. 2Give him his reward in this world, and repay him for his evil before he comes before You to repent. “Subdue him [hakhri’ehu]” (Psalms 17:13) – tip the scales to condemn him [hakhriḥehu] and break him, just as it says: “They dropped to their knees [kare’u] and fell…” (Psalms 20:9). “Deliver me from the wicked with Your sword” (Psalms 17:13) – deliver my soul from that wicked one3Esau. who comes by the power of that sword, as it is stated: “By your sword you shall live” (Genesis 27:40). Alternatively, deliver my soul from that wicked one,4Rome, descendants of Esau. who is Your sword through whom You subjugate the world. Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Deliver my soul from that wicked one who is destined to fall by your sword. That is what is written: “For My sword is sated in Heaven; [behold, it will descend upon Edom]” (Isaiah 34:5) – the Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘He was going on his way, and then you are sending to him and saying: “So said your servant, Jacob”’ (Genesis 32:5).5Had you not sent to him, Esau would have continued on his way to Edom.
“Jacob sent messengers before him” – Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon began: “Like a muddied spring and a ruined fount, [so is a righteous man who falls before the wicked]” (Proverbs 25:26). Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: Just as it is impossible for a spring to be muddied and for a fount to be ruined,6Because the water is flowing, any mud will ultimately be swept away. so it is impossible for a righteous man to fall before the wicked. And like a muddied spring and a ruined fount,7They can be muddied and ruined for a limited time. so is a righteous man who causes himself to fall before the wicked. He was going on his way, and then you are sending to him and saying: “So said your servant, Jacob.”
“Jacob sent” – Rav Huna began: “Like one who grasps the ears of a dog, so is a passerby who is angered over a quarrel not his” (Proverbs 26:17). Shmuel bar Naḥman said: This is analogous to the head of the robbers, who was sleeping at a crossroads. One person passed and began waking him. He said to him: ‘Wake up, because evil is rampant here.’ He woke up and began beating him. He said: ‘Evil has awakened.’ He said to him: ‘I was asleep and you woke me.’ So, the Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘He was going on his way, and then you are sending to him and saying to him submissively: “So said your servant, Jacob.”’ Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon began: “What will you say when He will reckon with you, and you trained them as chieftains and heads over you?” (Jeremiah 13:21). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘He was going on his way, and then you are sending to him and saying: “So said your servant, Jacob.”’
“Messengers [malakhim]” – these were flesh and blood messengers. The Rabbis say: Actual angels. Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: Hagar was Sarah’s maidservant and five angels happened upon her,8See Genesis 16:7–12. this one who is the beloved of the household, all the more so. If several angels escorted Eliezer,9See Genesis 24:7 and Bereshit Rabba 59:10. who was a slave of the household, this one, who was the beloved of the household, all the more so. Rabbi Yosei said: Joseph was the youngest of the tribes and three angels escorted him; that is what is written: “A man found him”10Since the “man” is unidentified and appears by chance, and also plays a crucial role in the story, the midrash understands that the mysterious man was, in fact, an angel. (Genesis 37:15), “the man asked him” (Genesis 37:15), “the man said to him” (Genesis 37:17); this one, who was the father of them all, all the more so. “Before him” – before the one whose time to assume kingship was before his.11See Genesis 36:31. Rabbi Yehoshua said: He removed his royal purple garment and cast it before him. He said to him: ‘Two starlings cannot sleep on one board.’12Our kingdoms cannot overlap. “To Esau his brother” – although he is Esau, he is his brother. “To the land of Se’ir, the field of Edom” – he is ruddy, his cooked food is red, his land is red, his mighty are red, his garment is red, and a red one will exact retribution from him in red garments. He is ruddy – “the first emerged ruddy” (Genesis 25:25); “his cooked food is red” – “feed me please from that red, red dish” (Genesis 25:30); “his land is red” – “to the land of Se’ir, the field of Edom”13Red, adom, is similar to Edom. See Genesis 25:30.; “his mighty are red” – “mighty ones are colored scarlet…” (Nahum 2:4); and a red [adom] one will exact retribution from him – “my beloved is clear and ruddy [adom]” (Song of Songs 5:10); in red garments – “why is there red on your garments?” (Isaiah 63:2).
“He commanded them, saying: So you shall say to my lord, to Esau: So says your servant Jacob: I have resided with Laban, and tarried until now” (Genesis 32:5). “He commanded them, saying: So you shall say to my lord, to Esau” – Rabbeinu [Yehuda HaNasi] said to Rabbi Appas: ‘Write one letter in my name to our master, Emperor Antoninus.’ He stood and wrote: From Yehuda the Prince to our master, Emperor Antoninus. He took it, read it, and ripped it. He said to him: ‘Write: From your servant Yehuda to our master, Emperor Antoninus.’ He said to him: ‘My teacher, why are you demeaning your honor?’ He said to him: ‘In what way am I better than my ancestors? Did he not say this: “So says your servant Jacob”?’ “I have resided with Laban” – Laban, who is the master of the deceivers, I placed him up my sleeve;14I succeeded in overcoming his deceitfulness. this man,15You, Esau. all the more so. Why did I reside with Laban and “I tarried until now”? It is because the adversary of that man [Esau] had not yet been born. But now, the adversary of that man has been born, as Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: There is a tradition that Esau will fall only into the hands of Rachel’s children. That is what is written: “Will the young of the flock not drag them?” (Jeremiah 49:20). Why does he call them “the young of the flock”? It is because they are the youngest of the tribes.
“I have oxen and donkeys and flocks and slaves and maidservants, and I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find favor in your eyes” (Genesis 32:6). “I have oxen [shor] and donkeys [vahamor]…”16Shor and Ḥamor are singular nouns used to connote numerous oxen and donkeys. – Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Neḥemya, and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yehuda says: From one ox, many oxen emerged; from one donkey, many donkeys emerged. Rabbi Neḥemya said: In people’s vernacular they say ox, camel. The Rabbis say: “Shor” – that is the one anointed for war, as it is stated: “A firstborn bull [shoro] is his majesty” (Deuteronomy 33:17).17The verse continues: “With them he will gore the peoples together at the ends of the earth.” “Ḥamor” – this is the messianic king, as it is stated: “He is humble, and riding upon a donkey [ḥamor]…” (Zechariah 9:9). “Flocks [tzon]” – this is Israel, as it is stated: “You, My flock [tzoni], flock of My pasture” (Ezekiel 34:31). “And slaves and maidservants [ve’eved veshifḥa]” – “Behold, as the eyes of slaves to the hand of their master, [as the eyes of a maidservant to the hand of her mistress]” (Psalms 123:2); “Be gracious to us, Lord; be gracious to us, for we have had more than enough of scorn” (Psalms 123:3).
“The messengers returned to Jacob, saying: We came to your brother, to Esau; moreover he is coming to meet you, and four hundred men with him” (Genesis 32:7). “The messengers returned to Jacob, saying: We came to your brother, to Esau” – you treat him like a brother, but he treats you like Esau.18He wants to harm you, and does not relate to you as a brother. “Moreover he is coming to meet you, and four hundred men with him” – Reish Lakish said: “With him” – those who are with him are like him. Just as he is mighty and capable of standing against four hundred men, so, each and every one of them is capable of overcoming four hundred men. Rabbi Levi said: He went and took a license from Egypt to collect taxes. He said: ‘If I can overcome him, fine. If not, I will say to him: Pay taxes, and as a result, I will confront him and kill him.’
Another matter, “Jacob sent messengers” (Genesis 32:4) – this is what was said with divine spirit by Solomon king of Israel: “Blessings upon the head of the righteous, and villainy will cover the mouth of the wicked” (Proverbs 10:6). Corresponding to whom did Solomon state this verse? He said it corresponding only to Jacob and Esau. “Blessings upon the head of the righteous” – this is Jacob. “And villainy will cover the mouth of the wicked” – this is the wicked Esau. Happy are the righteous who are blessed on earth and are blessed in Heaven, and this is appropriate, as it is stated: “So that one who blesses himself in the land will bless himself by the God of faithfulness” (Isaiah 65:16) – to inform you that all the blessings that Isaac blessed Jacob, corresponding to those, the Holy One blessed be He blessed him from on High. Isaac said to him: “God will give you from the dew of the heavens…” (Genesis 27:28), and the Holy One blessed be He blessed him with dew and rain, as it is stated: “The remnant of Jacob will be in the midst of many peoples like dew [from the Lord, like raindrops]” (Micah 5:6). Isaac said to him: “and from the fats of the earth” (Genesis 27:28), and the Holy One blessed be He said to him: “He will give rain for your seeds with which you will sow the ground” (Isaiah 30:23). Isaac said: “Peoples will serve you” (Genesis 27:29), and the Holy One blessed be He said to him: “Kings will be your caregivers, and their princesses, your wet nurses” (Isaiah 49:23). Isaac said: “You will be a lord to your brethren” (Genesis 27:29), and the Holy One blessed be He said to him through Moses: “To place you uppermost over all the nations” (Deuteronomy 26:19). You learned that all the blessings that Isaac blessed Jacob from below, corresponding to that, the Holy One blessed be He blessed him from on High. His mother Rebecca, too, blessed him corresponding to them, as it is stated: “He who dwells in the shelter of the Most High” (Psalms 91:1). So she said to him: “For He will charge His angels on your behalf [to guard you in all your ways]” (Psalms 91:11). When she said that to him in that language, the Divine Spirit blessed Him: “When he calls upon Me, I will answer him…” (Psalms 91:15). Once the Holy One blessed be He blessed him, why did his father bless him again, as it is stated: “Isaac summoned Jacob, and he blessed him”? (Genesis 28:1). It is, rather, that Isaac saw through the divine spirit that his descendants were destined to be exiled among the nations. He said to him: ‘Come and I will bless you blessings of exile, so that the Holy One blessed be He will return to you and gather you from the midst of the exiles.’ What are the blessings? “In six troubles He will deliver you, and in seven, no harm will touch you. …From the scourge of the tongue you will be hidden, and you will not fear pillage when it comes. At pillage and hunger you will laugh, and from the beasts of the earth, do not fear” (Job 5:19, 21–22). That is why it is stated: “Blessings upon the head of the righteous.”
Another matter, “Jacob sent” (Genesis 32: 4) – “Lord, do not grant the desires of the wicked. Do not bring their scheme to fruition [zemamo al tafek]; may they depart, Selah” (Psalms 140:9). He said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, do not realize for wicked Esau the thoughts of his heart.’ What is “zemamo al tafek”? He said before him: ‘Master of the universe: Place a muzzle for wicked Esau so that his satisfaction will not be complete.’ What muzzle did the Holy One blessed be He make for wicked Esau? Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: ‘These are the residents of Barbary and the residents of Germany, whom the Edomites19This refers to Rome, which was being attacked by Germanic tribes. fear.’ Another matter, “do not grant the desires of the wicked” – he said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, just as it was Laban’s intent to harm me, but you did not allow him to do so, so, too, regarding the thoughts of my brother Esau who is thinking to kill me, thwart his evil.’ He was one of three people who thought [to do] evil, but they were unsuccessful – Esau, Yerovam, and Haman. Esau, as it is stated: “Esau said in his heart” (Genesis 27:41). Regarding Yerovam it is written: “Yerovam said in his heart” (I Kings 12:26). Regarding Haman it is written: “Haman said in his heart” (Esther 6:6). What is “Esau said in his heart”? He said: ‘Cain killed his brother, and the Omnipresent did nothing to him. Ultimately, he [Adam] begot additional sons, and they inherited the world with him. But I, I will kill Isaac my father first, and then I will kill Jacob my brother, and I will inherit the world alone,’ as it is stated: “Let the days of mourning for my father approach” (Genesis 27:41) – he said: ‘First, I will hasten the mourning for Father, and then: “I will kill my brother Jacob”’ (Genesis 27:41). But the Holy One blessed be He did not enable him to do so. That is why it is stated: “Do not grant the desires of the wicked.”
Another matter, “Jacob sent messengers” (Genesis 32:4) – come and see what is written before this matter: “Jacob said, when he saw them: [This is the camp of God]” (Genesis 32:3). How many were in a camp of God? Two thousand myriads of ministering angels, as it is stated: “The chariots of God are myriad, thousands upon thousands of companies. My Lord is among them, at Sinai, in holiness” (Psalms 68:18). “He called the name of that place Maḥanayim” (Genesis 32:3). Why were there two camps? It teaches that they gave Jacob four thousand myriads of ministering angels and they appeared to him like a king’s armies, some of whom were clad in iron, some of whom were on horseback, and some of whom were sitting in chariots. He [Esau] encountered those clad in iron. He said to them: ‘With whom are you affiliated?’ They said to him: ‘With Jacob.’ He encountered those on horseback. He said to them: ‘With whom are you affiliated?’ They said to him: ‘With Jacob.’ He encountered those in chariots. He said to them: ‘With whom are you affiliated?’ They said to him: ‘With Jacob,’ as it is stated: “He said: For whom do you intend this entire camp that I met?” (Genesis 33:8). Jacob, too, would mention to Esau the name of the Holy One blessed be He, to scare him and to frighten him, as it is stated: “As I have seen your face, as the sight of the face of angels [elohim]” (Genesis 33:10). To what is this matter analogous? It is to one who invited another to a meal, and he20The guest. ascertained that he sought to kill him. He [the guest] said: ‘The taste of this dish is like the taste of a dish that I tasted in the king’s palace.’ He said: ‘He knows the king?’ He was afraid and did not kill him. The same is true of Jacob. When he said to Esau: “As I have seen your face, as the sight of the face of angels [elohim]” wicked Esau said: ‘The Holy One blessed be He brought him to all this glory? I will no longer be able to overcome him.’
Another matter, “Jacob sent messengers” (Genesis 32:4) – why did he send messengers to him? Rather, this is what he said: ‘I will send him messengers; maybe he will repent.’ He said to them: ‘Say to him: Do not say Jacob remains as he was when he departed from his father’s house, as it is stated: “For with my staff I crossed…” (Genesis 32:11), “He commanded him, saying” (Genesis 32:5) – say to him: Do not say that when he departed from you he took anything from the household property. Rather, [tell him that] I acquired all these as my wages, through my effort,’ as it is stated: “And now I have become two camps” (Genesis 32:11). At the moment that Jacob called Esau “my lord,” the Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You abased yourself and called him “my lord” eight times. As you live, I will establish eight kings from his descendants before your descendants,’ as it is stated: “These are the kings who reigned [in the land of Edom, before the reign of a king for the children of Israel]” (Genesis 36:31).  He [Jacob] said to them [the messengers]: ‘Say to him: If you are prepared for peace, I am with you, and if for war, I am with you. I have warriors, courageous and strong, who say something before the Holy One blessed be He, and He performs their will on their behalf,’ as it is stated: “He performs the will of those who fear him” (Psalms 145:19). That is why David came to give praise and acclaim before the Holy One blessed be He, who helped him when he fled from Saul, as it is stated: “For behold, the wicked bend the bow” (Psalms 11:2). What is written thereafter? “If the foundations are destroyed, what can the righteous man do?” (Psalms 11:3). He said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, if You had distanced and forsook Jacob, who is the pillar and foundation of the world, as it is stated: “The righteous man is the foundation of the world” (Proverbs 10:25), “what can the righteous man do?”’ Regarding that moment, it is stated: “Some on chariots and some on horses, but we invoke the name of the Lord our God” (Psalms 20:8).
Another matter, “I have oxen [shor], and donkeys [vaḥamor]” (Genesis 32:6). Shor – this is Joseph, as it is stated: “A firstborn bull [shoro] is his majesty” (Deuteronomy 33:17). Vaḥamor – this is Issachar, as it is written: “Issachar is a strong-boned donkey [ḥamor] (Genesis 49:14). Joseph’s grandson is destined to eradicate Amalek, as it is stated: “Joshua21Joshua was from the tribe of Ephraim, who was Joseph's son. weakened Amalek and its people by sword” (Exodus 17:13). Issachar’s descendants know what the Holy One blessed be He does in His world, as it is stated: “From the children of Issachar, possessors of understanding of the times, to know what Israel should do; their leaders were two hundred” (I Chronicles 12:33). “Flocks [tzon]” – this is Israel, as it is stated: “You, My flock [tzoni], flock of My pasture, you are man” (Ezekiel 34:31). “And slaves [ve’eved]” – this is David, as it is stated: “I am your servant [avdekha] son of your maidservant” (Psalms 116:16). “And maidservants [veshifḥa]” – this is Avigayil, as it is stated: “Here is your handmaiden as a maidservant [leshifḥa]” (I Samuel 25:41). “Jacob was very frightened and distressed. He divided the people who were with him, and the flocks, and the cattle, and the camels, into two camps” (Genesis 32:8). At that moment, those messengers went to Esau and saw armed warriors with him, and they came and told Jacob, as it is stated: “The messengers returned to Jacob, saying: We came to your brother, to Esau” (Genesis 32:7). What is: “And four hundred men with him”? Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said: Four hundred kings wearing crowns. Some say: Four hundred prefects were with him. Rabbi Yanai said: Four hundred generals were with him. When they related to Jacob all that multitude, he was afraid and he divided his wives and children into two camps, as it is stated: “He divided the people who were with him…[into two camps].”
“He said: If Esau will come upon the one camp, and smite it, the remaining camp will escape” (Genesis 32:9). “And Jacob said: the Lord of my father Abraham, and the Lord of my father Isaac, God who told me: Go back to your land and your birthright, and I will benefit you" (Genesis 32:10). “Deliver me, please, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau, for I fear him, lest he come and smite me, mother, and children, alike” (Genesis 32:12). “He said: If Esau will come upon the one camp, and smite it” – at that moment, our patriarch Jacob said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘Master of the universe, it is written in Your Torah: “A bull or a sheep, it and its offspring you shall not slaughter on one day” (Leviticus 22:28). If this wicked one comes and eradicates my children and their mothers as one, the Torah scroll that You are destined to give on Mount Sinai, who will read it? I implore You, deliver me from his hand, “lest he come and smite me mother and children alike,”’ as it is stated: “Deliver me, please.”  “And Jacob slept there on that night, and he took from what he had as a present for his brother Esau” (Genesis 32:14). What did he [Jacob] do? He arose and sent him a gift in order to blind his eyes, as it is stated: “As the bribe will blind the eyes of the wise” (Deuteronomy 16:19), and the wise are none other than Edomites, as it is stated: “I will eliminate the wise from Edom and understanding from the mountain of Esau” (Obadiah 1:8). “Two hundred female goats and twenty male goats, two hundred ewes and twenty rams” (Genesis 32:15). “Nursing camels and their offspring thirty, forty cows and ten bulls, twenty female donkeys and ten male donkeys” (Genesis 32:16). “He placed them in the charge of his servants, each drove by itself; he said to his servants: Go ahead of me, and maintain a distance between one drove and the other drove” (Genesis 32:17). “He placed them in the charge of his servants, each drove by itself.” What is: “Maintain a distance”? Jacob said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘Master of the universe, if troubles will befall my descendants, do not bring them one after another, but rather, create distance for them between their troubles.’ At that moment, Jacob lifted his eyes sand saw that Esau was coming from afar, and he directed his eyes heavenward, wept, and requested mercy from before the Holy One blessed be He. He heard his prayer and promised him that he would deliver him22Him and his descendants. from all his troubles due to Jacob’s merit, as it is stated: “The Lord will answer you at a time of trouble; the name of the God of Jacob will fortify you” (Psalms 20:2).

=== 76 | 76 ===
“Jacob was very frightened and distressed. He divided the people who were with him, and the flocks, and the cattle, and the camels, into two camps” (Genesis 32:8). “Jacob was very frightened and distressed” – Rabbi Pinḥas in the name of Rabbi Reuven: The Holy One blessed be He made a promise to two people, but they were afraid; the chosen of the patriarchs, and the chosen of the prophets. The chosen of the patriarchs – this is Jacob, as it is stated: “For the Lord has chosen Jacob for Himself” (Psalms 135:4). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: “Behold, I am with you” (Genesis 28:15), but ultimately he was afraid, as it is stated: “Jacob was…frightened.” The chosen of the prophets – this is Moses, as it is stated; “Were it not for Moses, His chosen” (Psalms 106:23). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: “For I will be with you” (Exodus 3:12), but ultimately, he was afraid: “The Lord said to Moses: Do not fear him” (Numbers 21:34). He says: ‘Do not fear’ only to one who is afraid. Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Ḥelbo in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman in the name of Rabbi Natan: Israel would have been worthy of elimination in the days of Haman, had they not based their mindset on the mindset of their ancestor.1The midrash states that in the days of Haman, the Jews should not have been terrified, since they had already been given a Divine promise that the Jewish people would not be eliminated. However, since this mindset of fearing annihilation despite a Divine promise existed already, with Jacob, it was forgiveable. They said: ‘If our patriarch Jacob, to whom the Holy One blessed be He promised and said: “Behold, I am with you,” (Genesis 28:15) was afraid, we, all the more so.’ That is what the prophet criticizes Israel: “You forgot the Lord your Maker, who spread the heavens and laid the foundation of the earth” (Isaiah 51:13). He said to them: ‘You have forgotten what He said to you: “So said the Lord: If the heavens above can be measured [and the foundations of the earth below probed, I too will spurn all the descendants of Israel because of everything that they did]” (Jeremiah 31:36) – if you see the heavens fall and the earth collapse.2Just as the heavens cannot be measured and the foundations of the earth probed, so I will never spurn you. Should you not have learned from the spread of the heavens and the earth?3You should have learned from the fact that the heaven and earth did not collapse, but rather, the heavens remained spread over the earth. Instead, “you feared continuously all day”’ (Isaiah 51:13).
Another matter, “Jacob was very frightened and distressed” – Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Ilai said: The fright and the distress are not the same.4It would have been enough to write one of them. One who fears, is in distress. Rather, he was frightened lest he kill, and distressed lest he be killed. He said: ‘If he overcomes me, he will kill me, and if I overcome him, I will kill him.’ That is: He was frightened lest he kill, and distressed lest he be killed. He said: ‘All these years, he [Esau] has been residing in the Land of Israel; say that he comes against me5Maybe he will be able to overcome me. by virtue of his residence in the Land of Israel. All these years, he has been residing and honoring his parents; say that he comes against me by virtue of his honoring father and mother, as so he said: “The days of mourning for my father will approach” (Genesis 27:41). Say that this old man died and he will come against me to kill me.’6This is another explanation for the distress of Jacob. The fear was of Esau, the distress was from the thought that maybe his father had died. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: This is what the Holy One blessed be He said to him: “Return to the land of your fathers, to the land of your birth” (Genesis 31:3). Say that the stipulations7The stipulations that Jacob made when he departed for Padan Aram. See Genesis 28:20–22. were until here: “And He will protect me on this path” (Genesis 28:20), and not beyond that.8Maybe the promise for protection ended when he reached the land of his fathers. Rabbi Yudan said: The Omnipresent said to him: “Return to the land of your fathers,” but nevertheless, “Jacob was very frightened”? Rather, from here [we learn] that there is no promise to the righteous in this world.9Promises made are conditional on righteous behavior, thus the righteous may fear that they have sinned in such a way that they have lost the guarantee of protection that they received (Etz Yosef). Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: “Behold, I am with you” (Genesis 28:15); “if God will be with me”? (Genesis 28:20). Rather, from here [we learn] that there is no promise to the righteous in this world. Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: “He said: For I will be with you” (Exodus 3:12) and nothing evil will harm you,10This is implied by the fact that God said that He would be with Moses. and it is written: “It was on the way, in the lodging, [the Lord encountered him and sought to kill him]” (Exodus 4:24). Rather, there is no promise to the righteous in this world.  Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanin of Tzippori: “Benayahu son of Yehoyada answered the king and said: “Amen; and so may the Lord, God of my lord the king, say” (I Kings 1:36).11This was said in responsed to David's decree to anoint Solomon as king. But is it not already stated: “Behold, a son is born to you, he will be a man of rest” (I Chronicles 22:9)12The son mentioned in the verse is Solomon. – rather, he said: ‘Many adversaries may arise from here to Giḥon.’
“He divided the people” – the Torah taught you proper conduct; that a person should not place all his property in one corner. From whom do you learn this? It is from Jacob, as it is stated: “He divided the people…” Likewise it says: “And hid them, fifty men to a cave” (I Kings 18:4).13Ovadya hid one hundred prophets from Jezebel, fifty in each of two caves, rather than all together in one cave. “He said: If Esau will come upon the one camp, and smite it, the remaining camp will survive” (Genesis 32:9). “He said: If Esau will come upon the one camp, and smite it” – these are our brethren in the south;14The Land of Israel. “the remaining camp will survive” – these are our brethren in the Diaspora. Rabbi Hoshaya said: Even though they survived, they fast on our behalf on Monday and Thursday.15Even though they are not being threatened, they fast and pray on their behalf.
“Jacob said: God of my father Abraham and God of my father Isaac, Lord, who says to me: Return to your land, and to the land of your birth, and I will benefit you” (Genesis 32:10). “Jacob said: God of my father Abraham and God of my father Isaac” – but not of Esau? It is, rather, that [God says:] ‘One who chooses their path and performs actions like theirs, I affirm My presence over him; one who does not choose their path and does not perform actions like theirs, I do not affirm My presence over him.’ Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: Who was close to David; was it not Aḥaz? But he leaves Aḥaz and says to Hezekiah: “So said the Lord, God of David, your father” (II Kings 20:5). It is, rather, that [God says:] ‘One who chooses their path and performs actions like theirs, I affirm My presence over him; one who does not choose their path and does not perform actions like theirs, I do not affirm My presence over him.’
“I am unworthy of all the kindnesses and of all the truth that You have performed for Your servant, for with my staff I crossed this Jordan, and now I have become two camps” (Genesis 32:11). “I am unworthy of all the kindnesses” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: I am “unworthy.” Rabbi Levi said: ‘I am worthy, but [I have become] “unworthy” due to [“all the kindnesses.”]’ “For with my staff I crossed this Jordan” – Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said, in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: In the Torah, in the Prophets, and in the Writings, we have found that Israel crossed the Jordan only due to the merit of Jacob. In the Torah – “for with my staff I crossed this Jordan.” In the Prophets – “You shall inform your children, saying: Israel crossed this Jordan on dry land” (Joshua 4:22) – Israel the elder. In the Writings – “What is it, sea, that makes you flee? The Jordan, that you turn back?…from before the God of Jacob” (Psalms 114:5, 7). There is a place called Jordan in the hot springs of Tiberias. Our patriarch Jacob entered there, panic-stricken, and Esau shut him in there. The Holy One blessed be He dug an opening in another place and he emerged. That is what is written: “When you pass through the water, I am with you, and through the rivers, they will not inundate you” (Isaiah 43:2).
“Deliver me, please, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau, for I fear him, lest he come and smite me, mother and children alike” (Genesis 32:12). “Deliver me, please, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau” – deliver my future descendants from the hand of his descendants, who come with the power of Esau.16The power of Esau is the sword – “by your sword you shall live” (Genesis 27:40). That is what is written: “I was looking at the horns, and behold, another, small horn arose among them” (Daniel 7:8) – that is the son of Netzer.17A robber who conquered provinces on the Roman–Persian border and ruled there under the auspices of Rome. “And three of the original horns were uprooted from before it” (Daniel 7:8) – this is that they gave them their kingdom; Macrinus, Carinus, and Kyriades.18These were the provinces. “Behold, there were eyes like the eyes of a man in this horn, and a mouth speaking arrogantly” (Daniel 7:8) – this is the evil empire that imposes levies upon all the nations of the world. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It is written: “And the ten horns: From this kingdom, ten kings will arise” (Daniel 7:24), all of those referred to in the verse are descendants of Esau.19All ten horns represent ten kingdoms descended from Esau, not from the son of Netzer. Rather, “I was looking at the horns, and behold, another, small horn arose among them” – this is the evil empire. “And three of the original horns were uprooted from before it” – these are the three previous kingdoms.20Babylon, Persia–Media, and Greece. “Behold, there were eyes like the eyes of a man in this horn” – this is the evil empire, that casts an envious eye on the possessions of others. This wealthy one, we will make him governor of his province; this wealthy one, we will make him an economic adviser.  “Lest he come and smite me, mother and children alike” – and you said: “You shall not take the mother with the offspring” (Deuteronomy 22:6). Another matter, “Lest he come and smite me, mother and children alike” – and you said: “A bull or a sheep, it and its offspring you shall not slaughter on one day” (Leviticus 22:28).
“And You said: I will benefit you, and render your descendants as the sand of the sea, which cannot be enumerated for multitude” (Genesis 32:13). “And You said: I will benefit [heitev eitiv] you” – heitev, by your merit; eitiv, by the merit of your fathers. “He stayed there that night; he took from that which was in his possession a gift for Esau his brother” (Genesis 32:14).  “Two hundred female goats and twenty male goats, two hundred ewes and twenty rams” (Genesis 32:15). “Thirty nursing camels and their offspring, forty cows and ten bulls, twenty female donkeys and ten male donkeys” (Genesis 32:16). “He stayed there that night; he took from that which was in his possession a gift for Esau his brother. Two hundred female goats and twenty male goats…” – Rabbi Elazar said: From here one derives the period of conjugal rights of a woman that is stated in the Torah: The men of leisure – every day; the laborers – twice a week; the seafarers – once in six months. “Two hundred female goats” that need “twenty male goats,” “two hundred ewes” that require “twenty rams.” “Thirty nursing camels and their offspring [uvneihem]” and their males [boneihem]21Boneihem means those who build them, which also can mean those with whom they have offspring. Being built can refer to having offspring (See Genesis 16:2). thirty; Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel: Because it is modest in its sexual relations, the verse did not publicize it, but just, “thirty nursing camels and their offspring.” “Forty cows and ten bulls,” as they need ten bulls. Twenty female donkeys and they need ten male donkeys – why did it place the camels in the middle? It is, rather, as though he [Jacob] was saying to him [Esau]: ‘Consider yourself as though you are sitting on the platform and judging, and I am being judged before you, and you become filled with mercy over me.’22The tall camels, after the goats and sheep and before the cows and donkeys, evoke the courtroom, with the judges elevated over those present.
“And he placed them in the hands of his slaves, each flock separately, and he told them: Go before me, and leave space between the flocks” (Genesis 32:17). “He commanded the first, saying: When Esau my brother meets you, and asks you, saying: To whom do you belong, and where are you going, and whose are these before you” (Genesis 32:18). “You shall say: They are from your servant, Jacob; it is a gift sent to my lord, to Esau and, behold, he too, is behind us” (Genesis 32:19). “He commanded also the second, and also the third, and also all that followed the droves, saying: In this manner shall you speak to Esau, when you find him” (Genesis 32:20). “He commanded the first, saying: When Esau my brother meets you…You shall say: They are from your servant, Jacob; it is a gift sent to my lord, to Esau” – Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi] and Rabbi Yosei ben Rabbi Yehuda were walking along the way. They saw a gentile coming toward them. They said: ‘He will ask us three things: What are you? What is your trade? Where are you going?’ What are you? Jews. What is your trade? Merchants. Where are you going? To purchase wheat from the storehouses of Yavne. Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi] stood opposite the gentile to see what he would ask, and Rabbi Yosei ben Rabbi Yehuda waited for him. He said: ‘If he says something, I [worry I] will say something else.’23If the gentile asks Rabbi Yehuda a question and then asks me the same question, if I don’t hear Rabbi Yehuda’s answer and I give a different answer, we may appear suspicious. He said to him: ‘From where do you know this?’ He said to him: ‘From Jacob our patriarch.’24Jacob prepared his messengers for all contingencies. “And, behold, he too, is behind us.” “He commanded the first…also the second” – Rabbi Pinḥas and Rabbi Ḥilkiya in the name of Rabbi Simon: “When you find him” in his greatness.25But if he is no longer in his greatness, approach him differently. “You shall say: Moreover, here is your servant Jacob, behind us. For he said: I will appease him with the gift that goes before me, and thereafter I will see his face; perhaps he will favor me” (Genesis 32:21). “You shall say: Moreover, here is your servant Jacob, behind us” – that is what is written: “The earth is given into the hand of the wicked one; he covers the faces of its judges…” (Job 9:24).26This verse is quoted in response to the fact that the righteous Jacob calls himself the slave of the wicked Esau. “He placed them in the charge of the servants, each drove by itself” – why did he not introduce them intermingled? It was in order to astonish him with his gift.27So he would see the variety and the number of each of the species. Why did he not introduce them all at once? It was in order to satiate the eyes of the wicked one. He came to end it, but he said: ‘Receive’; He came to end it, but he said: ‘Receive.’28Each time Esau thought that the gift was complete, Jacob’s servant would say: There is more for you to receive.  “The gift went before him and he stayed that night in the camp” (Genesis 32:22). “The gift went before him [al panav]” – he, too, was distressed.29The word panav is found in the context of distress. See I Samuel 1:18.
“He arose during that night and he took his two wives, and his two maidservants, and his eleven children, and crossed the ford of the Yabok” (Genesis 32:23). “He arose during that night and he took his two wives, and his two maidservants…” – but where was Dina? He placed her in a chest and locked it with her in it. He said: ‘This wicked one has a covetous eye; [I do this] so he will not direct his eyes, see her, and take her from me.’ Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Abba HaKohen Bardela: The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘“For the sake of one who deprives his neighbor of kindness” (Job 6:14) – you withheld kindness from your neighbor, you withheld kindness from your brother.30Jacob should have allowed his brother to marry Dina. Had she married the man, she would not have engaged in licentiousness.  You did not seek to marry her to a circumcised man, so she married an uncircumcised man. You did not seek to marry her in a permitted fashion, so she married in a prohibited fashion.’ That is what is written: “Dina daughter of Leah…went out” (Genesis 34:1). “He took them, and crossed them over the stream, and brought over that which he had” (Genesis 32:24). “He took them, and crossed them over the stream” – Rav Huna in the name of Rabbi Idi: He made himself like a bridge, taking from here and placing it here.

=== 77 | 77 ===
“Jacob remained alone, and a man wrestled with him until the break of dawn” (Genesis 32:25). “Jacob remained alone, and a man wrestled with him.” “Yeshurun, there is none like God, Who rides the heavens in your assistance” (Deuteronomy 33:26). Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon: “There is none like God,” but who is like God? It is Yeshurun,1The Jewish nation. the best and most praiseworthy among you. You find that everything that the Holy One blessed be He is destined to perform in the future, He had them performed earlier, by means of the righteous in this world. The Holy One blessed be He revives the dead and Elijah revives the dead.2I Kings 17:22. The Holy One blessed be He withholds rain and Elijah withholds rain.3I Kings 17:1. The Holy One blessed be He blesses the scarce and Elijah blesses the scarce.4I Kings 17:14–16. The Holy One blessed be He revives the dead and Elisha revives the dead.5II Kings 4:33–35. The Holy One blessed be He remembers the barren and Elisha remembers the barren.6II Kings 4:16. The Holy One blessed be He blesses the scarce [to increase it] and Elisha blesses the scarce [to increase it].7II Kings 4:2–7. The Holy One blessed be He sweetens the bitter and Elisha sweetens the bitter.8II Kings 2:19–22. The Holy One blessed be He sweetens the bitter with bitter9Shemot Rabba 23:3. and Elisha sweetened the bitter with bitter. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Simon: “There is none like God,” but who is like God? It is Yeshurun, Israel the elder. Just as the Holy One blessed be He, it is written in His regard: “The Lord alone will be exalted [on that day]” (Isaiah 2:17), Jacob, too: “Jacob remained alone.”
Rabbi Ḥunya said: He appeared to him in the image of a herdsman; this one had flocks and that one had flocks, this one had camels and that one had camels. He said to him: 'Cross yours and then I will cross mine.' Jacob crossed his. He said: 'Let us return and see, whether, perhaps, we forgot something.' When he returned, “a man wrestled with him.” Rabbi Ḥiyya Rabba and Rabbi Shimon ben Rabbi were negotiating the sale of these silk fabrics. They entered Tyre and did their business. When they exited the city gates, they said: ‘Let us go and adopt the craft of our ancestors. Let us return and see if we forgot something.’ They returned and found a package of silk fabrics. They said to them: 'From where do you have this practice?'10The practice of returning to check if anything was left behind. They said: 'From Jacob our ancestor, as it is written: “Jacob remained alone.”' The Rabbis say: He appeared to him as the leader of robbers; this one had flocks and that one had flocks, this one had camels and that one had camels. He said to him: 'Cross mine11To the other side of the river. and I will cross yours.' The angel crossed that of our patriarch Jacob in the blink of an eye. Jacob was crossing, returning, and finding, crossing, returning and finding all night. He said to him: 'Sorcerer' parkamos; variant reading: parmakos>. Rabbi Pinḥas said: At that moment, Jacob took a scarf and placed it around his12The angel’s neck. neck, He said to him: ‘Parkamos parkamos.’13Jacob was saying to the angel: ‘You do not intimidate me.’ Rav Huna said: Ultimately the angel said: ‘I will inform him with whom he is engaging.’ What did he do? He placed his finger  on the ground and the ground began boiling with fire. Jacob said to him. 'With that you seek to scare me? I am completely constituted from it.' That is what is written: “The house of Jacob will be fire…” (Obadiah 1:18).
Rabbi Ḥama ben Rabbi Ḥanina said: It was Esau’s guardian angel. That is what he said to him: “For therefore, I have seen your face, as the sight of the face of angels, and you welcomed me” (Genesis 33:10).  “He saw that he could not prevail against him, and he touched the joint of his thigh; the joint of Jacob's thigh was dislocated as he wrestled with him” (Genesis 32:26). This is analogous to an athlete who was standing and wrestling with the king’s son. He lifted his eyes, saw the king standing over him, and cast himself down before him. That is what is written: “He saw that he could not prevail against him” – He saw in the Divine Presence that he could not prevail over him. Rabbi Berekhya said: We do not know who was victorious, whether it was the angel or Jacob, but from what is written in the verse: “A man wrestled [vaye’avek] with him” – that is, who became covered with dust [avak]; the man who was with him.14Since the man who was with him became covered with dust, that indicates that Jacob was victorious. Rabbi Ḥanina bar Yitzḥak said: The Holy One blessed be He said to him [to the angel]: 'He comes against you with five amulets in his possession: His merit, his father’s merit, his mother’s merit, his grandfather’s merit, and his grandmother’s merit. Evaluate yourself whether you are able even to stand against his merit.' Immediately, “he saw that he could not prevail against him.” This is analogous to a king who had a wild dog and a tame lion. The king would take his son and embolden his heart with the lion,15He was emboldened by the fact that he would emerge victorious over the lion. so were the dog to come and confront him, the king would say to him [the dog]: ‘The lion could not stand against him, and you seek to confront him?’ So, were the nations of the world to come and confront Israel, the Holy One blessed be He will say to them: ‘Your ministering angel could not stand against him, and you seek to confront his descendants?’  “He touched the joint of his thigh” – he touched the righteous men and women, the prophets and prophetesses, who are destined to emerge from him. Which is that [generation]? It is the generation of persecution.16The generation that lived in the wake of the Bar Kokhva rebellion. “The joint of Jacob's thigh was dislocated [vateka]” – Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Eliezer said: It was smoothed.17The bone that naturally protrudes in the thigh joint was driven inward, like a peg that is driven [tekua] into the ground. Rabbi Berekya said in the name of Rabbi Asi: It was split like a fish.18It was split lengthwise. In this interpretation, vateka is a derivation of the word beka, meaning split. Rav Naḥman bar Yaakov said: It was dislocated from its place, as it is written: “I was repulsed [vateka]…as My soul was repulsed [nake’a]” (Ezekiel 23:18).  “He said: Release me, as dawn has broken. He said: I will not release you unless you bless me” (Genesis 32:27). Throughout that night each of them was striking the other, this one’s shield against that one’s shield. When dawn broke: “He said: Release me, as dawn has broken.”

=== 78 | 78 ===
“He said: Release me, as dawn has broken. He said: I will not release you unless you bless me” (Genesis 32:27). “He said: Release me, as dawn has broken” – it is written: “New each morning, great is Your faithfulness” (Lamentations 3:23) – Rabbi Shimon bar Abba said: From the fact that you renew us each and every morning we know that You have great faithfulness to revive the dead for us. Rabbi Alexandri said: From the fact that you renew us in the morning of the kingdoms,1You give us strength to live despite the hardship of living under their reign. we know that You have great faithfulness to redeem us. Rabbi Ḥelbo said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: No heavenly group2Group of angels. lauds and repeats, but rather, each day the Holy One blessed be He creates a new group of angels, and they recite a new song before Him, and they go on their way. Rabbi Berekhya said: I responded to Rabbi Ḥelbo: ‘But is it not written: “Release me, as dawn has broken,” and the time for me to recite song has arrived?’ He said to me: ‘Strangler! Do you seek to strangle me?’3Do you seek to strangle me by challenging me from an explicit verse? I said: ‘What is that verse that is written: “Release me, as dawn has broken”?’ He said to me: ‘These are Mikhael and Gavriel, who are heavenly princes, as all of them are replaced, but they are not replaced.’  Hadrian, may his bones be crushed, asked Rabbi Yehoshua ben Ḥananya, he said to him: ‘Do you say: No heavenly group lauds and repeats, but rather, each day the Holy One blessed be He creates a new group of angels, and they recite a new song before Him, and they go on their way?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ He said to him: ‘To where do they go?’ He said: ‘To the place from which they were created.’ He said to him: ‘From where were they created?’ He said to him: ‘From the River of Fire.’ He said to him: ‘What is the function of the River of Fire?’ He said to him: ‘It is like that Jordan that does not stop; neither by day nor by night.’ He said to him: ‘From where does it originate?’ He said to him: ‘It is from the perspiration of beasts that perspire from bearing the Throne of the Holy One blessed be He.’ His adviser said to him: ‘But does that Jordan not flow during the day, and it does not flow at night?’ He said: ‘I was a sentry at Beit Peor; just as it flowed during the day, it flows at night.’ Rabbi Meir, Rabbi Yehuda, and Rabbi Shimon: Rabbi Meir says: Who is greater, the guard or the guarded? From what is written: “For He will charge His angels on your behalf to guard you” (Psalms 91:11) – that is, the guarded is greater than the guard. Rabbi Yehuda says: Who is greater, the carrier or the carried? From what is written: “They will carry you on their palms” (Psalms 91:12) – that is, the carried is greater than the carrier. Rabbi Shimon said: From what is written: “He said: Release me” – that is, the one releasing is greater than the one released.
“He said: ‘Release me” – as the time for my lauding, to laud the Holy One blessed be He has arrived.’ He said to him: ‘Let your colleagues laud Him.’ He said to him: ‘I cannot, as the next day I will come to laud, and they will say to me, just as you did not laud yesterday, so you will not laud today.’ He [Jacob] said: ‘If you complete your task, you receive your reward – “I will not release you unless you bless me.”’ He [Jacob] said to him: ‘Those angels who came to Abraham, they took their leave from him only with a blessing.’ He said to him: ‘They were sent only for that purpose, but I was not sent for that purpose.’ He said to him: ‘If you complete your task, you receive your reward’ – “I will not release you.” Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: He [the angel] said: ‘The ministering angels, because they revealed the secrets of the Holy One blessed be He,4They revealed to Lot that the city of Sodom was going to be destroyed. they were banished from their partition for one hundred and thirty-eight years. If I heed you, I will be banished from my partition.’ He said: ‘If you complete your task, you receive your reward – “I will not release you unless you bless me.”’ Rav Huna said: Ultimately he said: I will reveal it to him. If the Holy One blessed be He says to me: Why did you reveal it to him? I will say before Him: Master of the universe, your prophets issue decrees, and you do not abrogate their decrees; would I be able to abrogate their decree.5He is asking rhetorically. He said to him: ‘He is destined to reveal Himself to you in Beit El and change your name, and I will be standing there. That is what is written: “In Beit El he found him, and there he will speak with us” (Hosea 12:5).’ It is not written here, “with you,” but rather, “and there he will speak with us.”
“He said to him: What is your name? He said: Jacob” (Genesis 32:28). “He said: No more shall Jacob be said to be your name; rather, Israel, for you have striven with God and with men, and you have prevailed” (Genesis 32:29). “He said to him: ‘What is your name?’ He said: ‘Jacob.’ “He said: No more shall Jacob be said to be your name.” “Who confirms the word of His servant and fulfills the counsel of His messengers” (Isaiah 44:26) – Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Since He “confirms the word of His servant and fulfills the counsel of His messengers,” do we not know that it says: “Of Jerusalem: It will be inhabited; and of the cities of Judah: They will be built” (Isaiah 44:26)?6Namely, from the fact that the Lord fulfills the word of the angel who told Jacob that his name would be changed, we can learn that He will fulfill the word of His prophets who prophesied that Jerusalem would be inhabited. [It refers] to one angel who appeared to our patriarch Jacob. That is what is written: “He said to him: What is your name.… No [more…] Jacob.” “And fulfills the counsel of His messengers” – as the Holy One blessed be He appeared to our patriarch Jacob in order to fulfill the decree of that angel that said to him: “No [more…] Jacob.” The Holy One blessed be He also said so to him. That is what is written: “God said to him: Your name is Jacob; [your name shall no longer be called Jacob]” (Genesis 35:10) – “no [more] shall Jacob be said.” Bar Kappara said: Anyone who calls Abraham Abram violates a positive commandment. Rabbi Levi said: A positive commandment and a prohibition. “[Your name] shall no longer be called [Abram]” (Genesis 17:5) – a prohibition; “but your name shall be Abraham” (Genesis 17:5) – a positive commandment. And yet the members of the Great Assembly called him Abram, as it is written: “You are the Lord God who chose Abram…”? It was relating a narrative and saying that while he was still Abram You chose him. Similarly, let us say that one who calls Sarah Sarai violates a positive command?7And according to Rabbi Levi a positive command and a prohibition (Genesis 17:15). It is, rather, that only he8Abraham. The verse states: “God said to Abraham…you shall not call her name Sarai.” In the case of Abraham the verse stated “your name shall no longer be called Abram.” was commanded in her regard. Similarly, let us say that one who calls Israel Jacob violates a positive command? It is taught: It is not that the name of Jacob will be uprooted. Rather, “but Israel shall be your name” (Genesis 35:10) – Israel will be primary and Jacob secondary. Rabbi Zechariah in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: In any case: Your name is Jacob… “but Israel shall be your name” (Genesis 35:10) – Jacob is primary, and Israel is in addition to it.  “For you have striven with God and with men, and you have prevailed” – you have wrestled with the heavenly and prevailed over them, and with the earthly and prevailed over them. With the heavenly – this is the angel. Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: He was Esau’s ministering angel. This is what he said to him: “For therefore, I have seen your face, as the sight of the face of angels [penei elohim]” (Genesis 33:10). Just as penei elohim is judgment, so too, your face is judgment.9As it were, Esau is passing judgment on Jacob (see Bereshit Rabba 76:7). Just as penei elohim – “you shall not appear before Me [yera’u fanai] empty-handed” (Exodus 23:15), so too, you, I will not appear before you empty-handed. With the earthly and you prevailed over them – this is Esau and his chieftains. Alternatively, “for you have striven with God” – it is you whose image is carved on High.10The image of man in the Throne of Glory.
“Jacob asked and said: Tell me, please, your name. He said: Why is it that you ask after my name? And he blessed him there” (Genesis 32:30). “Jacob asked and said: Tell me, please, your name” – Rav said in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Dostai: One verse says: “He sets a number for the stars, and calls them [all] by names [shemot]” (Psalms 147:4), and one verse says: “He who brings out their host by number, calling all of them by name [beshem]” (Isaiah 40:26). Rather, it teaches that there is change there.11At any given time there is one name, but the names change over time, which is reflected in the plural word “names.” The name that he is called now is unlike the name that he will be called after time, as it is stated: “The angel of the Lord said to him: Why do you ask my name? It is unknown [peli]” (Judges 13:18) – I do not know to what name I will be changed.
“The sun rose for him as he passed Penuel, and he was limping from his hip” (Genesis 32:32). “The sun rose for him…” – Rabbi Berekhya said: For whom did the sun not rise? Rather, for him it is for his healing, but for others, light. Rav Huna said in the name of Rav Aḥa: So, the sun was healing our patriarch Jacob and beating down on Esau and his chieftains. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You are a paradigm for your descendants. Just as you, the sun was healing you and beating down on Esau and his chieftains, so, your descendants, the sun will heal them and beat down on the idolaters. Will heal them – “but the sun of righteousness will shine for you who fear My name, with healing in its rays” (Malachi 3:20); and will beat down on the idolaters – “behold, the day is coming, burning like a furnace […and all that do evil will be straw, and the day that is coming will set them ablaze]”’ (Malachi 3:19). “And he was limping from his hip” – Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi was going up to Rome.12Rome is identified as Edom (Esau). When he reached Akko, Rabbi Ḥanina came out to greet him. He found him [Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi] limping from his hip. He said to him: ‘You are like your ancestor –”and he was limping from his hip.”‘
“Therefore, the children of Israel shall not eat the sciatic nerve, which is upon the hip socket, to this day, because he touched Jacob’s hip socket, at the sciatic nerve” (Genesis 32:33).  “Therefore, the children of Israel shall not eat the sciatic nerve [gid hanashe]” – why is it called gid hanashe? It is because it was dislocated [nasha] from its place. Rav Huna said: These extensions of the sciatic nerve are permitted, but Israel is holy and they prohibited it upon themselves. Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Yosei: Rabbi Yehuda said: He touched one of them, and one of them was prohibited. Rabbi Yosei said: He touched one of them,13But the Torah did not specify which leg, implying that it is prohibited to eat the sciatic nerve from either leg. and both of them were prohibited. There is a tanna who teaches that logic dictates that it is the right one, in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda. There is a tanna who teaches that logic dictates that it is the left one,14It might have been the left one. in accordance with Rabbi Yosei. The one who says that logic dictates that it is the right one – “he touched his hip [yerekho] socket.”15“His” indicates that it is the nerve in his stronger leg. The one who says that logic dictates that it is the left one, it is as it is stated: “Because he touched Jacob’s hip [yerekh] socket.”
“Jacob lifted his eyes and saw, and behold, Esau came, and with him four hundred men. He divided the children among Leah, and Rachel, and the two maidservants” (Genesis 33:1). “Jacob lifted his eyes and saw…” Rabbi Levi said: A lion was angry at the animals and beasts. They said: Who will go and placate it? This fox said to them: ‘Come here, as I know three hundred parables, and I will placate him.’ They said to it: ‘Let us go.’ It walked a bit and stopped. They said: ‘What is this?’ It said to them: ‘I forgot one hundred.’ They said to it: ‘We will suffice even with two hundred.’ It walked a bit and stopped. They said: ‘What is this?’ It said to them: ‘I forgot one hundred more.’ They said to it: ‘We will suffice even with one hundred.’ When they reached there, it said: ‘I forgot them all. Instead, let each and every one placate for itself.’ So, Jacob our patriarch; Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: [Initially Jacob said] I have the ability to pray. Rabbi Levi said: [Initially Jacob said] I have the ability to organize a war. But when he arrived: “He divided the children…” – he said: Let the merit of each and every person stand on his behalf.
“He placed the maidservants and their children first, and Leah and her children next, and Rachel and Joseph last” (Genesis 33:2). “He placed the maidservants and their children first” – this is to say: The farther back one is, the more he is beloved. “He passed before them and prostrated himself earthward seven times, until he reached his brother” (Genesis 33:3). “He passed before them” – that is what is written: “As a father has mercy upon his son” (Psalms 103:13). Rabbi Ḥiyya taught: Like the most merciful of the patriarchs. Which is the most merciful of the patriarchs? Rabbi Yehuda said: This is Abraham. Abraham said: “Far be it from You to do a thing like this” (Genesis 18:25).16Abraham prayed to avert the destruction of Sodom. Rabbi Levi said: Jacob – “he passed before them.” He said: It is preferable that he harm me and not them. “And prostrated himself earthward seven times” – why seven? It is based on: “The righteous man falls seven times and rises” (Proverbs 24:16). Another matter: Why seven? He [Jacob] said to him [Esau]: ‘May you consider yourself as though you are situated behind seven partitions and sitting and judging, and I am being judged before you, and you are filled with mercy upon me.’ Rabbi Ḥanina bar Yitzḥak said: He did not cease prostrating and progressing, prostrating and progressing, until he introduced the attribute of justice into the attribute of mercy.17So that the attribute of justice would be subjected to the attribute of mercy. 
“Esau ran to meet him, embraced him, fell upon his neck, and kissed him, and they wept” (Genesis 33:4). “Esau ran to meet him…and kissed him [vayishakehu]” – it is dotted above it.18Above the word vayishakehu. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar said: Every place you find the script more numerous than the dots, you expound the script; the dots more numerous than the script, you expound the dots. Here, neither is the script more numerous than the dots, nor are the dots more numerous than the script. Rather, it teaches that at that moment he was overcome with mercy and he kissed him with all his heart. Rabbi Yannai said to him: If so, why is it dotted over it? Rather, it teaches that he did not come to kiss him, but rather to bite him, and Jacob’s neck was transformed into marble and the teeth of that wicked one were blunted. Why does the verse state: “And they wept”? It is, rather, that this one wept over his neck, and that one wept over his teeth. Rabbi Abbahu in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan derives it from here: “Your neck is like the ivory tower…” (Song of Songs 7:5).
“He lifted his eyes, saw the women and the children, and said: Who are these to you? He said: The children with whom God has graced your servant” (Genesis 33:5). “He lifted his eyes” – Rabbi Binyamin bar Levi said: Because we heard grace regarding eleven tribes, but we did not hear regarding Benjamin;19He was not yet born when Jacob said: “The children with whom God has graced your servant.” where did we hear? It was elsewhere: “He said: God be gracious to you, my son” (Genesis 43:29).20Joseph said it to Benjamin. “The maidservants approached, they and their children, and they prostrated themselves” (Genesis 33:6). “Leah too, and her children, approached, and prostrated themselves; and then Joseph and Rachel approached, and prostrated themselves” (Genesis 33:7). “The maidservants approached, they and their children, and they prostrated themselves. Leah too, and her children, approached…” Regarding Joseph it is written: “And then Joseph and Rachel approached, and prostrated themselves.” Joseph said: This wicked one has a covetous eye. Let him not direct his eyes and look at my mother. He stood tall and obscured her. That is what is written: “Joseph is a fruitful tree [ben porat], a fruitful tree alongside a spring [alei ayin]” (Genesis 49:22) – Joseph, you grew like a fruitful tree to block an eye [alei ayin].21To obscure Rachel from Esau’s eye. Joseph, you grew due to cows [ben parot].22The reference is to the cows in Pharaoh’s dream. “A fruitful tree alongside a spring [alei ayin]” – you grew due to produce [ben perot].23The reference is to the sheaves in Pharaoh’s dream. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Simon: It is incumbent upon me to repay you due to that eye.24Due to the eye that you blocked from seeing Rachel. “To repay [lifro’a]” is expounded from the word porat.
“He said: For whom do you intend this entire camp that I met? He said: To find favor in the eyes of my lord” (Genesis 33:8). “Esau said: I have plenty, my brother. What is yours shall be yours” (Genesis 33:9). “He said: For whom do you intend this entire camp that I met?” – throughout that night the ministering angels arrayed in groups and companies, and were confronting those of Esau and saying to them: ‘With whom are you affiliated?’ They said: ‘With Esau.’ They said: ‘Strike them, strike them, let them have it.’ ‘With Abraham’s grandson’; but they said: ‘Let them have it.’ ‘With Isaac’s son’; but they said: ‘Let them have it.’ When they said: ‘We are with Jacob’s brother,’ they said: ‘Leave them, as they are from ours.’ In the morning he said to him: “For whom do you intend this entire camp that I met…”? He said to him: ‘Did they say anything to you?’ He said to him: ‘I am broken before them.’ “He said: To find favor…” “Esau said: I have plenty…” – of beatings, “my brother, [what is yours] shall be yours.”25There was a failure to communicate. Jacob thought that Esau was referring to the messengers who brought the gift to Esau. Esau thought that Jacob was referring to the groups of ministering angels that attacked him and his people. Another matter: “Esau said: I have plenty…” – Rabbi Aivu said: It is because the blessings were dubious for him. Where were they reinforced for him? It is here, from what he said to him: “My brother, what is yours shall be yours.” Rabbi Elazar said: Ratification of a document is only by its signatories. So that you will not say: Had Jacob our patriarch not deceived his father he would not have taken the blessings, the verse states: “My brother, what is yours shall be yours.”26Esau thereby ratified the transaction of the blessings.
“Jacob said: Please, no, if I have found favor in your eyes, receive my gift from me, for therefore, I have seen your face, as the sight of the face of angels [elohim], and you welcomed me” (Genesis 33:10). “Jacob said: Please, no, if I have found favor in your eyes, receive my gift from me, for therefore [I have seen your face], as the sight [kirot] of the face [penei] of elohim” – just as “the face of elohim” connotes judgment, so, “your face” connotes judgment.27Elohim in this context means judges. Just as the face of elohim:28Elohim in this context means God. “They shall not appear before Me [yera’u fanai] empty-handed” (Exodus 23:15), so, you: They shall not appear before you empty-handed. “Please, take my gift that was brought to you as God has graced me, and because I have everything. He urged him, and he took it” (Genesis 33:11). “Please, take my gift that was brought to you” – he said to him: ‘How much exertion did I exert until it came into my possession, but you, it came to you on its own.’ It is not written here, “that you brought,” but rather, “that was brought” – it came to you on its own. “He urged him, and he took it” – he appeared as though he was withdrawing, but his hand was outstretched. Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: “Those who grovel [mitrapes] for pieces [beratzei] of silver” (Psalms 68:31) – he opens his palm [matir et hapas] and is placated [umitratze] with silver. Reish Lakish ascended to inquire after the well-being of Rabbeinu.29The grandson of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi. He said to him: ‘Pray for me, because this empire30The Roman empire. is very wicked.’ He [Reish Lakish] said to him: ‘Do not take anything from anyone, and you will not need to give anything.’ While he was sitting with him, a certain woman came and gave him a bowl with a knife in it. He [Rabbeinu] stood and took the knife and returned the bowl to her. An imperial messenger came, saw it, coveted it, and took it. Before evening, Reish Lakish ascended to inquire after the well-being of Rabbeinu and saw that he was laughing. He said to him: ‘Why are you laughing?’ He [Rabbeinu] said to him: ‘That knife that you saw, a messenger from the empire came, saw it, coveted it, and took it.’ He [Reish Lakish] said to him: ‘Did I not say to you: Do not take anything from a person, and you will not need to give anything.’ A certain ignoramus said to Rabbi Hoshaya: ‘If I say to you a good saying, would you say it in public in my name?’ He said to him: ‘What is it?’ He said to him: ‘All those gifts that our patriarch Jacob gave to Esau, the nations of the world are destined to return to the messianic king in the future. What is the source? “The kings of Tarshish and of the islands will return tribute” (Psalms 72:10). It is not written here, “bring,” but rather, “return.”’ He said to him: ‘As you live, you said a good saying, and I will say it in your name.’
“He said to him: My lord knows that the children are tender, and the nursing flocks and cattle are upon me; if they drive them hard one day, all the flocks will die” (Genesis 33:13). “He said to him: My lord knows that the children are tender…” – this is Moses and Aaron. “And the nursing flocks and cattle are upon me” – this is Israel, as it is stated: “You, My flock, the flock of My pasture, you are people” (Ezekiel 34:31). Rav Huna said in the name of Rav Aḥa: Had it not been for the mercy of the Holy One blessed be He, “if they drive them hard one day” the entire flock would have died in the days of Hadrian. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Levi: “My lord knows that the children are tender” – this is David and Solomon. “And the nursing flocks and cattle are upon me” – this is Israel, as it is stated: “You, My flock…” (Ezekiel 34:31). Rav Huna said in the name of Rav Aḥa: Had it not been for the mercy of the Holy One blessed be He, “if they drive them hard one day” the entire flock would have died in the days of Haman.
“Please, let my lord pass before his servant, and I will advance slowly, according to the pace of the property that is before me and according to the pace of the children, until I will come to my lord, to Seir” (Genesis 33:14). “Please, let my lord pass before his servant” – He [Esau] said to him: ‘Do you seek that we will be partners with you in your world?’ He [Jacob] said to him: “Please, let my lord pass before his servant.” He said to him: ‘Do you not fear my ministers, my governors, and my officers?’ He said to him: “I will advance slowly [le’iti]” – I will walk slowly in accordance with my possessions, just as it says: “The water of the Shiloaḥ that flows slowly [le’at]” (Isaiah 8:6). Alternatively, I will go with a covered face, just as it says: “Behold, it is wrapped [luta] in the cloth” (I Samuel 21:10). “Until I will come to my lord, to Seir” – Rabbi Abbahu said: We reviewed the entire Bible and did not find that Jacob ever went to Esau at Mount Seir. Is it possible that Jacob, [who] was truthful, [nevertheless] deceived him? When, then, did he go to him? In the future. That is what is written: “Saviors will ascend Mount Zion to judge the mountain of Esau” (Obadiah 1:21).
“Esau said to him: Please, I will place with you some of the people who are with me. He said: Why do that? I will find favor in the eyes of my lord” (Genesis 33:15). “Esau said to him: Please, I will place with you…” – he sought to accompany him, but he did not accept it. Rabbeinu, when he would ascend to the empire, he would look at this portion and would not take a Roman31The text says Aramean, but the reference is to Romans. with him. One time, he did not look at it, and he took Romans  with him. He did not reach Akko before he sold his horse.32He did so in order to garner funds to bribe the Romans to allow him to proceed. “Esau returned on that day on his way to Seir” (Genesis 33:15) – and the four hundred men who were with him, where were they? Each and every one left on his way; they said: Let us not be burned in Jacob’s coals. When did the Holy One blessed be He repay them? It was elsewhere: “Not a man of them escaped except for four hundred lads, who rode on the camels and fled” (see I Samuel 30:17).33These were Amalekites, descendants of Esau.
“Jacob traveled to Sukot, and built him a house, and established booths [sukot] for his livestock. Therefore, he called the name of the place Sukot” Genesis 33:17). “Jacob traveled to Sukot” – how many years did our patriarch Jacob remain in Sukot? Rabbi Abba said: Eighteen months – Sukot, house, Sukot, and in Beit El six months. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Levi: All those months that he remained in Beit El, he would give Esau that same gift. Rabbi Avin says in the name of Rabbi Ḥuneya: For nine years he would give Esau that same gift. Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Abba: All those years34Some commentaries suggest that the correct reading is “months.” Others explain that Jacob returned to pour libations in Beit El for many years after he left Beit El.  that Jacob remained in Beit El, he did not refrain from pouring libations. Rabbi Ḥanan said: Anyone who knows how many libations Jacob our patriarch poured in Beit El would know how to calculate the waters of Tiberias.

=== 79 | 79 ===
“Jacob arrived intact to the city of Shekhem, which is in the land of Canaan, upon his arrival from Padan Aram, and he encamped before the city” (Genesis 33:18). “Jacob arrived intact.” “In six troubles He will deliver you, and in seven, no harm will touch you” (Job 5:19); if they are six, I will withstand them, if they are seven, I will withstand them. “In famine, He redeems you from death” (Job 5:20) – “For these two years the famine is in the midst of the land” (Genesis 45:6). “And in war, from the sword” (Job 5:20) – “It is in my power to do you harm” (Genesis 31:29). “From the scourge of the tongue you will be hidden” (Job 5:21) – Rav Aḥa said: Evil speech is so egregious that the One who created it created a place in which it could be hidden. “And you will not fear pillage when it comes” (Job 5:21) – this is Esau and his chieftains. “At pillage and hunger you will laugh” (Job 5:22) – this is Laban, who came hungry for his [Jacob’s] wealth, to rob him. “For your covenant will be with the rocks of the field…” (Job 5:23) – “he took one of the stones from the place, and placed it beneath his head” (Genesis 28:11). “You will know that your tent is at peace” (Job 5:24) – the incident of Reuben and Bilha,1See Genesis 35:22. the incident2See Genesis 38:1–30. of Judah and Tamar.3See Sifrei Devarim ch. 31 which states that God told Jacob that Reuben had repented. In the case of Judah and Tamar, it is explicit in the verse that Judah admitted that he was at fault. Thus, despite the falls, Jacob's tent remained at peace (see the Peirush Maharzu on the midrash here). “When you visit your abode, you will not be lacking” (Job 5:24) – our patriarch Jacob was eighty-four years old and had never seen a drop of seminal emission.4Even unintentionally. “You shall know also that your descendants will be many, and your offspring like the grass of the earth” (Job 5:25) – Rabbi Yudan said: Our patriarch Jacob did not pass from the world until he saw six hundred thousand of his sons’ descendants. “You will come to the grave at the right time [bakelaḥ], like a grain pile at its time” (Job 5:26). Rabbi Yitzḥak and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yitzḥak said: You will come moist [laḥ]5This means full of vitality. to your grave. The Rabbis say: You will come complete [bekhola] to the grave, full, lacking nothing, as it is stated: “Jacob arrived intact.”
“Jacob arrived intact.” “A song of ascents. Let Israel6This is expounded as a reference to Jacob, whose name was also Israel. now say: From my youth, they have greatly afflicted me” (Psalms 129:1) – the Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘And did they overcome you?’ He said to Him: “Yet they did not prevail against me” (Psalms 129:2) – “Jacob arrived intact.” “Many evils may afflict a righteous man…” (Psalms 34:20). “Many evils” – this is Esau and his chieftains; “a righteous man” – this is Jacob. “But the Lord delivers him from them all” (Psalms 34:20) – “Jacob arrived intact.” “The Lord will guard your going and your coming, from now until eternity” (Psalms 121:8). “Will guard your going [tzetekha]” – “Jacob departed [vayetze] from Beersheba” (Genesis 28:10); “And your coming [uvo’ekha]” – “Jacob arrived [vayavo] intact.”
“If you are pure and upright…He will restore the abode of your righteousness” (Job 8:6). “If you are pure and upright” – “if you were” is not written here, but rather, “you are.” But in the past, he was not a righteous man. “He will rouse Himself for you” (Job 8:6) – the Holy One blessed be He is destined to be roused in your regard, and reward you for all the acts of righteousness that you performed. Because it is written: “But Jacob was a simple man, abiding in tents” (Genesis 25:27); therefore: “Jacob arrived intact.” Rabbi Berekhya began: “You will decree, and He will fulfill it for you, and light will shine upon your ways” (Job 22:28). “You will decree, and He will fulfill it for you” – this is Jacob. “And light will shine upon your ways” – light will shine upon your two journeys.7The journey to Haran, and the journey back. Because it is written: “If God will be with me…” (Genesis 28:20); “and behold I am with you, and will keep you” (Genesis 28:15): “and I return to my father’s house in peace” (Genesis 28:21), and it is written: “Jacob arrived intact.”
“Jacob arrived intact.” It is written: “Those who sow in tears, reap with joyous song” (Psalms 126:5). “Those who sow in tears” – this is our patriarch Jacob, who sowed the blessings in tears: “Perhaps my father will feel me” (Genesis 27:12). “Reap with joyous song” – “God will give you from the dew of the heavens and from the fat of the earth” (Genesis 27:28). “Though he walks weeping” (Psalms 126:6) – “he raised his voice and wept” (Genesis 29:11). “Bearing his sack of seed” (Psalms 126:6) – as he is drawn to the place that he is destined to procreate from there, as it is written: “Take a wife for you from there” (Genesis 28:2), “Isaac sent Jacob and he went to Padan Aram; to Laban, son of Betuel” (Genesis 28:5). “He returns in joyous song, bearing his sheaves [alumotav]” (Psalms 126:6) – he came bearing young men [uleimin] and young women [ve’uleimita].
“Jacob arrived intact” – intact in his body. Because it is written: “He was limping because of his hip” (Genesis 32:32); nevertheless, intact in his body. Intact in his children; because it is written in his regard: “If Esau will come upon the one camp, and smite it, the remaining camp will survive” (Genesis 32:9); nevertheless, here, intact in his children. Intact in his wealth; although, Rabbi Avun said in the name of Rav Aḥa: Our patriarch Jacob would give Esau that same gift8See Genesis 32:14–16. for nine years; nevertheless, here, intact in his wealth. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Intact in his studies, but Joseph forgot, as it is stated: “As God has made me forget all my toil” (Genesis 41:51). Elsewhere it says: “The toiling soul toils for itself” (Proverbs 16:26).9The toil of the soul is Torah study.
“And he encamped [vayiḥan] before the city” – he graced [ḥanan] the leadership of the city, he began sending them gifts. Another matter, “and he encamped [vayiḥan] before the city” – he began establishing markets and selling at low prices. That is what they say, that a person must show gratitude to a place from which he benefits. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai and Rabbi Elazar his son were hiding in a cave for thirteen years during the days of persecution. They would eat withered carobs until they broke out in sores. After thirteen years, he [Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai] emerged and sat at the cave entrance. He saw a certain hunter standing and hunting birds. When Rabbi Shimon would hear a Divine Voice from Heaven: ‘Freedom, freedom,’ it would escape. But when he would hear a Divine Voice saying: ‘Killing,’ it would be hunted and trapped. He said: ‘Were it not for Heaven, a bird would not be hunted; the soul of a person, all the more so.’ He went out and found that matters were calm, and that the edict10The edict that Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai should be killed. had been abrogated. They came and bathed in that heated bathhouse in Tiberias. His son said to him: ‘Tiberias has afforded us so much benefit, and we are not purifying it from the dead?’11There were areas of Tiberias in which priests could not go because there unidentified graves there. Purifying Tiberias would allow the priests to go to those places. He said: ‘We must perform an act of good just as our ancestors would, as they would establish markets and sell at low prices.’ He said: ‘We need to purify Tiberias.’ What did he do? He took a mandrake. He would cut the mandrake, cast the cuttings, and scatter them in the street. Every place where there was a corpse, it would rise, and they would move it and take it out of the city. And every place where there was no impurity, the mandrake would remain, and it would indicate which was a place of purity and which was a place of impurity until the time that they purified it from all the corpses. A certain Samaritan ignoramus saw him and said: ‘Will I not go and mock this Jewish elder?’ Some say it was in the wicker basket market, and some said it was the sack market. He took a corpse and concealed it in one of the streets that had been purified. In the morning, he went and said to them: ‘You said that ben Yoḥai had purified Tiberias. Come and see this corpse.’   Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai saw through the Divine spirit that he placed it there.12That the Samaritan had placed the corpse there. He said: ‘I decree that the one who is above shall descend, and the one who is below shall ascend,’ and so it was.13The Samaritan who was above died and descended to the grave, and the corpse that he had buried came to life and rose from the grave. He14Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai. ascended and sat in his house. He passed by the Tower of Colors and heard the voice of Nakai the scribe. He said: ‘Did you not say that bar Yoḥai purified Tiberias? But they say that they found a corpse.’ He said:15Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai. ‘Let him come to me, if I do not have at my disposal halakhot as numerous as the hair on my head regarding Tiberias, that it is pure, with the exception of this-and-that place. You were not with us in the quorum when it was purified. You breached the fence of the Sages, and in your regard it is written: “One who breaches a fence, a serpent will bite him”’ (Ecclesiastes 10:8). He [Nakai the scribe] immediately became a pile of bones. He [Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai] passed in the Beit Nekofa Valley. He saw a person standing and gathering the sefichin16Vegetables which grow during the Sabbatical year are called "sefichin." It is forbidden to eat sefichin. of the Sabbatical year. He said to him: ‘Is this not the sefichin of the Sabbatical year?’ He said to him: ‘But is it not you who permitted it? Did we not learn: Rabbi Shimon says: All the sefichin are permitted except for the sefichin of cabbage, as there is nothing like it in the vegetables of the field.’17Mishna Shvi'it 9:1. He said to him: ‘But do my colleagues not disagree with me? You breached the fence of the Sages, and “one who breaches a fence, a serpent will bite him.”’ And so it was for him. Another matter, “and he encamped before the city” – he entered on Friday near sunset, while it was still day, and established Shabbat boundaries while it was still day. That is to say: Jacob observed Shabbat before it was given.
“He purchased the tract of the field where he had pitched his tent from the possession of the children of Hamor, father of Shekhem, for one hundred kesita” (Genesis 33:19). “He purchased the tract of the field where he had pitched his tent…for one hundred kesita”18Kesita is the name of a coin. – Rabbi Yudan bar Simon said: This is one of three places that the nations of the world cannot deride Israel and say: ‘They are stolen [property] in your hands,’ and these are: The Cave of Makhpela, the Temple, and Joseph’s tomb. The Cave of Makhpela, as it is written: “Abraham heeded Efron, and Abraham weighed for Efron [the money…]” (Genesis 23:16). The Temple, as it is written: “David gave to Ornan for the place [six hundred shekels worth of gold]” (I Chronicles 21:25). Joseph’s tomb – “he purchased the tract of the field” (Genesis 33:19); Jacob purchased Shekhem. Rabbi Ḥiyya Rabba, Rabbi Shimon bar Rabbi, and Rabbi Shimon bar Ḥalafta forgot words from the Targum, and they came to a certain Arabian merchant to learn it from there.19To learn the meaning of words in the Targum from the language spoken by the Arabian. He heard his voice that he said to another: ‘Lift this yahava upon me.’ We understand from him that yahava is a burden, as it is stated: “Cast your burden [yehavekha] upon the Lord, and He will sustain you” (Psalms 55:23). In addition, he heard the voice of an Arabian who said to another: ‘Why are you mekhaseh me,’ but he wished to say: ‘Why are you me’aseh me,’ as it is written: “You will crush [ve’asotem] the wicked, for they will be ashes” (Malachi 3:21). In addition, they heard that a woman said to another: ‘Come to the bathhouse.’ She answered: “I am bereaved and lonely [vegalmuda]” (Isaiah 49:21). Galmuda – I am a menstruant. In addition, he heard another woman saying to another: ‘Lend me your broom,’ and she said: ‘Lend me metatekh,’ as it is stated: “I will sweep it with the broom [metateh] of destruction, the utterance of the Lord of hosts” (Isaiah 14:23). [They heard women say to another woman:] ‘We came to arouse lelivyatakh’20We came to wail with you. – “Who prepare for rousing their wailing [livyatan]” (Job 3:8). [And they heard:] ‘Lend me your diamond [kesitatekh].’ [And they heard:] ‘Take this lamb [kesita] out to the pasture.’21The price of one hundred kesita that Jacob paid could have been one hundred jewels or one hundred lambs. “For one hundred kesita.” Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: One hundred precious stones, one hundred sheep, one hundred sela. Rabbi Simon said: Kof – kamilia [jewel], samekh22The letter samekh and the letter sin are interchangeable.– sela’im, tet – terayon [valuable coins]. Yod heh, what are they doing here? Rabbi Yehuda of Sikhnin in the name of Rabbi Levi: These are gold pendants and emeralds that are typically placed in nose rings. Who writes the writ of sale? Rabbi Berekhya said: The Lord [Ya] writes the writ of sale. Who attests to the writ of sale? The Lord [Ya] attests to the writ of sale. That is the yod heh of kesita. That is what is written: “There the tribes went up, the tribes of the Lord [Ya], a testimony for Israel, to give thanks to the name of the Lord” (Psalms 122:4) – Ya attests on their behalf that they are the sons of their fathers. Here, too, He testified.
“He established there an altar, and called it El, God of Israel” (Genesis 33:20). “He established there an altar, and called it [vayikra lo] El” – Reish Lakish said: “And called it El, God of Israel” – he said: ‘You are God of the heavenly, and I am the ruler of the earthly.’23He called himself, “Israel,” by the name El. Rav Huna said in the name of Reish Lakish: Even the beadle in a synagogue does not assume authority on his own, but you24Jacob. assume authority on your own? Tomorrow, your daughter will go out and be violated. That is what is written: “Dina, daughter of Leah…went out” (Genesis 34:1).

=== 80 | 80 ===
Dina, daughter of Leah, whom she had borne to Jacob, went out to see the daughters of the land (Genesis 34:1). “Dina, daughter of Leah…went out.” “Behold, all who cite proverbs will cite this proverb about you, saying: Like the mother is her daughter” (Ezekiel 16:44) – Yosei of Maon interpreted in the synagogue of Maon: “Hear this, priests, and listen, house of Israel, and hearken, house of the king” (Hosea 5:1) – he said: The Holy One blessed be He is destined to take the priests, place them on trial, and say to them: ‘Why did you not toil in Torah? Did you not benefit from twenty-four priestly gifts?’ And they say to Him: ‘They did not give us anything.’ “Listen, house of Israel” – ‘why did you not give the priests twenty-four priestly gifts that I wrote for you in the Torah?’ They say to Him: ‘It is because of those from the house of Nasi,1The political leader. who take it all.’ “Hearken, house of the king, as judgment is yours” – ‘was it yours?2God tells the king. “This will be the due of the priests” (Deuteronomy 18:3). Therefore, to you and upon you, the attribute of justice will turn.’  Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi II] 3Grandson of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi. heard and was angry. At dusk, Reish Lakish ascended and inquired after the wellbeing of Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi II] and placated him regarding Yosei of Maon. He said to him: ‘Rabbi, we must be grateful to the nations of the world, who introduce clowns into their theaters and circuses so that they would not converse with one another and come to gratuitous altercations. Yosei of Maon said a Torah matter, and you became angry with him.' He said to him: ‘And does he know anything of matters of Torah?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ ‘Has he received the Oral Law?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ ‘If I ask him, will he respond?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ ‘If so, let him ascend to here,’ and he ascended to there. He [Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi II] said to him: ‘What is what is written: “Behold, all who cite proverbs will cite this proverb about you, saying: Like the mother is her daughter”?’ He said to him: ‘Like the daughter, so is her mother; like the generation, so is the nasi; like the altar, so are its priests. Here they say: According to the garden, the gardener.’ Reish Lakish said to him: ‘Until now I have not finished placating him over that one, and now you are bringing another upon us?’ [Reish Lakish said to Yosei of Maon ]‘What is the essence of: “Behold, all who cite proverbs”?’4What is the literal explanation of the phrase that the daughter is like the mother?  He [Yosei of Maon] said to him: ‘There is no cow that is prone to gore that does not have a calf that kicks. There is no woman who engages in promiscuity that does not have a daughter who engages in promiscuity.’ They said to him: ‘If so, Leah our matriarch was a harlot?’ He said to them: ‘“Leah came out to meet him…” (Genesis 30:16) – she came out adorned like a harlot.’ That is why, “Dina, daughter of Leah…went out.”'
“Like troops of robbers waylay a man, a company of priests murders its way to Shekhem, for they have formulated a plot” (Hosea 6:9). Just as these robbers sit on the way, kill people, and take their wealth, so, Simeon and Levi did to Shekhem. But, like “a company of priests”? I wonder. Just as these priests join together at the threshing floor to take their portion, so Simeon and Levi did in Shekhem, as it is stated: “Murders its way to Shekhem” – it was proper for Simeon and Levi to have killed in Shekhem. “Shall [he render our sister] a harlot?” (Genesis 34:31) – they said: ‘What, will they treat us as worthless people?’ Who caused it? “Dina, daughter of Leah…went out.”
“The thistle that was in the Lebanon sent to the cedar” (II Kings 14:9). “The thistle that was in the Lebanon” – this is Ḥamor, father of Shekhem; “sent to the cedar” – this is Jacob. “Give your daughter to my son as a wife” (II Kings 14:9) – “The soul of my son Shekhem longs for your daughter. [Please, give her to him as a wife]” (Genesis 34:8). But the beasts of the field…passed and trampled” (II Kings 14:9) – “They killed Ḥamor and Shekhem his son by the sword” (Genesis 34:26). Who caused it? “Dina, daughter of Leah…went out.”
Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon began: “Do not glory in tomorrow [leyom maḥar][for you do not know what the day will bring]” (Proverbs 27:1), but you say: “My honesty shall speak on my behalf on a future day [beyom maḥar]”? (Genesis 30:33). In the future, your daughter will go out and be violated.5Namely, you cannot be certain of what will happen in the future. That is what is written: “Dina…went out.” Rabbi Ḥanina in the name of Rabbi Abba HaKohen ben Rabbi Eliezer began: “For the sake of one who deprives his neighbor of kindness” (Job 6:14) – you withheld kindness from your brother,6Jacob hid Dina away from Esau when they met, not allowing him to see her and ask for her hand in marriage. If she had been married to Esau, this episode would not have happened. See Bereshit Rabba 76:9.  she married Job,7Some say that Job lived in the days of Jacob, and married Dina. See Bava Batra 15b. who is neither a proselyte nor circumcised. You did not seek to marry her to a circumcised man, so she married an uncircumcised man. You did not seek to marry her in a permitted fashion, so she married in a prohibited fashion. “Dina…went out.”
Rabbi Tanḥuma began: “One man out of one thousand I have found, but a woman among all these I did not find” (Ecclesiastes 7:28).8The Yefe Toar explains that this comes to explain how it is possible to say that there was something improper in Leah's behavior, as mentioned by Reish Lakish above in paragraph 1. Rabbi Yehoshua in the name of Rabbi Levi began: “You neglect all my counsel” (Proverbs 1:25) – that is what is written: “The Lord God built [vayiven] the side” (Genesis 2:22). Vayiven – he observed from where to create her…9See Bereshit Rabba 18:2 for the entire statement of Rabbi Yehoshua in the name of Rabbi Levi. God created the woman such that she should be modest, but nevertheless not all are modest. Reish Lakish cites it from here: “He erected an altar there” (Genesis 35:7).10See Bereshit Rabba 79:8 where Reish Lakish said that Jacob gave an improper name to the altar, and what happened to Dina was a punishment. “Shekhem, son of Ḥamor the Ḥivite, prince of the land, saw her, and he took her, and lay with her, and violated her” (Genesis 34:2).  Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Levi: This is analogous to one who had a litra of meat in his possession. When he revealed it, a bird swooped down and snatched it. So, “Dina, daughter of Leah…went out.” Immediately, “Shekhem, son of Ḥamor…saw her.” Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: She exposed her forearm.11When it says that Shekhem saw her, it was only her forearm, and no other concealed part of her body. “And lay with her, and violated her.” “And lay with her” – in the typical manner; “and violated her” – in an atypical manner.
“And his soul cleaved to Dina the daughter of Jacob, and he loved the young woman, and spoke comfortingly to the young woman” (Genesis 34:3). “And Shekhem spoke unto his father Hamor, saying: Take me this girl for a wife” (Genesis 34:4). “Jacob heard that he had defiled Dina his daughter, and his sons were with his livestock in the field, and Jacob kept silent until their arrival” (Genesis 34:5). “Jacob heard that he had defiled Dina his daughter…and Jacob kept silent” – that is what is written: “But a man of understanding will be silent” (Proverbs 11:12). “And the sons of Jacob came from the field when they heard, the men were saddened, and they became very angry, as he performed a depravity to Israel to lie with Jacob's daughter, and so should not be done” (Genesis 34:7). “The sons of Jacob came from the field when they heard” – Isi ben Yehuda said: Four verses have no resolution,12It is not clear whether the words in the verses under discussion is the last word of the previous phrase, or the first word of the subsequent phrase. See Yoma 52a–b and Rashi on Yoma 52b. and they are: “It will be lifted [se’et]” (Genesis 4:7); “Cursed [arur]” (Genesis 49:7); “And will arise [vekam]” (Deuteronomy 31:16); “Shaped like almond flowers [meshukadim]” (Exodus 25:34). Rabbi Tanḥuma adds this one: “The sons of Jacob came from the field when they heard,” or: “when they heard, the men were saddened.” “And so should not be done” – even among the nations of the world, as from the moment that the world was stricken in the generation of the Flood, they stood and fenced themselves away from licentiousness.
“Ḥamor spoke with them, saying: The soul of my son Shekhem desires your daughter. Please, give her to him as a wife” (Genesis 34:8). “Ḥamor spoke with them, saying” – Reish Lakish said: With three expressions of fondness, the Holy One blessed be He expressed His fondness for Israel: With cleaving, with desiring, and with wanting. With cleaving – “but you who cleave [to the Lord…]” (Deuteronomy 4:4). With desiring – “It is not for your multitude that the Lord desired [you]” (Deuteronomy 7:7). With wanting – “All the nations will praise you, [as you will be a wanted land]” (Malachi 3:12). And we learn it from the portion of this wicked one: With cleaving – “his soul cleaved [to Dina daughter of Jacob]” (Genesis 34:3). With desiring – “The soul of my son Shekhem desires your daughter” (Genesis 34:8). With wanting – “because he wanted Jacob’s daughter” (Genesis 34:19).  Rabbi Abba bar Elisha adds two more: With love and with speech. With love – “I have loved you” (Malachi 1:2). With speech – “speak to the heart of Jerusalem” (Isaiah 40:2). And we learn it from the portion of this wicked one: With love – “he loved the young woman” (Genesis 34:3), with speech – “he spoke tenderly to [al lev] the young woman” (Genesis 34:3). Do you have a person who speaks to the heart [al lev]? It is, rather, matters that calm the heart. He said to her: ‘Your father, for one field, see how much he wasted and how much money he expended. I, who have the means to give you several orchards and several fields of grain, all the more so.’ “And intermarry with us; your daughters you will give to us, and you will take our daughters” (Genesis 34:9). “Intermarry with us” – Rabbi Elazar said: An Israelite never places his finger into the mouth of an idolater first, unless the idolater first placed his finger into the mouth of the Israelite. “Intermarry with us” – “do not intermarry with them” (Deuteronomy 7:3). They said: “Intermarry with us.” They said; they demanded first.13The Malbim (on Genesis 34:9) explains that normally in cases of intermarriage the non-Jew is the one who initiated the marriage. “Increase greatly the bridal payment and gift, and I will give in accordance with what you shall say to me, and give me the young woman as a wife” (Genesis 34:12). “Increase bridal payment [mohar] and gift [umatan].” Mohar – dowry; matan – addition.14An addition to the standard dowry.
Jacob’s sons answered Shekhem and Ḥamor his father with guile, and spoke, as he had defiled Dina their sister” (Genesis 34:13). “Jacob’s sons answered Shekhem…” – what do you think, that there is deceit here? The Divine Spirit says: “As he had defiled Dina their sister…” “They said to them: We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to a man who has a foreskin, as it is a disgrace for us” (Genesis 33:14). “They said to them: We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to a man who has a foreskin, as it is a disgrace” – Rabbi Neḥemya said: Where do we find that the foreskin is called disgrace? It is from here, as it is stated: “As it is a disgrace.” “Are their livestock and their property and all their animals not ours? We only must accede to them, and they will live with us” (Genesis 34:23). “Their livestock and their property” – they thought to despoil them, and were despoiled. “All who emerged from the gate of his city heeded Ḥamor and Shekhem his son; every male, all who emerged from the gate of his city, was circumcised” (Genesis 34:24). “[They] heeded Ḥamor and Shekhem his son…” – one of them would enter the city bearing his burden, and they would say to him: ‘Go and be circumcised.’ He would say: ‘Shekhem is marrying and Magbai is circumcised?’15Magbai is a generic name. Just because Shekhem is marrying, I should get circumcised?
“It was on the third day, when they were in pain, that the two sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dina's brothers, each man took his sword, and came upon the city confidently, and killed all the males” (Genesis 34:25). “It was on the third day, when they were in pain” – there we learned: One bathes the child [using hot water].16The presumption of this section is that one is not permitted to bathe on Shabbat with hot water, even if the water was heated before Shabbat. The school of Rabbi Meir: One bathes the circumcision. Rabbi Yosei said: You17Whoever it is that teaches the halakha. should teach that one bathes the child.18And not one bathes the circumcision. Rabbi Ze’eira said: At all times, Rabbi Yosei would say to him: ‘Say over your mishna [one bathes the child], as we learned:19The following serves as a proof that the correct version of the Mishna is that one bathes "the child" and not only "the circumcision." One does not withhold oil or hot water from upon a wound on Shabbat. Moreover, one may sprinkle hot water upon a wound on Shabbat. And if you say one bathes the circumcision, what is the difference between the wound of an adult and wound of a child. It is, rather, to teach you that one bathes the entire body of the child, which is not the case regarding an adult, as that [one] is only [allowed to bathe] the wound.’ Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya says: One bathes the child on the third day from circumcision that coincides with Shabbat. Rabbi Yaakov bar Aḥa said: At all times, Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Yonatan would instruct the midwives and say to them: ‘All the treatments that you administer during the week, perform them on Shabbat, on the third day that coincides with Shabbat.’ Shmuel said: It is due to danger. Rabbi Yosei said to him: ‘If it is due to danger, let us prepare hot water for him on Shabbat, as we learned: A person heats a cloth and places it upon his wound on Shabbat, and he may not take a bowl filled with hot water and place it on his belly on Shabbat,20This is for fear that the water will spill and cause a burn. but hot water for a cure is permitted.’ Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: There is no prohibition; rather, it is permitted. 21Boiling water on Shabbat in order to bathe the child on the third day is permitted.
“The two sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi…took” – from the fact that it says Simeon and Levi, we know that they are Jacob’s sons. It is, rather, “Jacob’s sons” – that they did not take counsel from Jacob; “Simeon and Levi” – that they did not take counsel from one another. “Dina's brothers” – was she only the sister of the two of them? Was she not the sister of all the tribes? It is, rather, because they endangered their lives on her behalf, she is called by their name. Similarly, “Miriam the prophetess, Aaron’s sister” (Exodus 15:20) – was she [only] Aaron’s sister? Was she not sister of the two of them? It is, rather, because Aaron devoted himself on her behalf,22He implored Moses to pray on Miriam’s behalf when she was afflicted with leprosy. that is why she is called by his name. Similarly, “And in the matter of Kozbi, daughter of the prince of Midyan, their sister” (Numbers 25:18) – was she [only] their sister? Was she not a member of their nation? It is, rather, because she gave her life on behalf of her nation, her nation was called by her name. “Each man took his sword” – Rabbi Elazar says: They were thirteen years old. “They slew Ḥamor and Shekhem his son by the sword, and took Dina from Shekhem’s house, and departed” (Genesis 34:26). Shmuel asked Levi bar Sisi, he said to him: ‘What is that which is written: “And came upon the city confidently”?’ He said to him: ‘They were confident in the strength of the elder. Our patriarch Jacob did not want his sons to perform that act, but when his sons performed that act, he said: What, will I allow my sons to fall at the hand of the nations of the world. What did he do? He took his sword and his bow, stood at the entrance of Shekhem, and said: If the nations of the world come to confront my sons, I will battle against them.’ That is what he said to Joseph: “I have given to you one portion [shekhem] beyond your brothers…” (Genesis 48:22) – where do we find that our patriarch Jacob took his sword and his bow in Shekhem, as it is stated: “Which I took from the hand of the Emorite, with my sword and with my bow”? (Genesis 48:22) – “Ḥamor and Shekhem his son.”23As a consequence of the actions of Simeon and Levi, who killed Ḥamor and Shekhem, Jacob took up his sword and bow.
“And took Dina” – Rabbi Yudan said: They were dragging her and departing. Rav Huna said: One who engages in relations with an uncircumcised man, it is difficult to pull away. Rav Huna said: She said: ‘But I, where will I carry my shame?’24See II Samuel 13:13. until Simeon said to her that he would take her.25Marry her. That is what is written: “[Simeon’s sons…]and Shaul, son of the Canaanite woman” (Genesis 46:10) – the son of Dina, who engaged in relations with a Canaanite. Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Neḥemya, and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yehuda said: That he [Shekhem] performed actions of the Canaanites.26Harlotry. Rabbi Neḥemya said: That she engaged in relations with a Ḥivite, who are included in the Canaanites. The Rabbis say: Simeon took her and buried her in the land of Canaan.
“Jacob said to Simeon and Levi: You have troubled me, to render me loathsome to the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites and the Perizites, and I am few in number; they will mobilize against me and smite me, and I and my household will be destroyed” (Genesis 34:30). “They said: Shall he render our sister as a harlot?” (Genesis 34:31). “Jacob said to Simeon and Levi: You have troubled me” – the Rabbis said: [Jacob said:] ‘The barrel was clear, and you rendered it murky. There is a tradition of the Canaanites, that they are destined to fall into my hands; however, the Holy One blessed be He said: Until you multiply and reach six hundred thousand.’27But because of the action of Simeon and Levi the Canaanites will conclude that Jacob is an immediate threat. Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: [Simeon and Levi replied:] ‘The barrel was murky, and we rendered it clear.’ They said: ‘“Shall [he render our sister] a harlot?”’ – they said: ‘What, will they treat us as worthless people?’ Who caused it? “Dina…went out.”

=== 81 | 81 ===
“God said to Jacob: Arise, ascend to Beit El, and settle there, and make there an altar to the God who appeared to you when you fled from Esau your brother” (Genesis 35:1). “God said to Jacob: Arise, ascend…” “It is a snare for a person to spout [yala] sanctity [kodesh]; scrutiny must follow vows” (Proverbs 20:25) – may a curse come upon one who eats consecrated items [kodashim] in his throat [belo’o].1One who eats consecrated items when he is not permitted to do so is punished.  Rabbi Ḥiyya taught: May a curse come upon a person who benefits from consecrated items. Consecrated items is [a reference to] none other than Israel, as it is stated: “Israel is sacred to the Lord…” (Jeremiah 2:3). “Scrutiny must follow vows” – Rabbi Yanai said: If a person delays his vow, his ledger is scrutinized.2The midrash asserts that Jacob was punished for delaying the fulfillment of his vow (see Genesis 28:20–22). 
“God said to Jacob: Arise, ascend to Beit El.” “If you were demeaned, it is due to arrogance [behitnaseh]; if you conspired [zamota], put hand to mouth” (Proverbs 30:32). Ben Azzai and Rabbi Akiva, Ben Azzai says: If you demean yourself for matters of Torah, ultimately, you will be exalted [lehitnaseh] through them. If [others] conspired to slander you, place hand to mouth;3Be silent and it will stop. one knows, two do not know.4If you are silent, most people will not hear of it; if you engage in a battle against the slanderers, everyone will hear of it.  Rabbi Akiva says: What caused you to be demeaned in matters of Torah? It is because you exalted yourself through them.5You sought to exalt yourself with your Torah knowledge. Consequently, you forgot some of that knowledge, and were embarrassed when you were not able to answer the questions posed to you (Etz Yosef).  Rabbeinu6Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi. was passing through Simoneya and the people of Simoneya went out to greet him. They said to him: ‘Rabbi, provide us with someone who will teach us Bible, teach us Mishna, and adjudicate our trials.’ He provided them with Rabbi Levi bar Sisi. They built a large platform and seated him upon it, but he was unable to articulate matters of Torah. They asked him three questions. They said to him: ‘A yevama without an arm, how does she perform ḥalitza?’7Part of the ceremony of ḥalitza involves her removing her brother-in-law’s shoe. He did not answer them. ‘If she spit blood, what is the law?’8Spitting is another part of the ḥalitza ceremony. He did not answer them at all. They said: ‘Perhaps he is not expert in Talmud, but, he is expert in aggada. Let us ask him verses.’ They said to him: ‘What is [the meaning of] that which is written: “However, I will tell you] what is recorded in the script of truth”? (Daniel 10:21). If truth, why recorded, and if recorded, why truth?’9The term recorded, [rashum], implies something that is written casually and in a temporary manner, and may be erased. But if it is true, it should be written in a permanent manner (Etz Yosef).  He did not answer them.  When he saw his own great distress, he awoke early in the morning and went to Rabbeinu. [Rabbeinu] said to him: ‘What did the people of Simoneya do to you?’ He said to him: ‘Do not remind me of my distress. They asked me three questions and I was unable to answer them.’ He said to him: ‘What are they?’ He said to him: ‘A woman without an arm, how does she perform ḥalitza?’ He said to him: ‘Did you not know how to answer?’ He said to him: ‘Yes, [I know the answer, she may perform ḥalitza] even with her teeth, and even with her body.’ [He told Rabbeinu the second question:] ‘If she spits blood, what is the law?’ He said to him: ‘Did you not know how to answer?’ He said to him: ‘[I know the answer,] even if there was a scintilla of spittle in it, it is valid, but if not, it is not valid.’ [He told Rabbeinu the third question:] ‘“However, I will tell you what is recorded in the script of truth” (Daniel 10:21). If truth, why recorded, and if recorded, why truth?’ He said to him: ‘Did you not know how to answer?’ He said to him: ‘It is recorded before the edict has been decreed; it is truth after the edict has been decreed. What is the seal of the Holy One blessed be He? Rabbeinu said in the name of Rabbi Reuven: Truth [emet]. What is emet? Reish Lakish said: Alef is the first of the letters, mem in the middle, tav at the end, based on the verse: “I am first and I am last…”’ (Isaiah 44:6). [Rabbeinu] said to him: ‘Why did you not answer them as you answered me?’ He said to him: ‘They prepared a great platform and seated me upon it. I became arrogant and I was unable to articulate matters of Torah.’ This verse was read in his regard: “If you were demeaned, it is due to arrogance” (Proverbs 30:32). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: If you thought in your heart to perform a mitzva, but you did not perform it, it would have been preferable for you to place a muzzle on your mouth and not articulate it.10If one vows to fulfill a mitzva or a positive act and does not do so, one is punished. It is better therefore to leave one’s intentions unarticulated.  Rabbi Yudan said: Just as your hand is adjacent to your mouth, so, [the fulfillment of] your vow should be adjacent to your mouth.11One may take a vow, but should be careful to fulfill it right away.  The Rabbis say: Just as your hand precedes your mouth, so, your vow should be before your mouth.12One first takes food in one’s hand and then places it in one’s mouth. Similarly, one should already have the means to fulfill a vow at the time one takes the vow.  Know that it is so, as Jacob our patriarch, because he delayed his vow, his ledger was scrutinized,13He suffered many difficulties as a result. as it is stated: “God14The name "God" is understood by the Sages to refer to God when He acts with the attribute of justice. This is in contrast to the name “Lord” which refers to God when He acts with compassion.  said to Jacob: Arise, ascend to Beit El, and settle there, and make there an altar” (Genesis 35:1). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: In times of trouble – a vow; in times of relief – it is swept away.15He interprets the verse as criticizing Jacob for taking a vow in his time of need, and neglecting to fulfill it when he experienced relief from his troubles.  Rabbi Levi said: When your sieve is blocked, bang on it.16This is a metaphor, meant to express that if one forgets to fulfill his vow, one experiences suffering until remembering to do so (Yefeh To’ar).  The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Jacob, you have forgotten your vow: “Arise, ascend to Beit El” – to the house of God [beit El], “and make there an altar to the God who appeared to you [when you fled from Esau your brother],” and if you do not do so, you are like Esau. Just as Esau vows and does not fulfill, so, you vow and do not fulfill.’
“Jacob said to his household, and to all who were with him: Remove the foreign gods that are in your midst, and purify yourselves, and change your garments” (Genesis 35:2). “Jacob said to his household” – Rabbi Kruspedai said that Rabbi Yoḥanan said: We are not expert in the minutiae of idol worship, like Jacob our patriarch, as we learned: One who finds vessels, and upon them, a figure of the sun, a figure of the moon, or a figure of a dragon, he casts them into the Dead Sea.17Mishna Avoda Zara 3:3. The mishna prohibits only items adorned with specific pictures, whereas Jacob insisted that the members of his household change their garments, meaning dispose of any garments with any pictures whatsoever, fearing that they were also made for the sake of idolatry.  Rabbi Yoḥanan said: All garments are included in the category of idols.18Rabbi Yoḥanan derives from the actions of Jacob that garments with any images are prohibited due to idolatry, contrary to the statement of the mishna.   “They gave to Jacob all the foreign gods that were in their possession, and the rings that were in their ears, and Jacob interred them beneath the terebinth that is near Shekhem” (Genesis 35:4). “They gave to Jacob” – Rabbi Yishmael ben Rabbi Yosei ascended to pray in Jerusalem. He passed Mount Gerizim and saw a Samaritan there. [The Samaritan] said to him: ‘Where are you going?’ He said to him: ‘I am ascending to pray in Jerusalem.’ He said to him: ‘Is it not preferable for you to pray on this blessed mountain,19See Deuteronomy 11:29. and not on those ruins?’20Is it not better to pray on Mount Gerizim, which was considered sacred to the Samaritans, rather than in Jerusalem?  He said to him: ‘I will tell you to what you are comparable – to a dog that is eager for a carcass. So, because you know that idols are interred under [the mountain], as it is written: “Jacob interred,” that is why you are eager for it.’ They said [to each other]: ‘This one seeks to take them.’21The Samaritans believed that Rabbi Yishmael ben Rabbi Yosei wanted to steal the idols that were interred underneath the mountain.  . They reached a consensus to kill him, and he arose and fled at night.
“They traveled; the dread of God was upon the cities that were surrounding them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob” (Genesis 35:5). “They traveled; the dread of God was [upon the cities that were surrounding them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob]” – Rabbi Shmuel said: In three places, idolaters gathered to wage war with Jacob’s children, but the Holy One blessed be He did not allow them to do so, as it is written: “They traveled; the dread of God was [upon the cities]...” The second time was in the days of Yehonatan, as it is stated: “The very ground trembled, and there was a God-inspired terror” (I Samuel 14:15). Third, in the days of Joshua, they sought to pursue,22See Joshua 11:1–5.  but the Holy One blessed be He did not allow them to do so. Where did they gather? In Ḥatzor, as it is written: “But all the cities that stood intact, Israel did not burn them; Joshua burned only Ḥatzor alone” (Joshua 11:13). Rabbi Elazar said: He burned it based on a tradition. The Holy One blessed be He said it to Moses, and Moses said it to Joshua.23According to Rabbi Elazar, the reason for the burning of Ḥatzor was not because the nations had gathered there to attack Israel, but because Joshua had been commanded to do so by Moses.  “Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan, it is Beit El; he and all the people who were with him” (Genesis 35:6). “Jacob came to Luz” – as anyone who enters it blossoms with mitzvot and good deeds like an almond tree [luz].
“Deborah, Rebecca’s nurse, died, and she was buried below Beit El, beneath the oak, and he called its name Alon Bakhut” (Genesis 35:8). “God appeared to Jacob again, already upon his arrival from Padan Aram, and He blessed him” (Genesis 35:9). “Deborah, Rebecca's nurse, died…and he called its name Alon Bakhut” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: In the Greek language, alon means other. While he [Jacob] was still observing the mourning for Deborah, the report that his mother had died came to him. That is what is written: “God appeared to Jacob…and He blessed him.” With which blessing did he bless him? Rav Aḥa said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: He blessed him with the blessing of the mourners.

=== 82 | 82 ===
“God appeared to Jacob again, upon his arrival from Padan Aram, and He blessed him” (Genesis 35:9). “God appeared to Jacob.” It is written: “Show me a sign for good, [so that those who hate me will see it and be shamed, for You, Lord, have helped me and comforted me]” (Psalms 86:17) – it is speaking of David but was fulfilled in Jacob.1The author of this statement was David. Although there is no indication that David’s request was fulfilled, Jacob did receive such a sign.  “A sign” – on the basis of what is stated: “If he said this: The speckled will be your wages [then all the flocks bore speckled]” (Genesis 31:8). “Those who hate me will see it” (Psalms 86:17) – this is Esau and his chieftains. “Have helped me” (Psalms 86:17) – with the trouble of Shekhem, as it is written: “The dread of God was upon the cities” (Genesis 35:5). “And comforted me” (Psalms 86:17) – with the blessing of the mourners.
It is written: “Who may ascend the mountain of the Lord? Who may stand…? He who has clean hands…. He will receive the blessing from the Lord…” (Psalms 24:3–5).2These phrases are all interpreted as applying to Jacob. The first, “who may ascend the mountain of the Lord?” is an allusion to the verse: “Arise, ascend to Bet El” (Genesis 35:1) (Etz Yosef; see Midrash Tehillim 24:9).  It is written: “So said the Lord of hosts, God of Israel: They will again say…the Lord will bless you, abode of righteousness, mountain of sanctity…” (Jeremiah 31:23).3The blessing mentioned in this verse, which refers to the God of Israel, is understood as applying to Jacob, also known as Israel (Etz Yosef).  It is written: “A man of faith will abound with blessings” (Proverbs 28:20) – this is Jacob. “And one who hastens to become rich will not be absolved” (Proverbs 28:20) – this is Esau. It is written: “The blessing of the Lord, it will enrich” (Proverbs 10:22). “And one who hastens to become rich will not become rich” is not written here, but rather, “will not be absolved” – this is the wicked Esau, who married Yehudit, Basmat, and Maḥalat in order to increase wealth; he will never be cleansed. It is written: “I will cleanse; their blood I will not cleanse” (Joel 4:21) – that is what is written: “For his pursuit of his brother with the sword; and suppressing his mercy” (Amos 1:11). “God appeared to Jacob again, upon his arrival.” Rabbi Yitzḥak began: “You shall craft for Me a stone altar…[I will come to you and I will bless you]” (Exodus 20:21) – the matters can be derived a fortiori: If one who crafts an altar to My name, I appear to him and bless him, Jacob, whose image is fixed on My throne, all the more so. “God appeared to Jacob.” Rabbi Levi began: “And a bull and a ram for a peace offering…[for today the Lord shall appear to you” (Leviticus 9:4) – the matters can be derived a fortiori: If one who sacrifices a ram to my name, I appear to him and bless him, Jacob, whose image is fixed on My throne, all the more so. “God appeared” – “Blessed are you upon your arrival, and blessed are you upon your departure” (Deuteronomy 28:6). Upon his arrival at his father-in-law’s house, he was laden with blessings: “May God Almighty bless you…” (Genesis 28:3), and upon his departure from his father-in-law’s house, he was laden with blessings: “God appeared to Jacob…[and He blessed him].”   “Who confirms the word of His servant and fulfills the counsel of His messengers” (Isaiah 44:26) – Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Levi: When He “confirms the word of his servant,” do we not know that He “fulfills the counsel of His messengers”? It indicates that one angel appeared to Jacob our patriarch and said to him: ‘The Holy One blessed be He is destined to appear to you in Beit El and change your name, and I am destined to be standing there.’ That is what is written: “In Beit El He will find us and there He will speak with us” (Hosea 12:5) – “will speak with you” is not written here, but rather, “there He will speak with us.” The Holy One blessed be He appeared to him to fulfill the angel’s words; [and for] Jerusalem, in whose regard all the prophets prophesy, all the more so that He will fulfill the words of His prophets.
“God appeared…again” – Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: “Again” – as it was initially. Just as initially, it was by means of an angel,4This was when Jacob was told to return to Canaan (Genesis 31:11).  so, too, the second [time] was by means of an angel. Rabbi Berekhya said: [God said:] ‘I will not associate My name with any person again; only with you and not with another, as it is stated: “I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob” (Exodus 6:3), and there is no other with them.’ Rabbi Yudan said: “Again” – I will appear to you another time.  “And He blessed him” – with what blessing did He bless him? Rabbi Asi said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: He blessed him with the blessing of the mourners.5Jacob’s mother, Rebecca, had died (see Bereshit Rabba 81:5). 
“God said to him: I am God Almighty. Be fruitful and multiply; a nation and an assembly of nations will be from you, and kings will emerge from your loins” (Genesis 35:11). “God said to him: I am God Almighty. Be fruitful and multiply” – Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: I used to say: Reuben was already out. Simeon was already out. Benjamin had already emerged from his loins and was still in his mother’s womb.6He used to wonder who this blessing referred to, given that Jacob’s sons were all born except for Benjamin, and Rachel was already pregnant with him, such that he had already emerged from Jacob’s loins.  Then I said: “A nation” – this is Benjamin; “and an assembly of nations” – this is Manasseh and Ephraim, as it is written: “His descendants will be a plenitude of the nations” (Genesis 48:19). Rabbi Berekhya, Rabbi Ḥelbo, and Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: “And kings will emerge from your loins” – this is Yerovam and Yehu. The Rabbis say: Is it possible that Avner was a righteous man and he disputed that the kingdom [belonged to] the house of David? It is that he expounded a midrash, and crowned Ish Boshet.7See II Samuel 2:8–9.  That is what is written: “And kings will emerge from your loins” – this is Saul and Ish Boshet. What did they see that led them to draw near and ostracize in the case of the concubine in Giva?8See Judges chap. 20–21.  It is, rather, that they read a verse and ostracized them, and read a verse and immediately welcomed them. They read a verse and ostracized them: “Ephraim and Manasseh will be like Reuben and Simeon for me” (Genesis 48:5).9They felt justified in ostracizing the tribe of Benjamin because Manasseh and Ephraim counted as two tribes, such that there would be twelve tribes even without Benjamin.  They read a verse and welcomed them: “A nation and an assembly of nations will be from you.”10As stated above, this refers to Benjamin as well as Manasseh and Ephraim, and therefore they welcomed Benjamin back and cancelled his ostracization. 
Rabbi Yudan, Rabbi Aivu, and Rabbi Mashyan ben Nagari  said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: [God told Jacob:] ‘Your descendants are destined to become a nation like the assembly of peoples;11Your descendants will act like the other nations.  just as the assembly of peoples sacrifice [on private altars] at the time when the private altars are prohibited, so, your descendants will sacrifice at the time when the private altars are prohibited.’12It is permissible for other nations to sacrifice on private altars, even though they also have the ability to brings sacrifices to the Temple. Similarly, there will be a time when Jacob’s descendants will sacrifice a permissible offering on a private altar at a time when the prohibition of sacrificing on a private altar was in effect. This alludes to the incident of Elijah on Mount Carmel (see I Kings chapter 18; Yefeh To’ar).  Rabbi Ḥanina cites it from here: “Elijah took twelve stones [according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob,] to whom was the word of the Lord, saying: Israel will be your name” (I Kings 18:31) – from the moment that this name was given to him, it was stated to him: “A nation and an assembly of nations will be from you.” Rabbi Simlai cites it from here: “They called the name of the city Dan, after the name of Dan their forefather, who was born to Israel” (Judges 18:29) – from the moment that this name was given to him, it was stated to him: “A nation and an assembly of nations will be from you.” Rabbi Yoḥanan cites it from here: “They will call peoples to the mountain; there they will slaughter offerings of righteousness” (Deuteronomy 33:19) – when your descendants will become like the peoples at Zebulun’s mountain,13When they come to Mount Carmel to sacrifice offerings to idols.  “there they will slaughter offerings of righteousness.” It is not written here: “There they will offer prohibited offerings on private altars,” but rather, “offerings of righteousness.” I will perform righteousness with them and accept their offering. But “a nation and an assembly of nations will be from you” – to obligate each and every tribe; this is the opinion of Rabbi Shimon.14Rabbi Shimon interprets the verse as stating that if one tribe sins unwittingly based on the ruling of the Sanhedrin, that tribe is obligated to collectively bring the bull offering for an unwitting communal sin (see Mishna Horayot 1:5). Rabbi Yehuda says: To obligate each and every congregation.15Rabbi Yehuda says that even if one tribe sinned based on the ruling of its own court, that tribe is obligated to collective bring the bull offering (see Mishna Horayot 1:5).
“God ascended from upon him, in the place where He had spoken with him” (Genesis 35:13). “God ascended from upon him” – Reish Lakish said: The patriarchs are the Divine Chariot, as it is stated: “God ascended from upon Abraham” (Genesis 17:22); “God ascended from upon him”; “the Lord stood over him” (Genesis 28:13).16These verses, stated regarding Abraham and Jacob, demonstrate that the Divine Presence rested upon the patriarchs.  “Jacob established a monument in the place where He spoke with him, a monument of stone. He poured a libation upon it, and poured oil upon it” (Genesis 35:14). “Jacob established a monument…. He poured a libation upon it” – he poured oil on it from the full mouth of a cruse.17He did not sprinkle a little oil, but rather, poured a large stream of oil.
“They traveled from Beit El, and it was still some distance to arrive at Efrat, and Rachel was in childbirth, and had difficulty in her childbirth” (Genesis 35:16). “They traveled from Beit El, and it was still some distance [kivrat]” – Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov said: It was at the time when the land is perforated like a sieve [kevara] and the grain [bar] is plentiful.18The end of the summer.  The Rabbis say: It was when the grain [habar] is already [kevar] growing, the rainy season has passed, and the summer has not yet come. “Rachel was in childbirth, and had difficulty in her childbirth” – there are three who encountered difficulty in childbirth and died after giving birth, and they are: Rachel, Pinḥas’s wife, and Mikhal daughter of Shaul. Rachel –“Rachel was in childbirth, and had difficulty in her childbirth.” Pinḥas’s wife – “His daughter-in-law, wife of Pinḥas…[she crouched and gave birth, as her pangs of labor overcame her]” (I Samuel 4:19). Mikhal, as it is stated: “Mikhal daughter of Saul did not have a child until the day of her death” (II Samuel 6:23). Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: “Until the day of her death” she did not have, but on the day of her death she had. That is what is written: “[These were the sons of David…] the sixth was Yitre’am, by Egla his wife” (I Chronicles 3:3).19Egla is understood to be another name for Mikhal.  Why does it call her Egla? Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: Because she lowed like a calf [egla] and died.
“It was as she had difficulty in her childbirth, the midwife said to her: Fear not; for this too is a son for you” (Genesis 35:17). “It was as she had difficulty in her childbirth…” – two students of Rabbi Yehoshua changed their outer garment during a time of persecution.20They wore Roman garments so they would not be identified as Jews.  A Roman officer21This officer apparently was of Jewish lineage and had studied Torah.  encountered them and said to them: ‘If you are sons of the Torah, give your lives for its sake. If you are not its sons, why should you be killed for its sake?’22He was saying, either dress as Jews and take the risk of dying for the sake of Torah, or abandon your faith entirely and cease being Jews (Matnot Kehuna).  They said to him: ‘We are its sons, and we are [willing to be] killed for its sake; however, it is not the way of people to commit suicide.’ He said to them: ‘I will ask you three questions. If you answer me, fine. If not, I will subject you to religious persecution.’23I will give you the choice to convert or to die.  He said to them: ‘One verse says: “The Lord stands to dispute [and stands to judge the peoples]” (Isaiah 3:13), but it is written: “As there I will sit to judge all the surrounding nations” (Joel 4:12).’ They said to him: ‘When the Holy One blessed be He judges Israel, He judges them while standing, He abbreviates the trial and makes compromises in the sentence. But when He judges the nations of the world, He judges them while seated, is scrupulous in judgment, and extends the trial.’ He said to them: ‘That is not what your teacher Rabbi Yehoshua expounded. Rather, both in this [case] and that one, the verse is speaking of the nations of the world: When He judges the nations of the world, He judges them while seated, is scrupulous in judgment and extends the trial, and then he becomes an adversary against them.’24He stands and implements their punishment against them. He said to them: ‘What is [the meaning] of that which is written: “One who works his land [admato] will be sated with bread…”?’ (Proverbs 28:19). They said to him: ‘One who leases a single field, fertilizes it and hoes it, is preferable to one who leases many fields and leaves them fallow.’ He said to them: ‘That is not what your teacher Rabbi Yehoshua expounded. Rather, one who worships God will be sated with bread until the day of his death.25He expounds admato as a conjunction of the words ad moto – until the day of his death. “And he who pursues vanities will be sated with poverty” (Proverbs 28:19) – these are the idolaters who pursue vanity, their idol worship.’ He said to them: ‘What is [the meaning] of that which is written: “It was as she had difficulty in her childbirth…”?’ They said to him: ‘This is the way that one soothes the soul of the birthing mother. One says to her: Fear not,for you have borne a male offspring.’ He said to them: ‘That is not what your teacher Rabbi Yehoshua expounded. Rather, each and every tribe had a twin sister born with him, in accordance with what Abba Ḥalfoi ben Kureya said: An additional twin sister was born with Benjamin.’26When the first sister emerged, Rachel did not fret because she knew that a sister had been born with all the tribes. When the additional sister emerged, she was concerned that she would not be bearing her second son. That is why the midwife assured her that there was also a son.
“It was with the departure of her soul, as she was dying, that she called his name Ben Oni, and his father called him Benjamin” (Genesis 35:18). “It was with the departure of her soul…that she called his name Ben-oni” – the son of my travail in the Aramaic language. “And his father called him Benjamin” – in the sacred tongue.27The word on in Aramaic means suffering. In Hebrew, it means strength. Jacob replaced on with yamin, the right hand, which symbolizes strength. “Rachel died, and was buried on the way to Efrat, which is Bethlehem” (Genesis 35:19). “Rachel died and was buried” – immediately after death, burial. “On the way to Efrat, which is Bethlehem” – Rabbi Yanai and Rabbi Yonatan were sitting. A certain heretic came and asked them: ‘What is [the meaning of] that which is written: “Upon your departure from me today, [you will find two men by Rachel’s tomb, at the border of Benjamin at Tzeltzaḥ]”? (I Samuel 10:2). Is Tzeltzaḥ not on the border of Benjamin, and Rachel’s tomb on the border of Judah, as it is written: “On the way to Efrat,” and it is written: “[But you,] Bethlehem of Efrat, [young to be among the thousands of Judah]”?’ (Micah 5:1). Rabbi Yanai said: ‘Remove my disgrace.’28He said to Rabbi Yonatan to answer the heretic, because, to his, dismay, he was unable to answer him. Rabbi Yonatan] said to him: ‘“Upon your departure from me today” by Rachel’s tomb, you will find two men at the border of Benjamin in Tzeltzaḥ.’ Some say [that Rabbi Yonatan said]: ‘“Upon your departure from me today” at the border of Benjamin in Tzeltzaḥ, you will find two men by Rachel’s tomb.’ This one is accurate, and you thus learn that they were at the border of Benjamin. It is [similarly] written: “…And he passed through the land of Benjamin, but they did not find. They came to the land of Tzuf” (I Samuel 9:4–5). And it is written: “He said to him: Behold, now, a man of God is in this city” (I Samuel 9:6).29The city was called Tzuf because the prophet [hatzofeh] resided there. These verses demonstrate that Saul and Samuel were in the territory of Benjamin. 
“Jacob established a monument upon her grave; it is the monument of Rachel's grave until today” (Genesis 35:20). “Jacob established a monument” – we learned there: The leftover [money] from the dead...30The leftovers of money collected for someone’s burial.Rabbi Natan says: With the leftover [money] from the dead one builds a structure on his grave.31Mishna Shekalim 2:5.  Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel taught: One does not craft structures for the righteous; their words are their memorials. We learned that Israel was called by Rachel’s name, as it is stated: “Is Ephraim a dear son to me?” (Jeremiah 31:20).32In this verse, all of Israel is referred to as Ephraim, a son of Rachel. For this reason Jacob built a monument on her grave, as a sign of honor for the fact that all of Israel is called by her grandson’s name, or so that people would be able to identify the spot and pray there (see Yefeh To’ar).   Another matter, “Rachel died, and was buried on the way to Efrat” – what did Jacob see that led him to bury Rachel on the way to Efrat? It is because Jacob foresaw that the exiles were destined to pass there. This is why he buried her there, so she would ask for mercy upon them. That is what is written: “A voice is heard in Rama, wailing, bitter weeping, Rachel weeping for her children” (Jeremiah 31:15).
“It was when Israel dwelled in that land that Reuben went and lay with Bilha, his father's concubine, and Israel heard. The sons of Jacob were twelve” (Genesis 35:22). “It was when Israel dwelled” – Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: Uprooting a [person from his place on his] family tree is severe in the eyes of the Holy One blessed be He. That is what is written: “It was when Israel dwelled,” and it is written: “The sons of Jacob were twelve.”33Despite Reuben’s misconduct, Jacob is still referred to as having twelve sons, as Reuben’s place in the family was not uprooted (Yefeh To’ar).  “The sons of Reuben, firstborn of Israel; [for he was the firstborn, but when he desecrated his father's couch, his birthright was given to the sons of Joseph son of Israel, but not to be reckoned as the firstborn]” (I Chronicles 5:1). Say from here that the firstborn status in respect to monetary rights were taken from him, but the firstborn status in respect to genealogy was not taken from him.34Joseph became the firstborn regarding inheriting a double portion of the estate, and similarly, Joseph is considered two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim. However, Reuben is still accorded the honor of being listed first among the sons, and called the firstborn.  Rabbi Levi and Rabbi Simon, one of them said: It is not for Reuben to be reckoned as the firstborn. The other said: One does not reckon Joseph as the firstborn, but only for Reuben.35The argument is whether the phrase “but not to be reckoned as the firstborn” indicates that Reuben is still listed as the firstborn, or not.  Rabbi Ḥagai said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: Even at the moment of corruption, one reckons only Reuben as the firstborn. That is what is written: “It was when [Israel] dwelled.” “The sons of Leah: Reuben, Jacob's firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun” (Genesis 35:23). “The sons of Leah: Reuben, Jacob’s firstborn” – Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: Reuben was the first in conception, first in birth, first in birthright, first in inheritance, first in Temple service, first in repentance. Rabbi Azarya said: First for prophecy as well, as it is stated: “The Lord spoke first to Hosea” (Hosea 1:2).36Hosea was the first of four prophets who were active in the same time period, and the Sages had a tradition that he was from the tribe of Reuben (Yefeh To’ar). 
“Oholivama bore Yeush, and Yalam, and Koraḥ; these are the sons of Esau, who were born to him in the land of Canaan” (Genesis 36:5). “Oholivama bore…” – that is what is written: “How has Esau been searched?” (Obadiah 1:6). Rabbi Simon said: Like the peeling of an onion.37Just as one peels away the layers of an onion and exposes what is underneath, the Torah lists the genealogical records of Esau to reveal their secrets (Yefeh To’ar).  Why to that extent? “I have exposed his hidden places” (Jeremiah 49:10) – in order to expose the mamzerim among them. How many mamzerim did he produce? Rav said three.38They were Ana (see below, 82:15), Oholivama (see Rashi, Genesis 36:2), and Timna (see Rashi, Genesis 36:12). Alternatively, the reference is to the three sons of Oholivama mentioned in this verse (Yefeh To’ar).  Rabbi Levi said four.39He includes the Koraḥ mentioned in this verse, or according to the second approach mentioned above, he includes Timna.  Rabbi Binyamin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Koraḥ mentioned here was a mamzer.40Koraḥ is mentioned as a son of Esau’s wife Oholivama in this verse, and as a son of Esau’s son Elifaz (Genesis 36:16), indicating that he was the illegitimate child of Oholivama and Elifaz (Rashi, Genesis 36:5). 
“Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the members of his household, and his livestock, and all his animals, and all his possessions that he acquired in the land of Canaan, and went to a land, due to his brother Jacob” (Genesis 36:6). “Esau took his wives” – “the heart of the wise inclines to his right, and the heart of a fool inclines to his left” (Ecclesiastes 10:2). “The heart of the wise inclines to his right” – this is Jacob, as it is written: “Jacob arose and lifted his children” (Genesis 31:17), and then “his wives” (Genesis 31:17). “The heart of a fool inclines to his left” – this is Esau, as it is stated: “Esau took his wives” and then “his sons.” “And went to a land, due to his brother Jacob” – Rabbi Eliezer said: Due to a promissory note – “That your descendants will be strangers” (Genesis 15:13).41Esau understood that the descendants of Abraham who would inherit the Land of Israel would first suffer great persecution. He did not want to suffer, and was willing to forego the opportunity to inherit the Land of Israel.  Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Due to the shame.42He was ashamed because he sold the birthright to Jacob.
“Timna was a concubine of Elifaz son of Esau, and she bore Amalek to Elifaz. These are the sons of Ada wife of Esau” (Genesis 36:12). “Timna was a concubine of Elifaz son of Esau” – Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: Why do I [need for the verse] to expound and say: “Timna was a concubine of Elifaz son of Esau”? It is to inform us of the praiseworthiness of the household of Abraham our patriarch, to what extent the kingdoms and realms wished to cleave to him. Who was Lotan? He was one of the rulers, as it is stated: “The chieftain of Lotan” (Genesis 36:29), and it is written: “Lotan’s sister was Timna” (Genesis 36:22). “Timna was a concubine…” She said: ‘Since I am not worthy to marry him as a wife, I will be his maidservant.’ The matters can be inferred a fortiori: If the wicked Esau, who had to his credit only one mitzva, because he honored his father, kingdoms and realms wish to cleave to him, all the more so that they would wish to cleave to the righteous Jacob, our patriarch, who fulfilled the Torah in its entirety.
“These are the children of Tzivon: Aya and Ana; he is Ana, who found the yemim in the wilderness, as he was herding the donkeys of Tzivon his father” (Genesis 36:24). “These are the children of Tzivon: Aya..” “These are the children of Tzivon: Aya and Ana” – what did the verse see that led it to write Ana, Ana, twice?43Why is Ana listed among the brothers of Tzivon (Genesis 36:20) and also among his sons? (Etz Yosef).  Were they two? Actually, there was one; however, Tzivon consorted with his mother and she bore Ana, and he became the son of Ana, son of Tzivon, and son of Se’ir.44Ana was listed among the sons of Se’ir because he was the son of Se’ir’s wife, but in actuality he was the son of Tzivon. The words “the son of Ana” appear to be out of place here.  In any case, he was one.  It is taught: Fire and mixed breeds45Animals that were crossbred. were not created during the six days of Creation, but it entered His mind for them to be created. When were the mixed breeds created? It was in the days of Ana. That is what is written: “He is Ana, who found the yemim in the wilderness.” Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: Mules [hamyonas]. The Rabbis say: Half-breeds [himisu] – half donkey and half horse. These are the signs: If its ears are small, its mother is a horse and its father is a donkey; if they are large, its mother is a donkey and its father is a horse. Rabbi Mana would command those of the household of the Nasi that they should purchase those with the small ears, because their mothers are horses and their fathers are donkeys. What did Ana do? He brought a female donkey, crossed it with a horse, and a mule emerged. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘I did not create anything that causes damage, but you created something that causes damage. As you live, I will create for you something that causes damage.’ What did He do? He brought a serpent, crossed it with a starred agama lizard, and a poisonous lizard resulted. A person never said that he was bitten by a rabid dog and he lived, by a poisonous lizard and he lived, or by a white mule and he lived. Fire: Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Nezira: That light46The light that was created on the first day of Creation. served for thirty-six hours, twelve on Shabbat eve,47Friday. twelve on Shabbat night, and twelve on Shabbat. When the sun set on Shabbat night, the Holy One blessed be He sought to sequester the light, but He accorded honor to the Shabbat. That is what is written: “The Lord blessed the seventh day” (Genesis 2:3). With what did He bless it? With light. When the sun set on Shabbat night and the light began serving,48The light created on the first day began to light up the world even without the sun.  everything began lauding the Holy One blessed be He. That is what is written: “Under all the heavens they sing to Him”49This verse is often translated “Under the heavens He sends it forth [yishrehu],” but the midrash interprets the word yishrehu to mean “they sing to Him [yashiru lo].”  (Job 37:3) – why? Because “His light is to the ends of the earth” (Job 37:3). When the sun set at the conclusion of Shabbat, darkness began to set in. Adam the first man became fearful, as it is written: “And I say: Darkness will conceal me” (Psalms 139:11). What did the Holy One blessed be He do for him? He prepared for him two flint stones, and [Adam] struck one against the other. Fire emerged and he recited a blessing over it. That is what is written: “Night is light for me” (Psalms 139:11). This is in accordance with the opinion of Shmuel, [who said]: Why do we recite a blessing on a candle at the conclusion of Shabbat? Because then was the beginning of its creation. Rav Huna in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: One recites a blessing over it even at the conclusion of Yom Kippur because the fire rested that entire day.50Since one is not permitted to use the fire on Yom Kippur, and once Yom Kippur is over one is permitted to use it, one appreciates fire and recites the blessing. 

=== 83 | 83 ===
“These are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom before the reign of a king for the children of Israel” (Genesis 36:31). “These are the kings who reigned…” – Rabbi Yitzḥak began: “Of oaks from Bashan they crafted your oars; [your rudder they made of ivory inlaid in boxwood from the isles of the Kitites]” (Ezekiel 27:6). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Idolaters were likened to a ship; just as a ship, they manufacture a mast for it from [wood from] one place and anchors from [wood from] another place, so, idolaters, “[Hadad died, and] Samla of Masreka [reigned in his stead]” (Genesis 36:36) “[Samla died,] and Shaul of Reḥovot of the river [reigned in his stead]” (Genesis 36:37).1When they would appoint kings, they would bring them in to reign from different places.    “These are the kings.” “An estate seized hastily at the start” (Proverbs 20:21) – “these are the kings.” “Will not be blessed at its end” (Proverbs 20:21) – “saviors will ascend Mount Zion [to judge the mountain of Esau]” (Obadiah 1:21).2The verse “An estate seized hastily at the start will not be blessed at its end” refers to Edom, which had kings before Israel, but which will eventually be judged and destroyed. 
Rabbi Aivu said: Before a king reigned in Israel, [but once there was a king in Israel],3Addition to the text based on Matnot Kehuna, Nezer HaKodesh, Etz Yosef.  “[There was no king] in Edom; an official was king” (I Kings 22:48)4Officials from Judah were installed as governors of Edom (see II Samuel 8:14).  – “These are the kings [who reigned in the land of Edom before the reign of a king for the children of Israel].” Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina [said]: When this one crowns kings, this one appoints judges.5When Edom had kings, Israel had judges but no kings.  When this one appoints chieftains, this one appoints princes.6When Nebuchadnezzar conquered the region, neither Edom nor Israel had kings; Edom had chieftains and Israel had princes, a lower status than chieftains (Etz Yosef).  Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: This one crowned eight and that one crowned eight.7There were eight kings of Edom before there was a king in Israel, and eight kings of Israel during whose reigns there was no king in Edom. This one crowned eight: Bela, Yovav, Ḥusham, Hadad, Samla, Shaul, Baal Ḥanan, Hadar. And that one crowned eight: Shaul, Ish Boshet, David, Solomon, Reḥavam, Aviya, Asa, Yehoshafat. Nebuchadnezzar came and mingled these with those, and abrogated these and those, [as it is stated:] “Who rendered the world like a wilderness and destroyed its cities” (Isaiah 14:17). Evil8Evil Merodakh, king of Babylon. came and accorded greatness to Yehoyakhin.9Yehoyakhin had been king of Judah; see II Kings 25:27–30.  Aḥashverosh came and accorded greatness to Haman.10Haman, like Edom, was a descendant of Esau. 
“Bela died, and Yovav, son of Zerah, of Botzra, reigned in his stead” (Genesis 36:33). “Bela died” (Genesis 36:33) – Rabbi Abahu said: This is analogous to a prince who was involved in litigation with someone and [the other litigant’s] sustenance ran out. Someone came and supplied him with sustenance. The king said: ‘I will contend only with the one who provided him with sustenance.’ So, the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Kingdom had already been uprooted from Edom, and Botzra came and provided them with kings? That is why I will contend only with Botzra,’ as it is stated: “For there is a sacrifice to the Lord in Botzra…” (Isaiah 34:6). Rabbi Berekhya said: Nevertheless, “and a great slaughter in the land of Edom” (Isaiah 34:6).11Although God’s anger is directed primarily at Botzra, He also brings great slaughter to Edom. 
“Baal Ḥanan son of Akhbor died, and Hadar reigned in his stead, and the name of the city was Pa’u and his wife’s name was Mehetavel, daughter of Matred, daughter of Mei Zahav” (Genesis 36:39). “Baal Ḥanan died” – Rabbi Levi and Rabbi Simon, Rabbi Levi said: They would adorn [their] gods [metivei elohot]. “Mehetavel” – they would adorn themselves for idol worship. “Daughter of Matred” – they would erect castles [turiyot] for idol worship. Rabbi Simon said: They would adorn women. “Mehetavel” – they would adorn her for her husband and then would take [toredin] her from her husband. “Daughter of Mei Zahav” – they were preoccupied with their sustenance; once they became wealthy, [they would say:] What is gold [mahu dahava]? What is silver?12They would boast that gold and silver were no longer valuable in their eyes.  “The chieftain of Magdiel, the chieftain of Iram. These are the chieftains of Edom, according to their settlements in their apportioned land. He is Esau, father of Edom” (Genesis 36:43).  “The chieftain of Magdiel, the chieftain of Iram” – on the day that Diocletian assumed the throne, Rabbi Ami saw in his dream: Today, Magdiel assumed the throne. He said: ‘One more king is required for Edom.’ “The chieftain of Iram” – Rabbi Ḥanina of Tzippori said: Why is he called Iram? Because he is destined to pile [laarom] treasures for the messianic king. Rabbi Levi said: There was an incident involving a certain ruler in Rome who would squander his father’s treasures. Elijah appeared to him in a dream. He said to him: ‘Your fathers gathered and you squander?’ He did not move from there until he refilled them.13The ruler immediately made it his top priority to replenish the treasures. 
The stubble, the straw, and the chaff were quarreling  with one another. This one said: ‘The field was sown for my sake,’ and that one said: ‘The field was sown for my sake.’ The wheat said: ‘Wait until you come to the threshing floor, and we will know for what the field was sown.’ They came to the threshing floor and the landowner went out to winnow it. The chaff was carried away with the wind, he took the stubble and cast it to the ground, he took the straw and burned it, he took the wheat and made it into a grain pile. Anyone who saw it kissed it, just as it says: “Kiss the grain lest He be angry” (Psalms 2:12).14The word var in this verse is often translated “son” or “purity,” but the word can also mean “grain.”  So it is with the nations of the world; these say: ‘We are primary and the world was created for our sake’ and those say: ‘The world was created for our sake.’ Israel says to them: ‘Wait until the day arrives when we will know for whose sake the world was created.’ That is what is written: “For, behold, the day is coming, burning like a furnace, [and all the wicked and all the evildoers will be straw]” (Malachi 3:19). And in their regard it is written: “You will winnow them and the wind will carry them and the storm will scatter them” (Isaiah 41:16). But Israel: “But you will rejoice in the Lord, you will be glorified in the Holy One of Israel” (Isaiah 41:16).

=== 84 | 84 ===
“Jacob settled in the land of his father’s residence, in the land of Canaan” (Genesis 37:1). “Jacob settled” – it is written: “Your gathering will save you when you cry out” (Isaiah 57:13). It is taught: His gathering and the gathering of his sons saved him from Esau.1Although originally Jacob was forced to flee from Esau, when he returned with his sons and they gathered in prayer together, Jacob was able to settle in the Land of Israel while Esau left and settled elsewhere (Genesis 36:6–8).  “But all of them the wind will carry off; futility will take them” (Isaiah 57:13) – this is Esau and his chieftains. “And the one who trusts Me will inherit the land” (Isaiah 57:13) – this is Jacob. “Jacob settled.”
“The wicked flee without a pursuer, but the righteous will be secure as a young lion” (Proverbs 28:1) – the wicked flee, but no one pursues them, as it is written: “[Esau took his wives, his sons, his daughters, all the members of his household, his livestock, all his animals, and all his possessions that he acquired in the land of Canaan,] and went to a land” (Genesis 36:6). Rabbi Elazar said: Due to a promissory note.2When God promised the Land of Israel to Abraham, he also stated that his descendants would be oppressed for many years in a strange land (see Genesis 15:6–16). Esau was willing to leave the Land of Israel and his claim to it so as not to have to endure that part of the prophecy.  Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Due to the shame.3The shame of selling the birthright to Jacob. “But the righteous will be secure as a young lion” – “Jacob settled.”
“If a lash causes death suddenly” (Job 9:23) – Antoninos asked Rabbeinu,4Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi he said to him: ‘What is the meaning of what is written: “If a lash causes death suddenly”?’ Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi] said: ‘[If you were to] decree that one should receive one hundred lashes and they would give him one hundred dinars.5If he is able to withstand all one hundred lashes, he will receive one hundred dinars.  The total of this is the total of that, but he will not get anything from him, and in that way he makes a mockery of the one receiving the lashes.6The individual being lashed will not be able to withstand all of the lashes, and may even die, in which case he will not receive the dinars and will have suffered for naught.  “He mocks at the undoing of the innocent” (Job 9:23) – Rav Aḥa said: When the righteous live in tranquility and seek to live in tranquility in this world,7It is the pursuit of tranquility, rather than the experience or enjoyment of tranquility, that is considered improper for the righteous (see Anaf Yosef).  the accuser comes and accuses them. He says: Is what is prepared for them in the World to Come not sufficient for them, that they seek to live in tranquility in this world? Know that it is so; Jacob our patriarch, because he sought to live in tranquility in this world, was confronted by the accuser regarding Joseph.8The heavenly accuser caused him to suffer distress due to the sale of Joseph.  “I was not tranquil, was not silent” (Job 3:26). “I was not tranquil” – from Esau; “was not silent” – from Laban. “And I did not rest” (Job 3:26) – from Dina. “But turmoil came” (Job 3:26) – the turmoil of Joseph came upon me.
Another matter: “Jacob settled…” – Abraham converted proselytes. That is what is written: “Abram took Sarai his wife…[and the people that they had made in Ḥaran]” (Genesis 12:5). Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Yosei ben Zimra: Were all who entered the world to assemble, they would be unable to create even a small gnat, and you say: “And the people that they had made in Ḥaran”? Rather, these are the proselytes that Abraham converted. Why, then, did it say “made” and did not say “converted”? It is to teach you that anyone who draws a proselyte near, it is as though he created him. Lest you say that Abraham was converting [proselytes] and Sarah was not converting [them], the verse states: “And the people that they had made in Ḥaran.” It is not written here, “That he had made,” but rather, “that they had made.” Rabbi Ḥunya said: Abraham would convert the men, and Sarah would convert the women. Why does the verse state: “That they had made”? It teaches that Abraham would bring them into his house, feed them, give them to drink, draw them near, and bring them under the wings of the Divine Presence.9The expression “that they had made” implies physical action, which is not necessarily included in converting proselytes. The midrash explains that the phrase refers to the fact that Abraham and Sarah would invite them into their home, feed them, and give them to drink (Yefe To’ar).   Jacob, too, converted proselytes, as it is written: “Jacob said to his household, [and to all who were with him: Remove the foreign gods that are in your midst, and purify yourselves].… They gave to Jacob [all the foreign gods that were in their possession]” (Genesis 35:2, 4). In Isaac’s regard we have not heard. Where did we hear? Rabbi Yitzḥak said, and some taught it in the name of Rabbi Hoshaya Rabba in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon: Here it is written: “Jacob settled in the land of his father’s residence.” What is [the meaning of] “his father’s residence [megurei]”? Those whom his father converted [migiyurei].
What is written prior to this matter? “These are the kings [who reigned in the land of Edom before the reign of a king for the children of Israel]” (Genesis 36:31). And here it is written: “Jacob settled” – Rabbi Ḥunya said: This is analogous to one who was walking on the way and saw a pack of dogs. He was afraid of them and he sat in their midst.10Dogs pursue those who run, so he sat and did not run. So, when our patriarch Jacob saw Esau and his chieftains, he feared them and settled in their midst.  Rabbi Levi said: This is analogous to a blacksmith whose [forge] was open to a plaza, and his son, a goldsmith, opened opposite him. He saw many bundles of thorns being brought into the city. He said: ‘Where will all these bundles be stored?’ There was a certain clever man there. He said to him: ‘Are you afraid of these? One spark will emerge from your [forge] and one spark from your son’s, and you will burn them.’ So, when Jacob saw Esau and his chieftains, he was afraid. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Are you afraid of these? One spark from you and one spark from your son will burn all of them. That is what is written: “The house of Jacob will be fire, and the house of Joseph a flame” (Obadiah 1:18) – “Jacob settled.” “This is the legacy of Jacob. Joseph, seventeen years old, was herding the flock with his brothers, and he was a lad with the sons of Bilha, and with the sons of Zilpa, his father’s wives; Joseph brought evil report of them to their father” (Genesis 37:2).  So said the Sages: “This is the legacy [toledot] of Jacob, Joseph” – all of these offspring [toladot] resulted only due to the merit of Joseph and because of him. Did Jacob not go to Laban only for Rachel? All these offspring were waiting until Joseph was born.11Jacob was afraid to return to his father in the land of Canaan, which would require him to confront Esau, until Joseph was born.  That is what is written: “It was, when Rachel bore Joseph” (Genesis 30:25) – when the rival of that wicked one12Esau was born, “Jacob said to Laban: Release me, and I will go” (Genesis 30:25). Who caused them to descend to Egypt? Joseph. Who supported them? Joseph. The sea was split only due to the merit of Joseph. That is what is written: “The waters saw You, God; the waters saw You and were frightened” (Psalms 77:17); “the depths sounded its voice” (Habakkuk 3:10); “with Your arm, You redeemed Your people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph” (Psalms 77:16). Rabbi Yudan ben Rabbi Shimon said: The Jordan, too, split only due to the merit of Joseph. Another matter: “Jacob settled” – so said the Sages: Jacob our patriarch did not enjoy settlement until he resided in his father’s residence. Which is that? It is the land of Canaan, as it was there that his father, Isaac, resided.  Another matter: The numerical value of “residence [megurei]” is two hundred and fifty-nine13Mem – 40; gimmel – 3; vav – 6; resh – 200; yod – 10. Together they sum to 259. – [corresponding to the years] from the day that the Holy One blessed be He said to Abraham: “Know [that your descendants shall be strangers in a land that is not theirs]” (Genesis 15:13) – until the time that Jacob our patriarch settled in the land of his father’s residence [megurei].
Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: “This is the legacy [toledot] of Jacob, Joseph” – the verse need not have said so, but rather, “this is the legacy of Jacob, Reuben.”14Generally, when the verse introduces the legacy [toledot] of an individual, what follows is a list of his sons, and, often, their sons (see, e.g., Genesis 10:1). That being the case, the verse should have listed Reuben, Jacob’s oldest son, first, and then the rest of the sons.  Rather, why does the verse state “Joseph”? It is because everything that befell this one befell that one.15Whatever befell Jacob befell Joseph. Just as this one was born circumcised, so too, that one was born circumcised.16See Bereshit Rabba 63:7; Midrash Tehillim 9:7.  Just as this one’s mother was barren, so too, that one’s mother was barren. Just as this one’s mother bore two [sons], so too, that one’s mother bore two. Just as this one was firstborn, so too, that one was firstborn.17Jacob bought the birthright from Esau and was therefore considered the firstborn. Joseph was firstborn to his mother, and Jacob awarded him the double portion usually allotted to the firstborn by declaring that his sons Manasseh and Ephraim would be considered independent tribes (Etz Yosef).  Just as this one’s mother encountered difficulty with birth, so too, that one’s mother encountered difficulty when she gave birth. Just as this one’s brother hated him, so too, that one’s brothers hated him. Just as this one’s brother sought to kill him, so too, that one’s brothers sought to kill him. Just as this one was a shepherd, so too, that one was a shepherd. This one was hated, and that one was hated. This one was robbed twice, and that one was robbed twice.18Jacob referred twice to sheep stolen from his care for which he would then have to compensate Laban (Genesis 31:39). Joseph himself was kidnapped by his brothers and then stolen from them and sold into slavery (see Genesis 37:28; Maharzu).  This one was blessed with wealth, and that one was blessed with wealth. This one went outside of the Land [of Israel], and that one went outside the Land [of Israel]. This one married a woman from outside the Land [of Israel], and that one married a woman from outside the Land [of Israel]. This one bore children outside the Land [of Israel], and that one bore children outside of the Land [of Israel]. This one was accompanied by angels, and that one was accompanied by angels.19See section 14.  This one rose to greatness by means of a dream, and that one rose to greatness by means of a dream.20God blessed Jacob in a dream (Genesis 28:12–15). Joseph rose to power by interpreting Pharoah’s dream (Etz Yosef).  This one was blessed in the house of his father-in-law, and that one was blessed in the house of his father-in-law. This one descended to Egypt, and that one descended to Egypt. This one ended the famine, and that one ended the famine.21Joseph interpreted Pharaoh’s dream as indicating only seven years of famine rather than fourteen or twenty-eight, and due to his interpretation, the famine was in fact meant to last only seven years. But when Jacob came to Egypt, the famine ended abruptly after only two years (see Bereshit Rabba 89:9).  This one administered an oath, and that one administered an oath.22Jacob asked Joseph to take an oath to bury him in the Land of Israel, and Joseph administered a similar oath to the children of Israel.  This one commanded, and that one commanded.23Jacob commanded his sons to bury him in the Land of Israel (Genesis 49:29). Joseph commanded his servants to embalm Jacob (Genesis 50:2).  This one died in Egypt, and that one died in Egypt. This one was embalmed, and that one was embalmed. This one’s bones were taken up [to the Land of Israel], and that one’s bones were taken up [to the Land of Israel].
“Joseph, seventeen years old…” – and you say he was a lad?24The term lad, used here in connection with Joseph, generally indicates someone younger than seventeen. It is because he would perform the actions of a lad – he would groom his eyes, lift his heels, and curl his hair. “Was herding…Joseph brought evil report of them to their father” – what did he say? Rabbi Meir, Rabbi Yehuda, and Rabbi Shimon: Rabbi Meir says: Your sons are suspected of eating the limb of a living animal. Rabbi Shimon says: They are directing their glances at the girls of the land. Rabbi Yehuda says: They are demeaning the sons of the maidservants and calling them slaves. Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: He was punished for all three of them. “Balance and scales of justice are the Lord’s” (Proverbs 16:11) – the Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You said: Your sons are suspected of eating the limb of a living animal; as you live, even at their time of corruption, they will slaughter and only then will they eat’ – “and slaughtered a goat” (Genesis 37:31).25After the sale of Joseph, they slaughtered a goat and dipped Joseph’s tunic in its blood. The verse emphasizes that they first slaughtered the goat.  ‘You said: They are demeaning the sons of the maidservants and calling them slaves’ – “Joseph was sold as a slave” (Psalms 105:17). ‘You said: They are directing their glances at the girls of the land; as you live, I will incite the bear against you’ – “His master’s wife cast her eyes [upon Joseph, and she said: Lie with me]” (Genesis 39:7).
“Israel loved Joseph more than all his sons, because he was a son of his old age; he crafted him a fine [passim] tunic” (Genesis 37:3). “His brothers saw that their father loved him more than all his brothers, and they hated him, and could not speak peaceably to him” (Genesis 37:4). “Israel loved Joseph” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya: Rabbi Yehuda says: Because the contours of [Joseph’s] face resembled his. Rabbi Neḥemya said: All the halakhot that Shem and Ever had transmitted to Jacob, he transmitted to him. “He crafted him a fine tunic” – Reish Lakish said in the name of Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya: A person must refrain from treating one of his children differently, as due to the fine tunic that Jacob crafted for Joseph, “and they hated him…”  “Fine [passim]” – as it would reach the palm of his hand [pas yado].26This was a sign of status, as it indicated that the wearer did not need to labor with his hands. Alternatively, passim – as it was extremely thin and light and could be hidden in the palm of his hand. “Fine [passim]” – they conducted a lottery [shehefisu] in its regard to determine who would take it to his father, and it fell on Judah. “Fine [passim]” – after the troubles that befell him: Peh – Potifar; samekh – merchants [soḥarim]; yod – Ishmaelites [Yishmaelim]; mem – Midianites [Midyanim].27See Genesis 37:28.  “Fine [passim]” – Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish in the name of Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya: “Come and see the works of God” (Psalms 66:5), and it is written thereafter: “He turned the sea into dry land” (Psalms 66:6). Why was it that “they hated him”? It was so that the sea would be split before them; passim – strips in the sea [pas yam].28God arranged that the brothers would hate Joseph, leading to his becoming a slave in Egypt, so that Joseph could withstand the temptation of Potifar’s wife. Consequently, he would accrue great merit, and it was as a result of that merit that the sea was split for the Israelites (Rashash). 
“His brothers saw that their father loved him more than all his brothers” – Rabbi Ahava bar Ze’eira said: From the defamation of the tribes you learn their praise. Elsewhere: “Avshalom did not speak to Amnon, either good or bad” (II Samuel 13:22) – what was in his heart remained in his heart; however, here: “And could not speak peaceably to him” – what was in their heart was in their mouth.
“Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it to his brothers; and they hated him even more” (Genesis 37:5). “He said to them: Please, hear this dream that I dreamed” (Genesis 37:6). “Joseph dreamed a dream.… He said to them: Please [na], hear” – he said: In this manner the prophets will rebuke you: “Hear now [na] what the Lord is saying” (Micah 6:1) “Behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and behold, my sheaf arose and also stood upright, and behold, your sheaves gathered around and prostrated themselves to my sheaf” (Genesis 37:7). “Behold, we were binding sheaves” – you were reaping produce, and I was reaping produce; yours would rot, and mine would keep. “And behold, my sheaf [alumati] arose and also stood upright” – Rabbi Levi and Rabbi Aḥa: Rabbi Levi said: You are destined to craft mute [ilmim] idols before Yerovam’s calves, and say: “This is your god, Israel” (Exodus 32:4).29See I Samuel 12:28. Rabbi Aḥa said: You are destined to conceal matters about me before our father, saying: “A savage beast devoured him” (Genesis 37:20). What will stand in my favor? It is mother’s silence.30This is a reference to Rachel’s silence when Laban gave Jacob Leah in her place. “And behold, my sheaf arose and also stood upright, and behold, your sheaves gathered around” – this corresponds to the five times that they are destined to prostrate themselves to him.31The words binding, sheaf, and sheaves, all have the Hebrew root alef-lamed-mem, which appears five times in this verse.  “His brothers said to him: Will you reign over us; will you have dominion over us? They hated him even more, for his dreams and for his words” (Genesis 37:8). “His brothers said to him: Will you reign over us” – Rabi Levi and Rabbi Simon: One said: Because they answered him begrudgingly, that is why he produced wicked ones.32Because they did not want Joseph’s descendants to rule over them, the kings he produced, Yerovam and Ahab, were wicked (Etz Yosef).  One said: Because they answered him with a double expression, that is why he produced kings.33The fact that they said, even rhetorically, that he would both reign and have dominion caused his descendants to become kings. 
“He dreamed yet another dream, and related it to his brothers, and he said: Behold, I dreamed another dream: and, behold, the sun, the moon, and eleven stars prostrated themselves to me” (Genesis 37:9). “He dreamed yet another dream…” – when Joseph said: “Behold, the sun, the moon,” Jacob said: Who revealed to him that my name is sun?34See Bereshit Rabba 68:10. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Joshua said to the sun: Wayward slave, were you not purchased with the money of my father? Did my father not see you in the dream: “Behold, the sun, the moon…prostrated themselves to me”? You, too, stand still before me. Immediately, “the sun stood still, and the moon stopped” (Joshua 10:13). “He related it to his father and to his brothers, and his father scolded him and said to him: What is this dream that you dreamed? Will we come, I, your mother, and your brothers, to prostrate ourselves to you to the ground?” (Genesis 37:10).  “He related it to his father and to his brothers, and his father scolded him” – the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘So you will scold your prophets,’ as it is stated: “Now, why did you not scold Jeremiah of Anatot” (Jeremiah 29:27).35This quote, ascribed to the false prophet Shemaya the Neḥelamite, indicates that the Israelites were wont to scold their prophets.  “And said to him: What is this dream that you dreamed”? Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina: So, our patriarch Jacob believed that the revival of the dead would occur in his lifetime, as it is stated: “Will we come [havo navo]” – Will I and your brothers come? That is fine. “[Will we come,] I and your mother” – is your mother not dead; and you say: “I, your mother, and your brothers?36Nevertheless, the next verse states: “But his father kept the matter in mind” (Genesis 37:11). However, Jacob our patriarch did not know that the matter related to Bilha, Rachel’s maidservant, who raised him as though she was his mother.
“His brothers envied him; but his father kept the matter in mind” (Genesis 37:12). “His brothers envied him; but his father kept [the matter] in mind” – Rabbi Levi said: He took a quill and wrote on which day, at which hour, at what place.37He recorded all the details of Joseph’s recounting of the dream so he could refer back to it. This indicated that he believed in the dream.  Rabbi Ḥiyya Rabba said: “But his father kept the matter in mind” – the Divine Spirit was saying: Keep these matters in mind because they are destined to occur. Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina: This is what our patriarch Jacob believed. He saw that these matters were impending.38Jacob saw that he was in fact destined to bow to Joseph (Matnot Kehuna).  He said: If his ledger was scrutinized, what can I do?39If my ledger has been scrutinized, meaning if my own record has been scrutinized in heaven and I am destined to bow to my own son as a result of my sins, so be it (Matnot Kehuna). 
“His brothers went to herd their father’s flock in Shekhem” (Genesis 37:12). “His brothers went to herd [lirot et]” – there are dots over the word et, indicating that they went only to herd themselves.40They went to eat and drink for their own pleasure, not primarily to herd the flocks. “Israel said to Joseph: Are your brothers not herding in Shekhem? Go, and I will send you to them. He said to him: Here I am” (Genesis 37:13). “Israel said to Joseph: Are your brothers not herding in Shekhem?” Rabbi Tanḥuma in the name of Rabbi Berekhya: He treated him with deference in accordance with the reverence due a father from the son.41Although Joseph’s relations with his brothers were strained, he agreed to go in order to honor his father. “He said to him: Here I am” – Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: Jacob our patriarch would remember these words, and his innards would be torn to shreds: You knew that your brothers hated you, and you would say to me: Here I am. “He said to him: Go now, observe the well-being of your brothers and the well-being of the flock and bring me back word. He sent him from the valley of Hebron, and he came to Shekhem” (Genesis 37:14). “He said to him: Go now, observe the well-being of your brothers and the well-being of the flock” – “the well-being of your brothers,” fine; but what is “the well-being of the flock”? This is [the source of] the saying: A person must inquire after the well-being of an item from which he derives benefit. “And bring me back word. He sent him from the valley of Hebron” – but is Hebron not situated in the mountain, yet it is written: “He sent him from the valley of [me’emek] Hebron”? Rav Aḥa said: He went to fulfill that profound [haamuka] counsel that the Holy One blessed be He arranged between Himself and His noble friend who is buried in Hebron: “They will be enslaved to them, and they will oppress them” (Genesis 15:13).
“A man found him, and behold, he was wandering in the field. The man asked him, saying: What do you seek? He said: I seek my brothers. Please tell me where they are herding. The man said: They traveled from here, for I heard them saying: We shall go to Dotan. Joseph went after his brothers, and he found them in Dotan” (Genesis 37:15–17). “A man found him, and behold, he was wandering in the field” – Rabbi Yannai said: Three angels came to his assistance: “A man found him”; “the man asked him”; “the man said.”  “They traveled from here” – from the attributes of the Omnipresent.42They abandoned the traits of mercy, grace, kindness, and the like. “They saw him from afar, and before he approached them, they conspired against him to kill him” (Genesis 37:18). “They saw him from afar” – they said: Come let us sic the dogs on him. “They said one to another: Behold, that dreamer is coming” (Genesis 37:19). “Now let us go and kill him and cast him into one of the pits, and we will say: A savage beast devoured him; and we will see what will become of his dreams” (Genesis 37:20). “They said one to another: Behold, that dreamer [baal haḥalomot]” – The Rabbis said: Here he is coming, bearing his dreams. Rabbi Levi said: This one is destined to mislead them to follow the Baal.43Joseph’s descendant Yerovam will incite them to engage in idol worship. “Now let us go and kill him” – the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘You say: “And we will see” and I say: We will see – now we will see “whose word will stand” (Jeremiah 44:28), mine or yours.’
“Reuben heard, and delivered him from their hand and said: Let us not smite him mortally” (Genesis 37:21). “Reuben heard, and delivered him” – where had he been?44The fact that he heard implies that he was not there during the initial discussion and heard about it after the fact (Etz Yosef).  Rabbi Yosei, Rabbi Neḥemya, and the Rabbis: Rabbi Yosei said: Each one of them would serve his father on his day, and that day was Reuben’s day. Rabbi Neḥemya said: Reuben said: I am the firstborn, and the blame will be attributed only to me. The Rabbis say: Reuben said: He enumerates me with my brothers; shall I not rescue him? I was under the impression that I had been banished because of that incident,45The incident of Reuben and Bilha; see Genesis 35:22.  and he enumerates me with my brothers, As it is stated: “And eleven stars prostrated themselves to me” (Genesis 37:9) – shall I not rescue him? The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘You were the first to engage in the saving of lives; as you live, they will designate cities of refuge first only within your boundaries.’ That is what is written: “Betzer in the wilderness…[for the Reubenites]” (Deuteronomy 4:43).
“It was when Joseph came to his brothers that they stripped Joseph of his tunic, the fine tunic that was upon him” (Genesis 37:23). “It was when Joseph came to his brothers that they stripped Joseph of his tunic” – Rabbi Elazar said: He came with praise.46Joseph came with praise for his brothers, i.e., in a conciliatory state of mind, as implied in the verse: “Joseph came to his brothers.” “They stripped Joseph” – this is the cloak. “Of his tunic” – this is his shirt. “The fine tunic” – this is the tunic. “That was upon him” – this is his undergarment.  “They took him [vayikaḥuhu] and cast him into the pit, and the pit was empty; there was no water in it” (Genesis 37:24). “They took him [vayikaḥuhu]” – it is written “he took him [vayikaḥehu].” Who was it? It was Simeon. When did [Joseph] repay him? It was later: “He took Simeon from them [and incarcerated him before their eyes]” (Genesis 42:24). “And cast him into the pit, and the pit was empty; there was no water in it” – there was no water in it, but there were serpents and scorpions in it. There were two pits,47This is based on the fact that the verse mentions “the pit” twice.  one filled with stones and one filled with fiery snakes and scorpions. Rav Aḥa said: “The pit was empty” – Jacob’s pit was emptied.48This is a reference to Jacob’s sons.  “There was no water in it” – there were in it no matters of Torah, which are likened to water, just as it says: “Ho, everyone thirsty, go to water” (Isaiah 55:1). It is written: “If a man is found abducting any of his brethren…[and he sold him, that thief shall die]” (Deuteronomy 24:7), and you are selling your brother?
“They sat to eat bread, and they lifted their eyes and saw, and, behold, a caravan of Ishmaelites was coming from Gilad, and their camels were bearing spices, and balm, and ladanum, going to take them down to Egypt” (Genesis 37:25). “They sat to eat bread” – Rabbi Aḥva bar Ze’eira said: The transgression of the tribes is remembered forever; it gave hope to the world. “They sat to eat bread” – he gave everyone in the world bread to eat.49The sale of Joseph led to his appointment to viceroy in Egypt and to his role as dispenser of food during the famine. “And they lifted their eyes and saw…” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: But is it not typical of the Ishmaelites to bear only hides and tar? Rather, see what the Holy One blessed be He prepared for that righteous one at that moment: Sacks filled with spices, so that the wind would blow through them [and provide a pleasant smell] to counteract the odor of the Arabs.50Because the Ishmaelites generally transported foul-smelling substances, they and their equipment had an unpleasant odor. God arranged for the caravan carrying Joseph to Egypt to have pleasant-smelling spices in order to mask the foul, unpleasant odor.  “Judah said to his brothers: What profit is it if we kill our brother and conceal his blood” (Genesis 37:26). “Judah said to his brothers…” – Rabbi Yehuda bar Ilai said: The verse is speaking in praise of Judah. In three places, Judah spoke before his brothers and they crowned him king over them.51They accepted his advice or his leadership.  “Judah said to his brothers”; “Judah and his brothers came [.…And Judah said]” (Genesis 44:14);52This was after Benjamin was caught with Joseph’s goblet; Judah led the brothers in their return to Joseph and spoke as their representative. “Judah approached him [and said]” (Genesis 44:18).53This was after Joseph informed them that Benjamin would be his slave. Judah again spoke on behalf of the brothers, argued for Benjamin’s release, and offered to take Benjamin’s place as a slave.  “Come, let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and let our hand not be upon him, for he is our brother, our own flesh. His brothers heeded him” (Genesis 37:27). “Come, let us sell him to the Ishmaelites” – they said: Let us adopt the way of the world. Canaan, who sinned,54Canaan reported Noah’s nakedness to Noah’s sons (see Bereshit Rabba 36:7).  was he not cursed to be a slave? This one, too, let us sell him to the Ishmaelites.55Joseph had slandered his brothers (Genesis 37:2; see above, section 7). Therefore, they considered him worthy of a similar fate to that of Canaan.  “His brothers heeded him.”
“Midianite men, merchants, passed, and they pulled and lifted Joseph from the pit; they sold Joseph to the Ishmaelites for twenty silver pieces, and they brought Joseph to Egypt” (Genesis 37:28). “Midianite [midyanim] men, merchants, passed” – their contentiousness [hadayyanim] passed.56Joseph’s brothers regretted what they had done. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Baitus in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon: It is written: “Why do you lead us astray, Lord, from Your ways?” (Isaiah 63:17) – when You wished, You placed in their heart to love, and when You wished, You placed in their heart to hate. The Holy One blessed be He said: You sold Rachel’s son for twenty maot, which are five sela’im. That is why each and every one of you will separate as the value of his son five sela’im of the Tyrian maneh.57This is a reference to the mitzva of redeeming firstborn sons (see Maharzu).  Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: The Holy One blessed be He said to the tribes: You sold Rachel’s son for twenty silver pieces. Consequently, each and every one of you received a beka per person.58Each one of the brothers involved in the sale received a beka, which equals half a shekel. That is what is written: “One beka per head, one half-shekel” (Exodus 38:26).59The head tax mentioned in the verse was set at the same price that each of the brothers had received for the sale of Joseph (Maharzu). 
“Reuben returned to the pit, and behold, Joseph was not in the pit, and he rent his garments” (Genesis 37:29). “Reuben returned to the pit” – where had he been? Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua: Rabbi Eliezer said: In his sackcloth and his fasting.60He was preoccupied with his repentance for his action involving Bilha (Genesis 35:22). When he was free, he went and peered into that pit. That is what is written: “Reuben returned to the pit.” The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘A person has never sinned before Me and repented, and you are the first to initiate repentance. As you live, your descendant will arise and be the first to initiate repentance.’61He will be the first to teach about the full power of repentance, such as the fact that repentance out of love can cause one’s sins to be considered as merits (Yefe To’ar).  Who is that? It is Hosea, as it is stated: “Return, Israel, to the Lord your God” (Hosea 14:2). “They took Joseph’s tunic, and slaughtered a goat, and dipped the tunic in the blood” (Genesis 37:31). “They took Joseph’s tunic, and slaughtered a goat” – why a goat? Because its blood is similar to that of man. “They sent the fine tunic, and they brought it to their father and said: We found this. Identify, please: Is it your son’s tunic or not” (Genesis 37:32). “They sent the fine tunic…” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The Holy One blessed be He said to Judah: ‘You said: “Identify, please”; as you live, Tamar will say to you: “Identify, please”’ (Genesis 38:25). “He identified it and said: My son’s tunic! A savage beast devoured him; Joseph has been mauled” (Genesis 37:33). “He identified it and said: My son’s tunic” – he said: I do not know what I am seeing.62Jacob was used to a high level of perception, fueled by the Divine Spirit. But from this incident until he reunited with Joseph, that clarity left him, and he was unsure of the exact facts or full ramifications of what he was seeing (Maharzu).  “My son’s tunic! A savage beast devoured him…” – Rav Huna said: The Divine Spirit flashed in him: “A savage beast devoured him” – this is Potifar’s wife.63Rav Huna explains that although Jacob himself was unsure what had occurred, he said something that alluded to future events (Maharzu). 
“Jacob rent his garments, placed sackcloth on his loins, and mourned his son many days” (Genesis 37:34). “Jacob rent his garments” – Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Hoshaya: The tribes caused their father to rend. Where did they receive retribution? In Egypt, as it was stated: “They rent their garments…” (Genesis 44:13). Joseph caused the tribes to rend; his descendant arose, and retribution was exacted against him, as it is stated: “Joshua rent his garments” (Joshua 7:6). Benjamin caused the tribes to rend.64When Joseph’s goblet was found in Benjamin’s sack, his brothers rent their garments. Although this was not Benjamin’s fault, since it occurred through him, he was also punished. Alternatively, knowing that his brothers’ money was returned on their first trip, he should have checked his sack before setting out (Yefe To’ar).  Where was retribution exacted against him? In Shushan the citadel, as it is stated: “Mordekhai rent his garments” (Esther 4:1). Manasseh caused the tribes to rend;65Manasseh was the messenger Joseph sent to search his brothers’ sacks (Matnot Kehuna).  that is why his inheritance was split, half of it in the land of the Jordan and half of it in the land of Canaan.  “Placed sackcloth on his loins” – Rabbi Aivu said: Because Jacob our patriarch adopted sackcloth, it does not depart from him, from his children, and from his descendants until the end of all the generations. But it is practiced only among his prominent descendants, [such as] David, as it is stated: “David and the elders, covered in sackcloth, fell on their faces” (I Chronicles 21:16). Ahab – “and placed sackcloth upon his flesh” (I Kings 21:27). Yoram – “the people looked, and behold, the sackcloth was upon his flesh” (II Kings 6:30). Mordekhai – “he donned sackcloth and ashes” (Esther 4:1). “And mourned his son many days” – these were twenty-two years.66Joseph was sold at age seventeen and stood before Pharaoh at age thirty. His father descended to Egypt in the second year of the famine that followed the seven years of plenty. Joseph was then thirty-nine years old. Thus, he was separated from Jacob for twenty-two years, corresponding to the twenty-two years that Jacob was away from his father.
“All his sons and all his daughters arose to console him, but he refused to be consoled; he said: For I will descend mourning to the grave, to my son. His father wept for him” (Genesis 37:35). “All his sons and all his daughters arose” – how many daughters did he have? He had one, and if only he had buried her. It is, rather, that a person does not refrain from calling his son-in-law his son and his daughter-in-law his daughter. Rabbi Yehuda says: The tribes married their sisters. That is what is written: “All his sons and all his daughters arose to console him.”67This view accords with the statement that each of Jacob’s sons was born with a twin daughter (see Bereshit Rabba 82:8). Each son then married one of the daughters of Jacob from a different mother, as according to the Noahide laws one is permitted to marry a half-sister from a different mother (Etz Yosef).  “But he refused to be consoled” – a certain noblewoman asked Rabbi Yosei, she said to him: It is written: “For Judah prevailed over his brothers” (I Chronicles 5:2), and it is written: “Judah was consoled, and he went up to his sheepshearers” (Genesis 38:12),68His two sons and his wife died, and he was able to be consoled. And from the fact that the verse states that Judah prevailed over his brothers, it is implied that he was the most elevated and that his conduct is worthy of emulation (Etz Yosef).  and this one, the father of them all, “refused to be consoled”? He said to her: One is consoled for the dead, but one is not consoled for the living. “His father wept for him” – this is Isaac. Rabbi Levi and Rabbi Simon said: When [Jacob] was with him he would weep, but when he would leave him, he would go, bathe, and anoint himself with oil.69Isaac was a prophet and knew the truth about Joseph.  Why did he not reveal it to him? He said: The Holy One blessed be He did not reveal it to him and I will reveal it to him? Rabbi Simon said: This was based on: Anyone for whom one mourns, one mourns with him.70If one’s close relative is in mourning, one mourns together with him (Moed Katan 20b). 
“The Medanites sold him to Egypt, to Potifar, an official of Pharaoh, the chief executioner” (Genesis 37:36). “The Medanites sold him” – how many bills of sale were written for him? Rabbi Yudan said: Four – his brothers to the Ishmaelites, the Ishmaelites to the merchants, the merchants to the Midianites, and the Midianites sold him to Egypt. Rav Huna said: Five – the Midianites sold him to the country’s treasury. Potifar came and purchased him from the country’s treasury.

=== 85 | 85 ===
“It was at that time; Judah descended from his brothers and turned to an Adulamite man, and his name was Ḥira” (Genesis 38:1). “It was at that time; Judah descended from his brothers” – “Judah has betrayed, and an abomination has been performed…” (Malachi 2:11). [God] said to him: ‘You have denied, Judah; you have lied, Judah’ – “and an abomination has been performed in Israel” (Malachi 2:11).1Judah is portrayed as having denied and lied in that he betrayed his status as a member of Jacob’s household by marrying a Canaanite woman (Matnot Kehuna). This is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Neḥemya (see Bereshit Rabba 84:21).  ‘Judah has become profane’ – “for Judah has profaned the holy of the Lord that He loves” (Malachi 2:11). “It was at that time.” “I will yet bring to you a dispossessor, inhabitant of Maresha; [the glory of Israel] will come as far as Adulam” (Micah 1:15) – the King and Holy One of Israel.2God will come to Adulam to punish Israel (Yefe To’ar).  [Alternatively,] should the glory of Israel have “come as far as Adulam”?3In this clause the midrash interprets “the glory of Israel” to refer to Judah himself. This sentence is to be read rhetorically; was it really fitting for Judah to come to Adulam and to marry a Canaanite woman? (see Yefe To’ar).  “Come as far as Adulam” – as it is written: “And turned to an Adulamite man.” “It was at that time” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman began: “For I have known the thoughts” (Jeremiah 29:11) – the tribes were engaged in the sale of Joseph, Joseph was engaged in his sackcloth and his fasting, Reuben was engaged in his sackcloth and his fasting, Jacob was engaged in his sackcloth and his fasting, Judah was engaged in taking a wife for himself, and the Holy One blessed be He was engaged in creating the light of the messianic king: “It was at that time, Judah descended from his brothers.”4Judah married the daughter of Shua, thereby establishing the family that would produce the Messiah.   “Before she begins labor, she will give birth” (Isaiah 66:7) – before the first one who would enslave [Israel] was born, the ultimate redeemer was born. “It was at that time” – what is written prior to the matter? “The Medanites sold him to Egypt” (Genesis 37:36).5As the events that would lead to Israel’s enslavement in Egypt were just beginning to unfold, God was already planting the seeds of the ultimate redemption. 
“It was at that time” – the verse should have said only: “Joseph was taken down to Egypt” (Genesis 39:1).6This verse, describing the sale of Joseph to Potifar in Egypt, is the direct continuation of chapter 37, which concludes with Joseph being brought down to Egypt. This narrative is interrupted by the story of Judah in chapter 38.  Why, then, did it juxtapose this portion to that one? Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Yoḥanan: Rabbi Elazar said: In order to juxtapose descent to descent.7The story of Judah’s descent is embedded within the story of Joseph’s descent to imply that Judah lost stature among his brothers due to the sale of Joseph, when they saw how much pain it caused their father (Yefe To’ar).  Rabbi Yoḥanan said: In order to juxtapose “identify” (Genesis 37:32) to “identify” (Genesis 38:25).8Because Judah was responsible for the sale of Joseph, in which the brothers asked Jacob to identify Joseph’s tunic, he experienced the embarrassment of having to admit his error when Tamar asked him to identify the possessions he had left with her (Etz Yosef).  Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: In order to juxtapose the incident of Tamar to the incident of Potifar’s wife. Just as this one, [Tamar, acted] for the sake of Heaven, so too, that one, [Potifar’s wife, acted] for the sake of Heaven, as Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: She saw through her astrology that she was destined to bring forth a child from him, but she did not know whether it would be from her or from her daughter. That is what is written: “[The astrologers, the stargazers,] who foretell by the new moons of that which will befall you” (Isaiah 47:13). Rabbi Aivu said: [They foretell] “of that which [will befall you]” but not all that [will befall you].9They do not provide all the details. Similarly, “[They were both naked, the man and his wife,] and they were not ashamed” (Genesis 2:25), “the serpent was…cunning” (Genesis 3:1). The verse should have said only: “The Lord God made for Adam and for his wife [hide tunics, and clothed them]” (Genesis 3:21).10Why is the story of the serpent inserted in between the verse stating that Adam and Eve were naked and the verse stating that God clothed them?  Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa said: It is to inform you for what reason that wicked one [the serpent] accosted them; because it saw them engaged in conjugal relations, it lusted after them. Rabbi Yaakov of Kefar Ḥanin said: So as not to end with the portion of the serpent.11The verse regarding the hide tunics was placed after the incident of the serpent so as not to conclude a passage with God’s curses, given in the aftermath of the story of the serpent.  Similarly, “[Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise, exalt, and glorify the King of heaven…] and He is able to humble those who walk in arrogance” (Daniel 4:34), “King Belshatzar” (Daniel 5:1) and “Darius the Mede” (Daniel 6:1). Where is Evil Merodakh?12The text proceeds from discussing Nebuchadnezzar to King Belshatzar and to Darius the Mede, while skipping Evil Merodakh, who reigned between Nebuchadnezzar and Belshatzar.  Rabbi Elazar said: To juxtapose a wicked one to a wicked one, a tormentor to a tormentor, a conceited one to a conceited one.13Both Nebuchadnezzar and his grandson Belshatzar were wicked, tormentors, and conceited. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: In order to juxtapose a reign that was truncated to a reign that was truncated.  Similarly, “During that night, Belshatzar the Chaldean king was killed” (Daniel 5:30), “and Darius the Mede [received the kingdom]” (Daniel 6:1). Where is [the chapter beginning:] “In the third year of the reign of King Belshatzar” (Daniel 8:1)?14Why does this chapter, which is set during the reign of Belshatzar, not precede the transition in the text to the reign of Darius?  Rav Huna said: So that they will not say that this is mere literature; so that everyone will know that he said it through the divine spirit.15At times, works composed with the divine spirit arrange events out of chronological order for esoteric reasons (Maharzu).  The Rabbis say: In order to indicate regarding the whole book that it was stated through the divine spirit. Here too, it should have said: “Joseph was taken down to Egypt” (Genesis 39:1), but it is written: “Judah descended from his brothers.” [Judah] said [to his brothers]:16This is an additional insight into the phrase “Judah descended from his brothers” (Yefe To’ar).  ‘Let us disperse ourselves, for so long as we are together, the promissory note is liable to be collected.’17Since we sinned together in the sale of Joseph, it would be fitting for the punishment to occur when we are all together (Etz Yosef). Alternatively, the promissory note refers to the prophecy to Abraham that his descendants would be oppressed in a foreign land. Judah sensed that the departure of Joseph might eventually lead to their all descending to exile. That would be more likely to occur if they were all together (Yefe To’ar).  The Holy One blessed be He said to them: If ten people were implicated for robbery, can one not be apprehended for the act of them all?18I can punish each of you separately, or I can punish even just one of you for the entire episode.  When they were implicated regarding the goblet, they said: “God has found [matza] the iniquity of your servants” (Genesis 44:16). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: The creditor has found the opportunity to collect on his promissory note. Rabbi Levi said: Like this one who empties [mematze] the barrel and leaves it with only its dregs.19God is punishing us for the sin in its entirety, to the last drop.  The Rabbis say:20The Rabbis say another reason for the juxtaposition of the story of Judah descending from his brothers and marrying, to the story of the sale of Joseph.  [Judah said:] ‘Come and let us provide for ourselves. In the past, he [Jacob] would have felt obligated to arrange for us to marry wives, but now he is preoccupied with his sackcloth and fasting. It is not right that he should engage in [arranging for us to marry wives.’ They said to Judah: ‘Are you not the leader of us all? You arise and provide for yourself.’ Immediately, “Judah descended” – it is a descent for him that he married a gentile woman. It is a descent for him that he buried his wife and his sons.
Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon and Rabbi Ḥanin in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Anyone who begins a mitzva and does not complete it, buries his wife and his children. From whom do you derive this? It is from Judah. “Judah said to his brothers: What profit is it [if we kill our brother and conceal his blood?]” (Genesis 37:26). He should have borne him on his shoulder to his father. What did it cause for him? He buried his wife and his children. Rav Huna in the name of Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili: Anyone who begins a mitzva and does not complete it, but another comes and completes it, it is attributed to the second one. That is what is written: “Joseph’s bones, which the children of Israel took up” (Joshua 24:32). Did Moses not take them up, as it is stated: “Moses took Joseph’s bones with him” (Exodus 13:19)? But since it was decreed upon him that he would not enter the land, and these [the children of Israel] tended to them, it is therefore attributed to them. “Joseph’s bones…” (Joshua 24:32) – they analogize it; to what is the matter comparable? To robbers who entered a certain wine cellar. They took a particular jug and drank. The owner of the cellar peered at them. He said to them: ‘May it be pleasant for you, may it be enjoyable for you, may it be sweet for you. You drank the wine, restore the jug to its place.’ So, the Holy One blessed be He said to the tribes: ‘You sold Joseph. Restore his bones to their place.’ Another matter: Joseph said to them: ‘To the place from which you abducted me, return me’ – “are your brothers not herding in Shekhem?” (Genesis 37:13).21This proves that the sale of Joseph took place in or around Shekhem.  That is what the children of Israel did: “Joseph’s bones, which the children of Israel took up from Egypt, they buried in Shekhem” (Joshua 24:32).
“And turned to an Adulamite man, and his name was Ḥira” – the Rabbis say: Ḥira is Ḥiram who was in the days of David, as it is stated: “For Ḥiram had been David’s friend all the days” (I Kings 5:15) – this man was accustomed to being a friend of this tribe. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: Ḥiram was someone else. According to the opinion of the Rabbis, he lived close to one thousand two hundred years; according to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda [ben Rabbi Simon], he lived close to five hundred years.22Both opinions agree that Hiram was the prince of Tyre who was addressed by the prophet Ezekiel (Ezekiel 28:2) almost five hundred years after the time of David (see Yalkut Shimoni, Va’era 180) The debate is whether Ḥiram was also the same person as the Ḥira in the time of Judah, five hundred or so years before David.  “There Judah saw the daughter of a certain Canaanite whose name was Shua, and he married her and cohabited with her” (Genesis 38:2). “There Judah saw the daughter of a certain Canaanite whose name was Shua” – the daughter23The Hebrew text has the word son, rather than daughter, but many suggest that the text should say daughter (see, e.g., Etz Yosef).  of a merchant,24This opinion interprets kenaani, generally translated as Canaanite, to mean merchant, which is in fact how the term is used in some places in Bible (see, e.g., Isaiah 23:8). Accordingly, Judah followed the family tradition of not marrying Canaanites.  the shining light of his place.  “She conceived, and she bore a son; he called his name Er” (Genesis 38:3). “She conceived, and she bore a son; he25Although the most common text of the midrash says “she”, the actual text of the verse is “he”.  called his name Er” – as he was discharged [shehuar] from the world. “She conceived again, and bore a son; she called his name Onan. She continued and bore a son again, and called his name Shela; and he was in Keziv when she bore him” (Genesis 38:4–5). “She conceived again…Onan” – as he brought acute mourning [anina] upon himself. “She conceived again.… Shela” – as he initiated a genealogy [shenishtalshel] in the world.26This translation is based on a variant reading, “in the world [baolam],” instead of “from the world [min haolam].” “She continued…again…Keziv” – Poskat,27This is the Aramaic name for Keziv. the name of a place. “Er, Judah’s firstborn, was wicked in the eyes of the Lord, and the Lord put him to death” (Genesis 38:7). “Er, Judah’s firstborn, was wicked in the eyes of the Lord” – he would plow in the gardens and discharge in the waste.28This is a euphemism for the fact that he would begin intercourse with his wife but then withdraw before discharging the semen so as to avoid impregnating her.
“Judah said to Onan: Consort with your brother’s wife, and consummate levirate marriage with her, and establish offspring for your brother” (Genesis 38:8). “Judah said to Onan…” – Judah was the first to initiate the mitzva of levirate marriage. It is taught: Any matter that was in the category of permitted, became prohibited, and then became permitted again, it does not return to its initial permitted state, but rather, to a second permitted state. A yevama,29A yevama is a woman whose husband died without children. She is tied in a levirate bond to his brother, who is called the yavam. because she was in the category of permitted, became prohibited, and was then permitted,30Before she married, she was permitted to marry the brother of her eventual husband. Once she married, she became forbidden to her husband’s brother. When her husband died, she became permitted to him once again. does she, perhaps, return to her initial permitted state? The verse states: “Her husband’s brother shall consort with her” (Deuteronomy 25:5) – mitzva.31This view accords with that of Abba Shaul (Yevamot 39b), who holds that levirate marriage may be performed only if the intent in doing so is to perform the mitzva, and not if the intent is simply because they would like to be married. This is different from the permitted status of the yevama to her eventual yavam before she had been married. At that time they could have married for any reason they wanted (Yefe To’ar).  Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta entered into levirate marriage with his brother’s wife. He engaged in relations five times,32He had five brothers who died without children. He did not remain married to these women, but after he fulfilled the mitzva he divorced them. he engaged in relations through a sheet,33This was in order to minimize his pleasure, so he would ensure that the act was purely for the sake of the mitzva. and planted five saplings in Israel.34Five sons were born from these acts of levirate marriage.  Who were they? Rabbi Yishmael ben Rabbi Yosei, Rabbi Elazar ben Rabbi Yosei, Rabbi Menaḥem ben Rabbi Yosei, Rabbi Ḥalafta ben Rabbi Yosei, and Rabbi Avdimos ben Rabbi Yosei. He had red eyes and resembled his mother.35Rabbi Avdimos had red eyes, as did his mother. This was considered unattractive, and underscores that Rabbi Yosei was interested only in fulfilling the mitzva of levirate marriage, and therefore he did so even in this case, where the woman was not attractive. “Onan knew that the offspring would not be his, and it was when he consorted with his brother’s wife, that he spilled on the ground, so as not to give offspring for his brother” (Genesis 38:9). “Onan knew” – he would penetrate inside but spill outside. “Judah said to Tamar, his daughter-in-law: Remain a widow in your father’s house, until Shela my son matures; for he said: Lest he too die, like his brothers. Tamar went and lived in her father’s house” (Genesis 38:11). “Judah said to Tamar, his daughter-in-law” – Rabbi Elazar said: Although there is no divination, there is a portent – “lest he too die, like his brothers.” The Rabbis say: [With regard to a] house, baby, and wife,36When a person builds a house, has a child, or marries, and then experiences a period of good or bad fortune, the experience can be seen as a portent for that fortune continuing. Viewing it in this way would not violate the prohibition against divination. although there is no divination, there is a portent.
“The days accumulated, and the daughter of Shua, wife of Judah, died, and Judah was comforted, and went up to his sheepshearers, he and Ḥira, his friend the Adulamite, to Timna” (Genesis 38:12). “The days accumulated, and the daughter of Shua, wife of Judah, died.” “The days accumulated” – twelve months. “Up to his sheepshearers” – every place that shearing is stated, it makes an impression. We found likewise regarding Naval, Laban, and Avshalom.37Each of these biblical characters is recorded as having gone to shear his sheep (I Samuel 25:2; Genesis 31:19; II Samuel 13:23). In each case, this preceded a significantly negative event. Some explain that the shearing would accompanied by celebration, and these celebrations led to negative consequences (see Maharzu).  “It was told to Tamar, saying: Behold, your father-in-law is going up to Timna to shear his sheep” (Genesis 38:13). “It was told to Tamar, saying…” – Rav said: There are two Timnas, one of Judah and one of Samson.38“Samson went down to Timna, and he saw a woman in Timna of the daughters of the Philistines” (Judges 14:1). Why does it mention in its regard ascent and descent? It was an ascent for Judah because he was producing kings, and a descent for Samson because he was marrying a gentile woman. Rabbi Simon said: There is one Timna. Why does it mention ascent and descent in its regard? Rabbi Aivu ben Agri said: It is like that Beit Maon – one ascends to it from Tiberias and descends to it from Kefar Shuvti.
“She removed the garments of her widowhood from upon her; she covered herself with a veil, and she wrapped herself, and she sat at Petaḥ Einayim, which is on the road to Timna, for she saw that Shela had matured, and she had not been given to him as a wife” (Genesis 38:14). “She removed the garments of her widowhood from upon her; she covered herself with a veil” – there were two who covered themselves with a veil, Tamar and Rebecca, and both of them bore twins. Rebecca – “she took the veil and covered herself” (Genesis 24:65); Tamar – “she covered herself with a veil, and she wrapped herself.” “She sat at Petaḥ Einayim” – Rabbi Ami said: We reviewed the entire Bible, and we did not find a place whose name is Petaḥ Einayim. What is petaḥ einayim? It teaches that she directed her glance to the entrance [petaḥ] to which all eyes [einayim] are directed.39This is a reference to the gates of prayer. She said: May it be Your will, Lord my God, that I will not emerge from this house empty-handed. Alternatively, “at Petaḥ Einayim” – it teaches that she opened his eyes [shepateḥa lo et haayin]40She removed his hesitations.  by saying to him: ‘I am ritually pure, and I am unmarried.’
“Judah saw her and thought her to be a harlot, because she covered her face” (Genesis 38:15). “Judah saw her” – Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Zavda said: A person must be very careful regarding his wife’s sister and his female relatives, that he not stumble with one of them. From whom do you derive it? From Judah – “Judah saw her…” Why? It is “because she covered her face” while she was still in her father-in-law’s house.41Yehuda did not recognize Tamar because she had always kept her face covered in his house. This was a sign of modesty, which should be emulated (Yefe To’ar). Alternatively, the midrash is saying one should take care to recognize his female relatives. Yehuda did not recognize Tamar because she had always kept her face covered in his house, and that is why he mistook her for a harlot (Etz Yosef).  “He turned to her by the road, and he said: Please, let me consort with you, for he did not know that she was his daughter-in-law. She said: What will you give me that you would consort with me” (Genesis 38:16)?  Another matter: “Judah saw her” – he did not pay attention to her. When she covered her face, he said: Were she a harlot, would she have covered her face?42Originally, when Judah saw her from a distance, he took her to be a harlot, and therefore was going to distance himself from her. But then she covered her face, leading Judah to believe she was not a harlot, and he did not distance himself from her.  Rabbi Yoḥanan said: He sought to pass, but the Holy One blessed be He dispatched to him the angel that is responsible for desire. He said to him: ‘Judah, where are you going? From where will kings be produced, from where will the prominent ones be produced?’ “He turned to her by the road” – despite himself, against his will.
“He said: What is the collateral that I should give you? She said: Your signet, and your belt, and your staff that is in your hand. He gave them to her and consorted with her, and she conceived by him” (Genesis 38:18). “What is the collateral that I should give…” – Rabbi Ḥuneya said: The divine spirit flashed in her. “Your signet [ḥotamekha]” – this is kingship, just as it says: “Set me as a seal [khaḥotam] upon your heart” (Song of Songs 8:6);43This verse is taken as an allusion to the kingship (see Shir HaShirim Rabba 8:6:2; Nezer HaKodesh, based on Zohar).  “for if Konya, son of Yehoyakim king of Judah, would be a signet ring [ḥotam] upon My right hand” (Jeremiah 22:24). “And your belt [uftilekha]” – this is the Sanhedrin, which is identifiable by a thread, just as it says: “a thread of sky-blue wool” (Exodus 39:31).44The members of the Sanhedrin would always be wearing a tallit with sky-blue ritual fringes (Matnot Kehuna). Alternatively, they would wear special clothing as a sign of honor (see Rabbi David Luria; Rashash).  “And your staff” – this is the messianic king, just as it says: “A staff will emerge from the stump of Yishai” (Isaiah 11:1); “the Lord will send your staff of strength from Zion” (Psalms 110:2). “He gave them to her…and she conceived by him” – mighty like him and righteous like him. “Judah sent the goat kid in the hand of his friend the Adulamite, to take the collateral from the woman, but he did not find her” (Genesis 38:20). “Judah sent…” – Yehuda bar Naḥman in the name of Reish Lakish: “Playing [mesaḥeket] in the world of His earth” (Proverbs 8:31), “playing [mesaḥeket] before Him at all times” (Proverbs 8:30). This is the Torah, which makes a mockery [mesaḥeket] of people.45People who seek to avoid the Torah’s judgment. The Holy One blessed be He said to Judah: ‘You deceived your father with a goat kid; as you live, Tamar will deceive you with a goat kid.’
“It was about three months later that it was told to Judah, saying: Tamar your daughter-in-law acted as a harlot; moreover, behold, she conceived through harlotry. Judah said: Take her out, and she shall be burned” (Genesis 38:24). Sumekhos says in the name of Rabbi Meir: From where is it derived that the fetus is not noticeable in the woman’s womb until three months? From here: “It was about three months later.” Rav Huna in the name of Rabbi Yosei: Not at the end of three full months, but rather, most of the first, most of the last, and the entire middle one, and ultimately it is not three full ones.46If a woman conceived toward the beginning of the calendar month, her fetus will be noticeable after the remainder of that month, the entire following month, and the majority of the month after that have passed, even though that is not three full months. This is derived from the phrase “it was about three months later.”   “Moreover, behold, she conceived through harlotry” – it teaches that she would pat her belly and say: I am pregnant with kings; I am pregnant with redeemers.47The phrase “moreover, behold, she conceived through harlotry” is understood to imply that she was not embarrassed that she had conceived; on the contrary, she was proud, even though onlookers assumed that it had occurred through harlotry (Yefe To’ar).  “Take her out and she shall be burned” – Efrayim the cucumber seller [makshaa],48Cucumbers are kishuim; alternatively, makshaa refers to one who poses many questions [kushyot]. student of Rabbi Meir, said in the name of Rabbi Meir: Tamar was the daughter of Shem, as it is written: “The daughter of a man who is a priest, [if she shall profane herself by acting as a harlot…she shall be burned in fire]” (Leviticus 21:9); that is why [Judah said]: “Take her out, and she shall be burned.”49Shem is identified by the Sages (see Nedarim 32b) as Malkitzedek, of whom the verse states that “he was a priest to God, the Most High” (Genesis 14:18). Consequently, if a daughter of Shem had committed adultery, she would have incurred the punishment of burning. 
“She was taken out, and she sent to her father-in-law, saying: By the man to whom these belong I am with child. She said: Identify, please, whose signet, and belt, and staff these are” (Genesis 38:25). “She was taken out [mutzet]…” – Rabbi Yudan said: [It may be derived] from here that [Judah’s items] were lost, and the Holy One blessed be He provided [himtzi] her with others in their place, just as it says: “Or found [matza] a lost item…” (Leviticus 5:22). Rav Huna said: “She was taken out” – he and she should be taken out.50This is expounded from the fact that “she [hi]” is spelled heh vav alef, which can also be read “he [hu].” The point is that just as she would ostensibly be killed for her violation, so would the man with whom she had committed adultery.  “She sent to her father-in-law, saying…[identify, please [haker na]…]” – he sought to deny it. She said to him: ‘Acknowledge now [haker na] your Creator; they belong to you and your Creator.’51This is because the items had been miraculously recreated after they were lost, as explained above (Yefe To’ar).  “Identify, please, whose signet” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The Holy One blessed be He said to Judah: ‘You said to your father: “Identify, please” (Genesis 37:32); as you live, Tamar will say to you: “Identify, please.”’
“Judah identified them, and said: She is more righteous than I, because indeed, I did not give her to Shela my son. And he was not intimate with her anymore” (Genesis 38:26). “Judah identified…” – Rabbi Yirmeya in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Rav Yitzḥak: The divine spirit appeared in three places: In the court of Shem, in the court of Samuel, and in the court of Solomon. In the court of Shem – “Judah identified them, and said: She is more righteous than I [mimeni].” What is mimeni? Rabbi Yirmeya in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘You will attest to what is revealed, and I attest to what is concealed.’52Judah could attest that he had been with Tamar, but he could not attest to the fact that no one else had been with her and that she had conceived from him. A Divine Voice therefore emerged and confirmed that which was concealed, namely that she had conceived from Judah and had not been intimate with anyone else. The word mimeni, which can also mean “from me,” is interpreted to mean that Tamar’s full exoneration was achieved with assistance from the Divine Voice, or that God announced that all of these events were “from Me,” meaning guided by Divine providence (see Kohelet Rabba 10:16).  In the court of Solomon – “she is his mother” (I Kings 3:27). Who said? Rabbi Shmuel said: A Divine Voice was shouting and saying: ‘She is certainly his mother!’ In the court of Samuel: “Here I am; testify against me.… He said… The Lord is witness for you, [and His anointed is witness this day, that you did not find anything in my hand.] They said: He is witness” (I Samuel 12:3–5). A Divine Voice emerged and said: “He is witness.”53God testified that Samuel had never taken anything from the people.  What does it say regarding Eli’s sons? “The sin of the lads was [very] great…” (I Samuel 2:17), and it is written: “That they would lie with the women who would assemble…” (I Samuel 2:22). Is it possible that it is so, that the sons of that righteous one would perform that act? Say now that because they would delay the bird offerings in Shilo and they thereby kept [the women] out of their houses for one night, the verse ascribes to them as though they had relations with them.54A woman who gives birth is required to bring two birds as offerings. The sons of Eli were slow in sacrificing the various offerings that were brought to the Tabernacle. This caused the women to remain in Shilo overnight and to be delayed in returning home to their husbands, and the verse describes this as though the sons of Eli would lie with the women.  Similarly, “his sons did not follow his ways, and they turned to bribes” (I Samuel 8:3) – is it possible that the sons of the righteous Samuel would perform that act? Rabbi Berekhya said: A caravan would pass in Beersheba, and they would forsake the needs of the public and engage in their own business. Because of that action, the verse ascribed to them as though they took bribes. Similarly, “she sat at Petaḥ Einayim” (Genesis 38:14), as it is written above.55Above (section 7) it was written that she did not actually act as a harlot as indicated by the plain meaning of the verse. 
“It was at the time of her giving birth, and, behold, there were twins in her womb” (Genesis 38:27). “It was at the time of her giving birth” – here they were incomplete, but elsewhere they were complete.56Regarding Rebecca’s birth of Jacob and Esau it is written: “Her days to give birth were complete” (Genesis 25:24). “Behold there were twins [teomim] in her womb” – teomim is written complete, as here they were both righteous. Elsewhere tomim (Genesis 25:24) is written, incomplete, as one was righteous and one was wicked.57Regarding the birth of Jacob and Esau, the word for twins is written without an alef, so that it is read tomim rather than teomim. This is because only Jacob was righteous.  “It was as she was giving birth, one extended a hand; the midwife took and bound upon his hand a crimson thread, saying: This one emerged first” (Genesis 38:28). “It was as she was giving birth, one extended a hand” – Rava bar Rav Ḥisda said: There are three who are believed immediately, and these are: The midwife, the caravan, and a woman who attests to the purity of another woman. Midwife – as it is written: “The midwife took and bound upon his hand a crimson thread, saying: This one emerged first.” Caravan – as Rabbi Simon brother of Rabbi Yehuda bar Zavdi said in the name of Rav: A child, as long as he is cast in the street, his father and mother can testify in his regard. When he is gathered from the street, he requires two witnesses.58If a young child is abandoned in the street, and adults come and claim to be his parents who were passing by in a caravan and lost their child, they are believed. But if the child has already been taken in from the street, testimony is required to establish the relationship between the child and individuals who claim to be his parents. See also Kiddushin 73b.  And a woman who attests to the purity of another woman – as we learned: If three women were sleeping in one bed and there was blood under one of them, they are all impure. If one of them examined herself and found blood, she alone is impure. Rava said: Provided that it is within twenty-four hours.
“It was as he retracted his hand, and behold, his brother emerged; and she said: What breach have you breached for yourself? He called his name Peretz” (Genesis 38:29). “It was as he retracted his hand…[What breach have you breached [paretz] for yourself? He called his name Peretz]” – the one who will be ascendant over all the mighty [haparitzim] will be produced from you.59This is derived from the double usage of the term breach [peretz] in the verse (Etz Yosef).  “The one who breaks through [haporetz] has ascended before them…” (Micah 2:13). Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi] said in the name of the Rabbis: All the mighty [haporetzim] will be produced from you, as it is stated: “The one who breaks through [haporetz] has ascended before them.” “Then his brother, on whose hand was the crimson thread, emerged; he called his name Zeraḥ” (Genesis 38:30). “Then his brother, [on whose hand was the crimson thread,] emerged” – numerous usages of “hand” are written here.60The reference is to verses 28–30. The word hand could have been skipped in verses 29 and 30 without impinging on the meaning of the verse (Etz Yosef).  Rabbi Yudan and Rav Huna: Rabbi Yudan said: Four, corresponding to the four proscriptions to which he was destined to extend his hand.61In four instances, the Israelites fought a war in which the possessions of the enemy were proscribed, such that no Israelites were permitted to take the spoils of war. Akhan, descended from Zeraḥ, took from the spoils of Jericho nonetheless (Joshua, chap. 7), and the midrash asserts that descendants of Zeraḥ did so in the other instances as well.  These are: The proscription of Amalek, the proscription of Siḥon and Og, the proscription of Jericho, and the proscription of the Canaanites . Rav Huna said: Corresponding to the four items that he was destined to take from the proscription. That is what is written: “I saw among the spoils a fine mantle from Shinar, [and two hundred shekels of silver, and one wedge of gold, weighing fifty shekels]” (Joshua 7:21).62Although these are only three items, Maharzu (based on Pirkei deRabbi Eliezer chap. 38) adds that these items were ornaments for an idol, and Akhan took the idol as well, which was the fourth item.   Rav Huna said: [The fine mantle] was a Babylonian garment of purple wool. What is Babylon doing here?63Garments of purple wool were royal garments. Why was there a Babylonian royal garment in Jericho?  Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: Any king or ruler who did not have dominion in the Land [of Israel] would say: I am not worth anything. The king of Babylon’s viceroy lived in Jericho. [The viceroy] would send him dates, and he would send [the viceroy] gifts.

=== 86 | 86 ===
“Joseph was taken down to Egypt and Potiphar, the official of Pharaoh, the chief executioner, an Egyptian man, purchased him from the Ishmaelites who had taken him down there” (Genesis 39:1). “Joseph was taken down to Egypt.” It is written: “With ropes of man I drew them, [with bonds of love; I was for them like those who lift the yoke above their jaws, and I leaned to them to provide food]” (Hosea 11:4) – these are Israel, [as it is stated]: “Draw me; after you I will run” (Song of Songs 1:4). “With bonds of love” (Hosea 11:4) – as it is written: “I loved you, said the Lord” (Malachi 1:2). “I was for them like those who lift the yoke” (Hosea 11:4) – as I elevated their enemies over them. Why to that extent? “Above their jaws” (Hosea 11:4) – because of the words that they expressed with their jaws, as they said: “This is your god, Israel” (Exodus 32:8).1This was stated by the Israelites as they committed the sin of the Golden Calf.  But ultimately, “I leaned to them to provide food” (Hosea 11:4) – I provide them with many foods to eat; “There will be abundance of grain in the land” (Psalms 72:16). Another matter, “with ropes of man I drew them [emshakhem]” (Hosea 11:4) – this is Joseph, [as it is stated]: “They pulled [vayimshekhu] and lifted Joseph from the pit” (Genesis 37:28). “With bonds of love” (Hosea 11:4) – “Israel loved Joseph more than all his sons” (Genesis 37:3). “I was for them like those who lift the yoke” (Hosea11:4) – as I elevated his enemies over him. Who was that? It was Potiphar’s wife. Why to that extent? “Above their jaws” (Hosea 11:4) – because of the words that he expressed with his jaws – “Joseph brought evil report of them to their father” (Genesis 37:2). But ultimately, “I leaned to them to provide food (Hosea 11:4) – an abundance of food.2Eventually, after his actions caused him to be brought down to Egypt, Joseph ended up providing food for his entire family, as well as for the entire population of Egypt and other lands. 
Another matter, “Joseph was taken down to Egypt.” “Joseph was the ruler” (Genesis 42:6). “Joseph was taken down [hurad] to Egypt” – he ruled over them, just as it says: “He will rule [veyerd] from sea to sea” (Psalms 72:8). He subdued them, just as it says: “For he had dominion [rodeh] over the entire region across the River” (I Kings 5:4). He imposed relocation upon them,3See Genesis 47:21.  just as it says: “He scraped it [vayirdehu] into his hands” (Judges 14:9).  He caused Jacob our patriarch to descend [horid] to Egypt. Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon: This is analogous to a cow that they were pulling to the slaughterhouse, but it would not be pulled. What did they do to it? They pulled its offspring before it, and it was walking after it despite itself, and to its [ultimate] detriment. So, Jacob was supposed to descend to Egypt in chains and neck chains.4This is because of the decree of enslavement in the Covenant between the Pieces (see Genesis 15:13). The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Shall I take My firstborn son down [to Egypt] in disgrace? And if I introduce it into Pharaoh’s heart, would I not be taking him down [to Egypt] in public?5If I introduce it into Pharaoh’s heart to bring Jacob down to Egypt in an honorable fashion, the public nature of the spectacle of his leaving the Land of Israel would itself cause Jacob great discomfort (Etz Yosef).  Instead, I will draw his son before him, and he will descend after him despite himself and to his [ultimate] detriment.’ He took down the Divine Presence with him. Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Simon: From where do we derive that the Divine Presence descended with him? From what is written: “The Lord was with Joseph” (Genesis 39:2). “To Egypt [Mitzraima]” – it is taught in the name of Rabbi Neḥemya: Any word that requires a lamed at its start, a heh [can be] placed at its end [instead]: Sedoma, Se’ira, Mitzraima, Ḥarana.6The lamed as a prefix or the heh as a suffix both mean “to.” These are examples where the verse uses the heh at the end of the name of the place, indicating “to Sodom” and the like.  But is it not written: “The wicked will return to the netherworld [lishola]”? (Psalms 9:18).7Lishola has both a lamed at the start and a heh at the end. Rabbi Abba bar Zavda said: [They will be sent] to the lowest compartment in the netherworld.
“[Potiphar...an Egyptian man,] purchased him [from the Ishmaelites]” – those who were acquired were acquiring.8The Ishmaelites descend from Hagar, Sarah’s maidservant, and the Egyptians descend from Ḥam, of whom it is stated: “A slave of slaves he shall be to his brothers” (Genesis 9:25), and they were the ones purchasing and selling Joseph. All slaves damage the household of their masters. But this one – “the Lord blessed the house of the Egyptian for Joseph’s sake” (Genesis 39:5). All slaves are suspected of robbery, but this one: “Joseph collected all the silver…[Joseph brought the silver to Pharoah’s house]” (Genesis 47:14). All slaves are suspected of licentiousness, but this one: “But he did not heed her” (Genesis 39:10). Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: All slaves, their master feeds teruma to their slaves, but this one fed his master teruma, as Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa said: Elazar took a wife from the daughters of Joseph.9Joseph was married to Potiphar’s daughter, so Potiphar’s granddaughter married Elazar, the son of Aaron, and ate teruma. Potiphar is “Potifera” (Genesis 41:45). Potiphar – because he would fatten [mefatem] calves for idol worship. Potifera – because he would defecate [pore’a atzmo] for idol worship.10Defacation in front of the idol of Baal Peor was a form of its worship (see Sanhedrin 60b).  When the bull [par]11Joseph, who was likened to a bull; see Deuteronomy 33:17. descended there, [Potiphar] became wealthy.12Translation follows Matnot Kehuna. Alternatively, he became an officer, or a eunuch.   “The official of [seris] Pharaoh” – he was castrated [nistares]. This teaches that [Potiphar] purchased [Joseph] only for intercourse, but the Holy One blessed be He castrated him. This is analogous to a she-bear that was killing its master’s children. He said: ‘Break its teeth.’ So, it teaches that [Potiphar] purchased him only for intercourse, and the Holy One blessed be He castrated him. That is what is written: “For the Lord loves justice [and does not forsake] His pious ones [ḥasidav]” (Psalms 37:28). Ḥasido is written.13The word ḥasidav is written with only one vav, such that it can be read ḥasido, “His pious one,” in singular. It should be noted however that the Masoretic text of Psalms actually has the word ḥasidav with two vavs. The midrash here cites a different tradition. Alternatively, in Midrash Shmuel the version of the text cites I Samuel 2:9 rather than Psalms, and in that verse the word in fact appears as ḥasido, with one vav (Etz Yosef).  Who is that? It is Joseph. “They are guarded forever, while the seed of the wicked is cut off” (Psalms 37:28) – this teaches that [Potiphar] purchased him only for intercourse, and the Holy One blessed be He castrated him. “Potiphar…an Egyptian man, purchased him [from [miyad] the Ishmaelites]” – a clever man. What was his cleverness? He said: In every place, a German sells a Cushite,14A white man sells a man of dark complexion (Matnot Kehuna).  but here, a Cushite is selling a German? This is no slave. He said to them: ‘Bring me a guarantor,’ as the term “from [miyad]” is nothing other than a guarantor, just as it says: “I will guarantee him, [from me [miyadi] you can demand him]” (Genesis 43:9). That is why it says: “From [miyad] the Ishmaelites.”  Rabbi Levi said: A slave purchased, the son of a maidservant sold, and a free man was a slave to both of them.15Potiphar, the Egyptian, was a descendant of Canaan, who was cursed by Noah to be a slave (see Genesis 9:25). The Ishmaelites were sons of Hagar, described as a maidservant to Sarah (see Genesis 16:2). Joseph was, by birth, a free man. 
“The Lord was with Joseph, and he was a successful man, and he was in the house of his master, the Egyptian” (Genesis 39:2). “The Lord was with Joseph” – but with the rest of the tribes, He was not? Rabbi Yudan said: [This is analogous] to an animal driver, who had twelve animals laden with wine before him. One of them entered the shop of an idolater; he forsook the eleven and followed after it. They said to him: ‘Why do you forsake eleven [animals] and follow the one?’ He said to them: ‘These are in the public domain, and I am not concerned lest [the wine] become libation wine.’16I am not concerned that an idolator will take the wine and use it for a libation to an idol, rendering it forbidden. Alternatively, this means – I am not concerned that an idolator will pick up the wine, rendering it forbidden by rabbinic law, as though it was poured as a libation to an idol.  So, these [Joseph’s brothers] were adults, and in their father’s domain, but this one was young and on his own. That is why, “the Lord was with Joseph.” “He was a successful [matzliaḥ] man” – Rabbi Berekhya said: A leaping man,17He was able to surmount all obstacles. just as it says: “They crossed [vetzalḥu] the Jordan before the king” (II Samuel 19:18). This is analogous to a she-bear that was standing in the street adorned with gems and precious stones. They said: ‘Anyone who jumps on it can take everything that is on it.’ There was a certain clever man there. He said to them: ‘You are looking at what is on it. I am looking at its teeth.’18Thus, while the masses approached the bear, the clever man distanced himself from it. Similarly, Joseph recognized the danger of the wife of Potiphar, and sought to distance himself from her.  Rabbi Berekhya said: All the power of that she-bear is in that it is able to jump, and you are greater that it.19The wife of Potiphar expended great effort to entice Joseph, yet he withstood her advances (Nezer HaKodesh).  Astonishing!
“His master saw that the Lord was with him, and everything that he did, the Lord made his undertaking successful” (Genesis 39:3). The Rabbis say: “His master saw that the Lord was with him” – but ultimately, he forgot, as it is written: “God has caused me to forget all my toil” (Genesis 41:51).20“The Lord was with him” in that Joseph would review his Torah studies, but ultimately, over time, he forgot them (Etz Yosef).  Rav Huna said in the name of Rav Aḥa: He would whisper and enter and whisper and exit.21He was constantly whispering his studies, or praying (see Yefeh To’ar).  [Potiphar] would say to him: ‘Pour me boiling water,’ and it would be boiling; lukewarm [water], and it would be lukewarm.22“The Lord was with him” and granted Joseph success beyond the natural order of the world.  He said: ‘What, Joseph, are you bringing straw to Efrayim, earthenware pots to Kefar Ḥanina, fleeces to Damascus, sorcery to Egypt – sorcery in a place of sorcerers?’ Until when? Rabbi Ḥiyya said: Until he saw the Divine Presence standing over him. That is what is written: “His master saw that the Lord was with him.”
“Joseph found favor in his eyes, and he served him. He appointed him overseer of his household, and everything that was his, he placed in his charge” (Genesis 39:4). “It was once he appointed him overseer of his household and over everything that was his, that the Lord blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake; the blessing of the Lord was in all that he had, in the house and in the field” (Genesis 39:5). “Joseph found…. It was once…” – Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: Everywhere that the righteous go, the Divine Presence goes with them.  He was there twelve years, six in the house and six in the field.23Many commentaries emend the text to read: He was there twelve months, six in the house and six in the field (see, e.g., Matnot Kehuna; Yefeh To’ar).  “He left everything that he had in Joseph's charge and he did not know anything with him about his doings, except the bread that he would eat. Joseph was of fine form, and of fair appearance” (Genesis 39:6). “He left everything that he had in Joseph's charge…except the bread that he would eat” – a euphemism.24This was a euphemism for his wife, as Joseph later says to her: “He has not withheld anything from me but you, as you are his wife” (Genesis 39:9). “Joseph was of fine form, and of fair appearance” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Cast a stick onto the ground and it will land on its source. Because it is written: “Rachel was of fine form [and fair appearance]” (Genesis 29:17); therefore, “Joseph was….”

=== 87 | 87 ===
“It was after these matters that his master's wife cast her eyes upon Joseph and she said: Lie with me” (Genesis 39:7). “It was after these matters.” “I saw among the naïve [bapetayim]” (Proverbs 7:7) – these are the tribes. Rabbi Levi said: In Arabia, they call children patya. “Discerned among the youths a lad” (Proverbs 7:7) – this is Joseph. He was “devoid of understanding” (Proverbs 7:7), as he would speak slander about his brothers. Is there anyone more devoid of understanding? From that, their descent to Egypt developed. “And behold, there is a woman to meet him” (Proverbs 7:10) – this is Potiphar’s wife, who confronted Joseph. “Dressed like a harlot” (Proverbs 7:10) – for Joseph. “And wily of heart” (Proverbs 7:10) – for Egypt.1Her public persona was modest. “She is turbulent and rebellious” (Proverbs 7:11) – muttering and confused.2Due to her lust. “Her feet do not abide in her house” (Proverbs 7:11) – but rather, “sometimes in the street, [sometimes in the squares, she lurks at every corner]” (Proverbs 7:12) – she would ask and say: ‘Have you seen Joseph?’ “She seized him and kissed him” (Proverbs 7:13) – “she seized him by his garment” (Genesis 39:12). “She was brazen and said to him” (Proverbs 7:13) – “lie with me” (Genesis 39:12).
“It was after these matters.” It is written: “Indeed, the rod of wickedness will not rest [lo yanuaḥ]…” (Psalms 125:3) – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana and Rabbi Yitzḥak, Rabbi Abba said: He gets no satisfaction [neyaḥa] in the company of the righteous, but only in the company of the wicked.3The wicked do not get satisfaction from being with the righteous (Yefeh To’ar). Alternatively, the evil inclination does not get satisfaction from being with the righteous (Etz Yosef).  Why? “Because the righteous will not [set their hands to wrongdoing]” (Psalms 125:3). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: He has no rest [hanaḥa] in the company of the wicked, but only in the company of the righteous.4It is not good for the wicked to be with other wicked people, as they will only increase his wickedness. If he is in the company of the righteous, he will learn from their righteous ways (Yefeh To’ar).  Why? “Because the righteous will not [set their hands to wrongdoing].” Alternatively, “The rod of wickedness will not rest” – this is Potiphar’s wife; “upon the lot of the righteous” (Psalms 125:3) – this is Joseph.
“His master's wife cast her eyes.” “Therefore, men of heart, hear me” (Job 34:10) – what is the craft of the Holy One blessed be He? “For He pays a person for his action” (Job 34:11) – [as stated by] Rabbi Meir, Rabbi Yehuda, and Rabbi Shimon.5See Bereshit Rabba 84:7, where these Sages state what slanderous reports Joseph brought to Jacob about his brothers. The midrash there asserts that the challenges later faced by Joseph, including his encounter with Potiphar’s wife, was punishment for his slandering his brothers. “His master's wife cast her eyes” – what is written prior to this matter? “Joseph was of fine form and of fair appearance” (Genesis 39:6). This is analogous to a mighty man who was standing in the street grooming his eyes, curling his hair, and lifting his heels. He said: ‘This is appropriate for me, becoming for me, [as I am] fair and mighty.’ They said to him: ‘If you are mighty, if you are fair, there is a she-bear before you, arise and attack it.’6Because Joseph was involved in beautifying himself, he was tested by his encounter with the wife of Potiphar, who is compared to the bear. Alternatively, Joseph was very confident in his spiritual abilities, and was therefore tested with this temptation (Nezer HaKodesh). 
“It was after these matters…” – there was a contemplation of matters there. Who contemplated? Joseph contemplated. He said: ‘When I was in Father’s house, Father would see which fine portion was there, and he would give it to me. My brothers would look at me enviously. Now that I am here, I am grateful to You that I have relief.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Carefree one, as you live, I will incite the she-bear against you.’ Another matter, he said: ‘Father was subjected to ordeals, my grandfather was subjected to ordeals, will I not encounter ordeals?’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘As you live, I will subject you to ordeals greater than theirs.’ Rabbi Menaḥama said in the name of Rabbi Beivai: This was the standard practice of the idolaters: When one of them would acquire slaves, he would go to the astrologer, who would say to him: ‘Behold it is good, a good portent.’ This term, “cast [vatisa],” is nothing other than a term of astrologers, just as it says: “Lest you lift [tisa] your eyes to the heavens [and see the sun and moon and the stars, all the host of the heavens, and you are led astray…]” (Deuteronomy 4:19). “She said: Lie with me” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: The wicked are accursed. Elsewhere, “spread your garment over your maidservant”7A more modest approach. (Ruth 3:9), but this one, like an animal: “she said: Lie with me.”
“He refused, and he said to his master's wife: Behold, my master, having me, does not know what is in the house, and he has placed everything that he has in my charge” (Genesis 39:8). “He refused, and he said to his master's wife” – Yehuda ben Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi] said: If, in the matter of a mitzva, one may refuse, in the matter of a transgression, [is it] not [obvious] that one must refuse? In the matter of a mitzva one may refuse – “my husband’s brother has refused [to perpetuate a name for his brother in Israel, he is unwilling to perform levirate marriage with me]” (Deuteronomy 25:7). In the matter of a transgression, must one not refuse? “He refused, and he said…: Behold, my master….” He said to her: ‘The Holy One blessed be He is accustomed to choose from the beloved of my father’s household for a burnt offering – to Abraham: “Take now your son” (Genesis 22:2). Shall I accede to you? Perhaps I have been chosen as a burnt offering, and I will be disqualified from being an offering.’ Another matter, “he said to his master's wife” – he said to her: ‘The Holy One blessed be He is accustomed to reveal Himself to the beloved of my father’s household at night: Abraham – “After these matters, the word of the Lord was to Abram in a vision,” (Genesis 15:1); Isaac – “The Lord appeared to him that night” (Genesis 26:24); Jacob – “He dreamed, and behold, a ladder” (Genesis 28:12). If I accede to you, perhaps the Holy One blessed be He will reveal Himself to me and find me impure.’ Another matter, “Behold, my master” – he said to her: ‘I am afraid. If Adam the first man was commanded regarding a minor mitzva, and when he violated it, he was expelled from the Garden of Eden, this, which is a major transgression of forbidden sexual relations, all the more so.’  “Behold, my master” – [he said to her:] ‘I am afraid of my father, in the land of Canaan; Reuben, because it is written in his regard: “Reuben went and lay with Bilha” (Genesis 35:22), his birthright was taken from him and given to me. If I accede to you, I will be rejected from my birthright.’ Another matter, “Behold, my master” – [he said to her:] ‘I am afraid of my master.’ She said to him: ‘I will kill him.’ He said to her: ‘Is it not sufficient that I will be counted in the company of adulterers, that [I should also be among] the company of murderers? And if this matter is what you seek – “behold, my master” – go to the one who is before you’ . Rabbi Yitzḥak said: The milk of black goats and the milk of white goats is the same.8If you seek sexual relations, go to your husband, who can provide that just as well as I can.   Another matter, “Behold, my master” – [he said to her:] ‘I am afraid of the Lord.’ She said to him: ‘He is not here.’ He said to her: “The Lord is great and highly extolled, [and His greatness is unfathomable]” (Psalms 145:3). Rabbi Avin said: She took him from room to room aand from bed chamber to bed chamber until she positioned him next to her bed. Her idol was etched above it. She took a sheet and covered its face. He said to her: ‘You have done well that you covered its face. The one in whose regard it is written: “They are the eyes of the Lord roving throughout the earth” (Zechariah 4:10), all the more so.’9If you are concerned about being seen by your idol, all the more so should you be concerned about being seen by God.  “There is no one greater in this house than I, and he has not withheld anything from me but you, as you are his wife. How can I do this great wickedness, and sin to God?” (Genesis 39:9). Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Ami: Was the verse missing anything? “And sin to the Lord”10This is the typical expression when referring to sin. is not written here, but rather, “[and sin] to God.” By God, I will not perform this evil matter.11The midrash interprets Joseph to have taken an oath that he would not perform this sin. 
“It was as she spoke to Joseph, day after day, and he did not heed her to lie with her, to be with her” (Genesis 39:10). “It was as she spoke to Joseph, day after day” – Rabbi Yudan said in the name of Rabbi Binyamin: Rachel’s children,12The reference is to Joseph and to Mordekhai, who was a descendant of Benjamin.  their ordeal was equal and their greatness was equal. Their ordeal was equal – “it was as she spoke to Joseph, day after day”; “it was, as they spoke to him, day after day” (Esther 3:4). Their greatness was equal – “Pharaoh removed his ring” (Genesis 41:42); “the king removed his ring” (Esther 8:2). “And he placed it upon Joseph's hand” (Genesis 41:42); “and he gave it to Mordekhai” (Esther 8:2). “He dressed him in garments of linen” (Genesis 41:42); “and place the garments and the horse…Haman took [the garments and horse and dressed Mordekhai]” (Esther 6:9–11). “He placed a gold chain on his neck” (Genesis 41:42); “Esther placed Mordekhai over the house of Haman” (Esther 8:2). “He had him ride in the second chariot that he had” (Genesis 41:43); “he had him ride the horse through the city square” (see Esther 6:11). “They cried before him: Kneel” (Genesis 41:43); “he cried before him: So [shall be done to the man whose honor the king desires]” (Esther 6:11). “And he did not heed her to lie with her” – in this world, “to be with her” – to be with her in Gehenna in the future. Another matter, “he did not heed her” – even for lying [with her] without intercourse. A noblewoman asked Rabbi Yosei, she said to him: ‘Is it possible that Joseph, seventeen years old, at the height of his passion, could conduct himself in such a manner?’13Is it really possible that he withstood the temptation?  He took out for her the book of Genesis and began reading before her the incident of Reuben and Bilha,14Genesis 35:22. the incident of Judah and Tamar.15Genesis 38:18. He said to her: ‘If these two, who were adults and in their father’s domain, the verse did not cover up their actions, this one who is young and on his own, all the more so.’
“It was on a certain day, he came into the house to perform his labor, and there was no one of the people of the household there in the house” (Genesis 39:11). “It was on a certain day, he came… and there was no one of the people of the household” – is it possible that this man’s house remained without anyone [inside]? Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: It was the day of the celebration of the Nile.16The midrash employs the term nibul, literally, disgrace, to refer to this event, because it was an idolatrous practice (Matnot Kehuna; see also Etz Yosef).  Everyone went to see, but he did not go. Rabbi Neḥemya said: It was the day of the theater. Everyone went to see it, but he did not go. Instead, “he came into the house to perform his labor” – to calculate his master’s accounts. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: “to perform his labor” indeed.17He went to submit to the demands of Potiphar’s wife. However, “there was no one [ish]” – he examined himself and did not find himself to be a man [ish].18He was afflicted with impotence. Alternatively, he realized that if he were to commit this act he would be comparable to an animal and not a man (Yefeh To’ar).  Another matter, the bow was drawn, and was restored.19This is a euphemism meaning that he experienced sexual arousal and then returned to a state of relaxation.  That is what is written: “His bow sat firm [vateshev be’eitan kashto]” 20This is expounded as vatashav – it returned to its original state [le’eitano]. (Genesis 49:24) – his firmness [kashyuto].21His male organ, metaphorically referred to as a bow, was firm, but returned [vatashav] to its former state [eitano] as he conquered his desire.  Rabbi Yitzḥak said: His semen dispersed and emerged through his fingernails, as it is stated: “And the arms of his hand were gilded [vayafozu]”22This is expounded as though it was vayafutzu – they were dispersed. The midrash asserts that Joseph dug his fingernails into the ground (Sota 36b) so that the discomfort would help his desire dissipate (Etz Yosef). (Genesis 49:24).  Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Matna: He saw the image of his father and his blood cooled, as it is written: “From the shepherd of the stone of Israel” (Genesis 49:24). Who did so?23Who enabled Joseph to conquer his desire?  “From the God of your father, and He will help you…blessings of breasts and of womb” (Genesis 49:25) – the blessings of your father and your mother.
“She seized him by his garment, saying: Lie with me. He left his garment in her hand and fled, and went outside” (Genesis 39:12). “She seized him by his garment…and went outside” – he leapt by the merit of the patriarchs, just as it says: “He took him outside” (Genesis 15:5).24God took Abraham outside and promised him that he would have many descendants, like the many stars in the sky.  Shimon of Kitron said: By the merit of Joseph’s bones, the sea was split for Israel. That is what is written: “The sea saw and fled” (Psalms 114:3), by the merit of: “He left his garment in her hand and fled.”  “She called the people of her household, and spoke to them, saying: See, he brought us a Hebrew man to ridicule us; he came to me to lie with me, and I cried out in a loud voice” (Genesis 39:14). “She called the people of her household” – she placed it into the mouths of all of them.25She coached them to tell her husband that Joseph had propositioned them as well (Etz Yosef). “She placed his garment beside her, until his master’s arrival to his home” (Genesis 39:16). “She placed his garment beside her” – Rabbi Ami said: She hugged it and kissed it.
“It was when his master heard the words of his wife that she spoke to him, saying: Your slave did to me in this manner. His wrath was enflamed” (Genesis 39:19). “It was when his master heard…in this manner” – Rabbi Abahu said: It was during intercourse.26As Potiphar and his wife engaged in intimate conduct, she would say to him: This is what your slave would do to me.  “Joseph's master took him, and placed him in the prison, the place where the king's prisoners were incarcerated, and he was there in the prison” (Genesis 39:20). “Joseph's master took him” – he said to him: ‘I know that you did not do this,27If he had believed his wife, he would, no doubt, have killed Joseph. but it is so I will not attach stigma to my children.’28If I do not punish you, everyone will know that I know that my wife is a harlot, and that stigma will affect my children. .
“The Lord was with Joseph, and extended him kindness, and placed his favor in the eyes of the commander of the prison” (Genesis 39:21). “The commander of the prison placed in Joseph's charge all the prisoners who were in the prison, and everything that they did there, he would determine” (Genesis 39:22). “The Lord was with Joseph...the commander of the prison placed…”29Rav Huna understands that the commander of the prison was none other than Potiphar himself. This is based on the fact that Joseph was in the prison of the chief executioner (Genesis 40:3), an appellation earlier applied to Potiphar (Genesis 39:1). Rav Huna asserts that Potiphar still had Joseph go and attend to a variety of tasks in his own home, where his wife would continue to harass Joseph (Maharzu).  – Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: His service was pleasant for his master, and he would go out and rinse his drinking glasses, set the tables, and make the beds. She would say to him: ‘In this matter, I mistreated [ashaktikha] you. As you live, I will mistreat you regarding other matters.’30She continued to proposition him and to threaten him if he would not submit to her demands. He would say to her: ‘[God] “Performs justice for the oppressed [laashukim]”’ (Psalms 146:7). [She would say:] ‘I will reduce your sustenance.’ He would say to her: ‘[God] “Provides food for the hungry”’ (Psalms 146:7). [She would say:] ‘I will shackle you.’ He would say to her: ‘“The Lord frees the imprisoned”’ (Psalms 146:7). [She would say:] ‘I will cause you to be bent over.’ He would say to her: ‘“The Lord straightens the bent”’ (Psalms 146:8). [She would say:] ‘I will blind your eyes.’ He would say to her: ‘“The Lord opens the eyes of the blind”’ (Psalms 146:8). How far did she go? Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: She placed an iron bar beneath his neck until he would direct his glance toward her and look at her. Nevertheless, he would not look at her. That is what is written: “They tortured his legs with chains; his body was placed in iron” (Psalms 105:18). “The commander of the prison did not oversee anything that was in his charge, for the Lord was with him, and everything that he did, the Lord made successful for him” (Genesis 39:23). “The commander of the prison did not…” – until now, [this has been stated] regarding times of trouble; from where is it derived that [God was with Joseph] even in times of prosperity? The verse states: “And everything that he did, the Lord made successful for him.”

=== 88 | 88 ===
“It was after these matters; the butler of the king of Egypt and the baker sinned against their master, against the king of Egypt” (Genesis 40:1). “It was after these matters…sinned.” “Deliver me from all my transgressions; do not disgrace me among the scoundrels” (Psalms 39:9) – Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina and Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman, Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: The nations of the world were not fit to have anguished and despised individuals in their midst.1Since they are rewarded for their good deeds in this world and punished in the next world, it would have been fitting for them to not have individuals who suffer in this world (Yefeh To’ar).  Why, then, do they have anguished and despised individuals in their midst? It is so they will not taunt Israel and say to them: ‘You are a nation of anguished and despised people.’ This is in accordance with [the verse]: “Do not disgrace me among the scoundrels.” Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: The nations of the world were not fit to have those who develop scabs in their midst. Why, then, do they have those who develop scabs in their midst? It is so they will not taunt Israel and say to them: ‘Are you not a nation of lepers?’ This is in accordance with [the verse]: “Do not disgrace me among the scoundrels.” Another matter, “deliver me from all my transgressions…” – this is Joseph. Because it is written in his regard: “She called to the people of her household…” (Genesis 39:14) – she placed him in the mouths of all of them,2The wife of Potiphar caused everyone to talk about how improper it was that Joseph had received so much from his master and had reciprocated by attempting to seduce his wife. the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘It is preferable that they turn against one another and not turn against this righteous one.’ That is what is written: “It was after these matters…sinned….” (Genesis 40:1).3God arranged for people to be distracted by the next sensation, the incarceration of the butler and baker. 
The Rabbis say: The butler – a fly was found in his goblet;4A fly was found in the goblet he served to Pharoah.  the baker – a pebble was found in his loaf. That is what is written: “The butler of the king of Egypt and the baker sinned against their master” – in the service of their master. Rabbi Evyatar said: They sought to consort with the king’s daughter. Here it is stated: “Sinned” and elsewhere it is stated: “[How can I do this wicked thing] and sin against God?” (Genesis 39:9).5This verse was stated by Joseph as part of his refusal to commit adultery with Potiphar’s wife. 
Rabbi Yuda bar Simon and Rabbi Ḥanin in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: It is written: “Come behold the works of the Lord…” (Psalms 46:9) – the Holy One blessed be He caused masters to become angry at their servants to grant prominence to the righteous: “Pharaoh became angry at his servants” (Genesis 41:10) – to grant prominence to Joseph. [And He caused] servants [to become angry] at their masters in order to grant prominence to the righteous: “Bigtan and Teresh became angry” (Esther 2:21) – to grant prominence to Mordekhai. Rabbi Yudan was speaking about these actions of Bigtan and Teresh. Rav said: They placed a short dagger in their shoes. Rabbi Ḥanin said: They prepared an apparatus to strangle him. Shmuel said: They placed serpent’s venom in his cup. “The matter was investigated, and was discovered” (Esther 2:23). The Rabbis say: They placed a fly in his goblet;6This was a poisonous fly (Etz Yosef; cf. Rabbi David Luria).  immediately, “the matter was investigated, and was discovered.”
“He placed them in custody in the household of the chief executioner, in the prison, the place where Joseph was incarcerated” (Genesis 40:3). “The chief executioner assigned Joseph to them, and he served them, and they were in custody one year” (Genesis 40:4). “They dreamed a dream, both of them, each man his dream during one night, each man in accordance with the interpretation of his dream, the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were incarcerated in the prison” (Genesis 40:5). “He placed them in custody…the chief executioner assigned…they dreamed a dream, both of them…” – Rabbi Ḥama bar Abba said: The dream, and the interpretation of his counterpart’s dream. “Joseph came to them in the morning, and saw them, and, behold, they were distressed” (Genesis 40:6). “They said to him: We dreamed a dream, and there is no interpreter for it. Joseph said to them: Are interpretations not for God? Please, relate it to me” (Genesis 40:8). “Joseph came to them…they said…we dreamed a dream…are interpretations not for God?” He attributed the greatness to its Owner.
“The chief butler related his dream to Joseph, and said to him: In my dream, behold, a vine was before me” (Genesis 40:9). “And on the vine were three tendrils, and it was as though it was budding; its blossoms emerged, and its clusters produced ripe grapes” (Genesis 40:10). “The chief butler related…behold, a vine was before me” – this is Israel, as it is stated: “You transported a vine from Egypt” (Psalms 80:9). “And on the vine were three tendrils” – Moses, Aaron, and Miriam. “It was as though it was budding” – the redemption of Israel was budding. “Its blossoms emerged” – the redemption of Israel blossomed. “Its clusters produced ripe grapes” – the vine that budded immediately blossomed; grapes that emerged immediately ripened. “And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand; I took the grapes, pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand” (Genesis 40:11). “Joseph said to him: This is its interpretation: The three tendrils are three days” (Genesis 40:12). “In three more days Pharaoh will raise your head and restore you to your position, and you will give Pharaoh's cup into his hand, like the former circumstance where you would provide him with drink” (Genesis 40:13). “And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand” – on this basis the Sages instituted the four cups on Passover eve. Rav Huna said in the name of Rabbi Benaya: Corresponding to the four expressions of redemption that were stated in Egypt: “I will take you out…I will deliver you…I will redeem you…I will take you” (Exodus 6:6–7). Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Corresponding to the four cups stated here: “And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand… you will give Pharaoh's cup into his hand…”7These are the first and fourth mentions of the word cup. Between them there are: “I took the grapes, pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand.” Rabbi Levi said: Corresponding to the four kingdoms. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Corresponding to the four cups [kosot] of bewilderment that the Holy One blessed be He will give the idolaters to drink. That is what is written: “For so said the Lord, God of Israel, to me: Take this cup of the wine of anger” (Jeremiah 25:15); “a golden cup is Babylon in the hand of the Lord…” (Jeremiah 51:7); “he will rain…upon the wicked [ blazing coals and sulfur; a scorching wind will be their lot [menat kosam]]” (Psalms 11:6).8The fourth is: “For a cup is in the hand of the Lord, with foaming wine…” (Psalms 75:10) (Jerusalem Talmud Pesaḥim 10:1). Corresponding to them, the Holy One blessed be He will give Israel four cups [kosot] of salvation in the future, as it is stated: “The Lord is my lot [menat kosi]” (Psalms 16:5); “I will lift a cup of salvation [kos yeshuot]” (Psalms 116:13): “You prepare a table before me in the presence of my enemies. You anoint my head with oil; my cup is full” (Psalms 23:5). “A cup of salvation [kos yeshua]” (Psalms 116:13) is not written here, but rather, “a cup of salvation [kos yeshuot]”9The word yeshuot is plural, such that a more literal translation would be “a cup of salvations.” Consequently, this alludes to the third and fourth cups.  – one for the messianic era and one for the days of Gog.  “If only you remember me when it shall be well for you, and please, perform kindness with me and mention me to Pharaoh, and take me out of this house” (Genesis 40:14). [Joseph] said to him: ‘You gave me good tidings;10The butler’s dream, as explained above, alluded to the redemption of Israel, and therefore constituted good tidings.  I, too, will give you good tidings: “In three more days…if only you remember me…”’  “For I was abducted from the land of the Hebrews and here, too, I have done nothing, that they placed me in the pit” (Genesis 40:15). “For I was abducted [gunov gunavti]” – Rav Aḥa said: From here [it may be derived] that he was abducted twice.11He was sold by his brothers, and then the Midyanites pulled him from the pit and sold him to the Ishmaelites (see Genesis 37:27–28). Alternatively, his being thrown into the pit by his brothers was considered a kidnapping, and he was subsequently stolen from the pit by the Ishmaelites (Maharzu, 84:6). “And here, too, I have done [nothing]…”
“The chief baker saw that he interpreted well, and he said to Joseph: I too, in my dream, behold, three wicker baskets were on my head” (Genesis 40:16). “And in the uppermost basket there was all manner of food for Pharaoh, baked products, and the birds were eating them from the basket above my head” (Genesis 40:17). “Joseph answered and said: This is its interpretation: The three baskets are three days” (Genesis 40:18). “In three more days Pharaoh shall lift your head from upon you, and shall hang you on a tree, and the birds shall eat your flesh from upon you” (Genesis 40:19). “The chief baker saw…[and he said to Joseph: I too [af]…]” – Rav Ḥama said: They are four who began with af and were eradicated with wrath [af].12The serpent, the chief baker, the congregation of Koraḥ, and Haman, as explained in Bereshit Rabba 19:2. “Behold, three wicker baskets” – these are the first three kingdoms.13The first three of the four kingdoms that would subjugate Israel and many other peoples: Babylon, Media, and Greece. “And in the uppermost basket” – this is the fourth kingdom,14Rome. which imposes taxes upon all the nations of the world. “The birds were eating them” – after they ate [the contents of] the uppermost one, they then ate [the contents of] the lower one. [Joseph] said to him: ‘You gave me bad tidings;15The baker’s dream alluded to the nations that would subjugate Israel.  I, too, will give you bad tidings: “In three more days…”’ “It was on the third day, Pharaoh's birthday, he made a feast for all his servants and raised the head of the chief butler and the head of the chief baker among his servants” (Genesis 40:20). “It was on the third day” – the day of Pharaoh’s birthday celebration. “He restored the chief butler to his butlership, and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand” (Genesis 40:21). “And he hanged the chief baker, as Joseph interpreted for them” (Genesis 40:22). “He made a feast…he restored the chief butler…and…the chief baker” – it befell this one what was stated to him and to that one what was stated to him.
“And the chief butler did not remember Joseph, but forgot him” (Genesis 40:23). “And the chief butler did not remember…” – each day, he would stipulate conditions, and an angel would come and reverse them.16He would stipulate to himself that when something would happen, that would be a reminder to him to mention Joseph to Pharoah. The angel would ensure that it would not happen. He would tie knots17He would tie knots in his garments, as a reminder to tell Pharaoh. and an angel would come and untie them. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You forget him, but I will not forget him.’18God did not want Joseph’s salvation to come about through the butler.  That is what is written: “And the chief butler did not remember.” Another matter, the chief butler forgot you, but I will not forget you. Who was expecting Abraham and Sarah, who were old, to have a son born to them? Who was expecting Jacob, who crossed the Jordan with [but] his staff, to expand and become wealthy? Who was expecting Joseph, who experienced all these troubles, to become king? Who was expecting Moses, who was cast into the Nile, to become what he became? Who was expecting Ruth, who was a proselyte, to return to the kingdom of Israel?19She returned with Naomi to the Land of Israel and became the mother of kings of Israel.  Who was expecting David to become king until the end of the generations? Who was expecting Yehoyakhin to leave prison? Who was expecting Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya to emerge from the fire? Who was expecting, in the days of Haman, that the Holy One blessed be He would save Israel? Who expects the exiles to achieve renown and glory? Who expects the Holy One blessed be He to raise the fallen booth of David, as it is stated: “On that day, I will raise the fallen booth of David” (Amos 9:11). [Who expects] that the whole world will become one group, as it is stated: “For then I will convert all the peoples to a pure language, for all of them to call in the name of the Lord, to serve Him with a common effort” (Zephaniah 3:9).

=== 89 | 89 ===
“It was at the conclusion of two years, and Pharaoh was dreaming: and, behold, he stood at the Nile” (Genesis 41:1). “It was at the conclusion of two years.” “He sets an end to darkness” (Job 28:3) – He set a time for the world, how many years it would spend in darkness. Why did He set a time for darkness? Because as long as the evil inclination is in the world, there is darkness and the shadow of death in the world, as it is written: “The stone of thick darkness and the shadow of death” (Job 28:3). If the evil inclination is removed from the world, there is no darkness and shadow of death in the world. Another matter, “He sets an end to darkness” – He set a time for Joseph, how many years he would spend in the darkness in prison. When the end came, Pharaoh dreamed a dream.
“It was at the conclusion of two years.” “In all toil there is advantage, but lips’ talk is only for detriment” (Proverbs 14:23). Rabbi Shimon bar Abba said: Like the difference between one who drinks hot water and one who drinks cold.1Even the toil of heating water brings an advantage, as hot water was considered more healthy to drink (Etz Yosef).  “But lips’ talk is only for detriment.”2If someone just talks and does not take action, he will suffer.  There was a certain bone gatherer in Tzippori, some say he was Rabbi Shimon bar Abba. When he would see black bones, he would say, these are drinkers of water; red, these are drinkers of wine; white, these are drinkers of hot water. Another matter, “in all toil there is advantage” – from all the suffering Joseph underwent with his master’s wife, he gained an advantage. How so? He took her daughter.3Joseph married Asenat, daughter of Potifera (Genesis 41:45), and Potifera is identified by the Sages as Potiphar (see Bereshit Rabba 86:3).  “But lips’ talk is only for detriment” – because he said to the chief butler: “Remember me…and mention me” (Genesis 40:14), two years were added for him,4Joseph spent an additional two years in prison.  as it is stated: “It was at the conclusion [of two years].”
“Happy is the man who has made the Lord his trust” (Psalms 40:5) – this is Joseph. “And did not turn to the proud” (Psalms 40:5) – because he said to the chief butler: “Remember me…and mention me,” two years were added for him. “Happy is the man who makes the Lord his trust” – Rabbi Yudan said: Many myriads of myriads tend after falsehood, woe unto anyone who puts his trust in them. “For a dream comes with a multitude of concerns” (Ecclesiastes 5:2) – Pharaoh said: ‘Who stands over whom – I for my god, or my god over me?’5The Nile was an Egyptian deity. Pharoah said: ‘Does it make sense that I protect my god, or that my god protects me?’  [Joseph] said to him: ‘You, over your god.’ That is what is written: “It was at the conclusion [of two years, and Pharaoh was dreaming: and, behold, he stood at the Nile.]”6The phrase “he stood at [al] the Nile” can alternately be translated, “he stood over the Nile,” as though Pharoah was standing guard to protect the Nile.  “For he emerged from prison to reign” (Ecclesiastes 4:14) – this is Joseph, who emerged from Pharaoh’s prison. “Emerged…to reign” – “Pharaoh sent [and summoned Joseph, and they rushed him from the dungeon]” (Genesis 41:14). “For even in his reign, he is revealed as poor” (Ecclesiastes 4:14) – due to Joseph’s reign, the impoverishment of Potifera was revealed.7As long as Joseph was in his home, Potifar thrived. After Joseph left, his fortunes changed.  Another matter, “it was at the conclusion.” “I saw all the living, who walk under the sun” (Ecclesiastes 4:15) – this is Joseph. “With the second child” (Ecclesiastes 4:15) – these are the two years that were added for him. Why were two years added for him? So that Pharaoh would dream and [Joseph] would be elevated by means of the dream, as it is stated: “It was at the conclusion of two years.”
“And Pharaoh was dreaming” – do not all people dream? Astonishing! It is, rather, that a king’s dream pertains to the entire world. “And Pharaoh was dreaming.” Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The wicked stand over their gods – “and Pharaoh was dreaming: and, behold, he stood at the Nile.”8The phrase “at [al] the Nile” can also be translated “over the Nile.”  But the righteous, their God stands over them [to protect them]: “Behold, the Lord stood over him” (Genesis 28:13). “And, behold, there were coming up from the Nile seven cows, fair of appearance and fat-fleshed, and they grazed in the pasture [baaḥu]. And, behold, seven other cows were coming up after them from the Nile, unsightly of appearance and lean of flesh, and stood alongside the other cows on the bank of the Nile” (Genesis 41:2–3). “And, behold, [there were coming up] from the Nile” – it was a hint to him,9This was a hint as to the meaning of the dream.  as plenty comes to Egypt only by means of the Nile, and similarly, famine comes to Egypt only by means of the Nile. “And, behold, from the Nile” – when the years are good, the creatures become brethren [aḥim] with one another. “They grazed in the pasture [baaḥu]” – love [ahava] and fraternity [aḥva] come to the world. Likewise it says: “Your livestock will graze on that day on a broad plain [kar nirḥav]” (Isaiah 30:23) – a satiated [kiri] slave, a satiated [kiri] master. Likewise it says: “The mountains will bear peace [for the people]” (Psalms 72:3) – if the mountains have borne their produce, there is peace among the people. “And, behold, seven stalks, thin and blighted by the east wind, were growing after them” (Genesis 41:6). “And, behold, seven stalks, thin…” – when the years are bad, people’s bodies break out in sores.10The term employed by the verse for growing is tzomeḥot, and in rabbinic Hebrew the related term tzemaḥim is another word for sores. 
“It was in the morning and his spirit was troubled; he sent and summoned all the magicians of Egypt, and all its wise men; Pharaoh related his dreams to them but no one could interpret them for Pharaoh” (Genesis 41:8). “It was in the morning and his spirit was troubled [vatipaem ruḥo],” and elsewhere it says: “His spirit was troubled [vatitpaem ruḥo]” (Daniel 2:1)11Written with the letter tav doubled. – Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Neḥemya, and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yehuda said: Here, he knew the dream and sought an interpretation from [Joseph]. But there, [he sought to know] the dream and its interpretation.12Nebuchadnezzar was troubled by a dream he had, but he no longer remembered the dream, and asked his magicians to tell him the dream and its meaning (see Daniel ch. 2).  Rabbi Neḥemya said: The dream of the idol and the dream of the tree.13The tav is doubled regarding Nebuchadnezzar because he had two entirely separate dreams, one concerning the idol (see Daniel 2:29–45) and one concerning the tree (see Daniel ch. 4), whereas Pharaoh’s two dreams were really just a doubling of one dream (see Genesis 41:25).  The Rabbis say: [It states] “vatitpaem ruḥo” there in order to accord prominence to four.14Daniel, Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya all rose to prominence in the aftermath of the interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream.  Here [it states] “vatipaem” to accord prominence to one.15Joseph rose to prominence after interpreting Pharaoh’s dream.  “Vatitpaem ruḥo” – in order to grant life to four; “vatipaem” – to grant life to one.16In the case of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, the lives of Daniel, Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya were in danger, as Nebuchadnezzar had decreed that all the wise men would be put to death if they could not tell him his dream and its interpretation (see Daniel 2:13). In the case of Pharoah’s dream, it was only Joseph who was in danger of dying in the dungeon.  Here, because it was just before morning – “vatipaem ruḥo,” but there, where it came in the evening, it is written: “Vatitpaem ruḥo.”17The doubled tav indicates that Nebuchadnezzar had a lot of time until morning in which to be troubled by his dream.  Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Any dream that is just before morning is immediately actualized.
“He sent and summoned…” – Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin in the name of Rabbi Levi: They would interpret it, but their voices would not enter his ears. [They would say:] ‘The seven good cows [mean that] you will beget seven daughters. The seven bad cows – you will bury seven daughters.’ Likewise they said: ‘The seven good stalks [mean that] you will conquer seven kingdoms. The seven bad stalks – seven districts will rebel against you.’ That is what is written: “A scoffer seeks wisdom, and there is none” (Proverbs 14:6) – these are Pharaoh’s magicians and wise men. “But knowledge is easy for the discerning” (Proverbs 14:16) – this is Joseph. Another matter, “he sent and summoned” – to inform you that each and every nation that exists in the world18Some interpret this phrase to mean: Each and every nation that rules over the world (Maharzu).  produces for itself five wise men to serve it. Moreover, the Holy One blessed be He provides it with three things: Wisdom, understanding, and might, as the wicked Sennacherib said: “With the power of my hand I have accomplished” (Isaiah 10:13). But when the Holy One blessed be He judges the world, He takes them from it, as it is stated: “I will eliminate the wise from Edom, and understanding from the mountain of Esau…Your mighty will be intimidated, Teiman” (Obadiah 1:8–9).  Why was all this [necessary]?19Why did God arrange for various advisors and magicians to offer interpretations of Pharoah’s dream before the butler suggested that he consult Joseph?  It was so Joseph would ultimately come, and gain prominence. The Holy One blessed be He said: 'If Joseph will come first and interpret the dream, it will not [earn him sufficient] praise. The magicians could say to him: ‘Had you asked us first, we would have already interpreted it for you.’ Instead, He waited until they exerted themselves, and exhausted [Pharoah’s] spirit. Then Joseph came and restored his spirit. In his regard, Solomon said: “The fool vents all his spirit” (Proverbs 29:11) – these are Pharaoh’s wise men; “but the wise man will soothe it, keeping it back” (Proverbs 29:11) – this is Joseph, as it is stated: “There is no one as understanding and wise as you” (Genesis 41:39).
“The chief butler spoke to Pharaoh, saying: I mention my sins today” (Genesis 41:9). When the chief butler saw that Pharaoh’s soul was on the verge of departing, he began calculating and saying: If Pharaoh dies and another king assumes the throne, I do not know whether or not he will keep me in my position of trust. “The chief butler spoke” – he said: ‘I have committed two sins. First, I did not perform a favor for Joseph and mention him before you. And, after I saw that you were tormented over the interpretation of a dream, I did not reveal to you that he knows its interpretation.’ “There with us was a Hebrew lad, a slave of the chief executioner; we told him, and he interpreted our dreams for us; each of us in accordance with his own dream, he interpreted” (Genesis 41:12). “It was, as he interpreted to us, so it was: Me, he restored to my position, and him, he hanged” (Genesis 41:13). “Pharaoh sent and summoned Joseph, and they rushed him from the dungeon. He shaved, changed his garments, and came to Pharaoh” (Genesis 41:14). “There with us was a Hebrew lad…” – although he mentioned him, he demeaned him, because he knew the prominence into which [Joseph] would enter. Immediately, “Pharaoh sent and summoned.”  “There with us…” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Cursed are the wicked, who do not perform complete goodness: “Lad” – a fool; “Hebrew” – an enemy; “slave” – as so it was written in Pharaoh’s books, that a slave cannot reign and does not wear kelidim keli yadayim]>.20Bracelets worn by royals.
“We told him, and he interpreted [our dreams] for us.” There was an incident involving a certain woman who came before Rabbi Elazar. She said to him: ‘In my dream, I saw the ceiling beam of my house broken.’ He said to her: ‘You will bear a male child and he will live.’ She went, and so it was for her. She came another time to ask him. She found his students sitting there, but their rabbi was not with them. She said to them: ‘Where is your rabbi?’ They said to her: ‘Tell us your inquiry and we will tell you [the answer].’ She said to them: ‘In my dream, I saw the ceiling beam of my house broken.’ They said to her: ‘This woman will bury her husband.’ When she went out from before them, she began wailing. Rabbi Elazar heard her voice. He said to them: ‘What did you say to that woman?’ They said: ‘It is that woman who came to ask you.’ He said to them: ‘What did you say to her?’ They said to him: ‘Such and such.’ He said to them: ‘You have eliminated a man. Is it not written: “It was, as he interpreted to us, so it was”? (Genesis 41:13).21The implication is that what occurred came about because of the Joseph’s interpretation (Matnot Kehuna).  And did Rabbi Yoḥanan not say: Everything follows the interpretation except for wine – there are those who drink it and it is good for them, and there are those who drink it and it is bad for them: If a Torah scholar drinks it is good for him, and if an ignoramus drinks it is bad for him?’22If a Torah scholar dreams that he is drinking wine it is a good sign; if an ignoramus dreams that he is drinking wine it is a bad sign.  Rabbi Abahu said: The content of dreams makes no difference.
“Pharaoh sent and summoned Joseph, [and they rushed him from the dungeon. He shaved, changed his garments, and came to Pharaoh]” – to accord deference to royalty.23That is why, although others rushed him, he shaved himself. “Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying: Not by me. God will respond for Pharaoh’s peace” (Genesis 41:16). “Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying: Not by me. God [will respond]” – He attributed the greatness to its initiator. “And, behold, seven cows, fat fleshed and fair of appearance came up from the Nile, and they grazed in the pasture” (Genesis 41:18). “Seven cows” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: It should have been fourteen years, as that is what Pharaoh saw.24The seven lean cows and seven blighted stalks should have indicated fourteen years.  Rabbi Neḥemya said: They were twenty-eight years, as that is what Pharaoh said to Joseph.25Pharaoh’s very mention of the seven lean cows and blighted stalks to Joseph should have initiated an additional seven years for each.  The Rabbis say: It should have been forty-two years, for what Pharaoh saw and said to Joseph, and [for what] Joseph repeated and said to Pharaoh. Rabbi Yosei ben Ḥanina said: The famine lasted two years, as once Jacob our patriarch descended there, the famine ceased. When did it return? In the days of Ezekiel. That is what is written: “I will render the land of Egypt desolation among desolate lands, and its cities will be desolation among ruined cities for forty years” (Ezekiel 29:12).

=== 90 | 90 ===
“Pharaoh said to his servants: Can we find a man like this, in whom there is the spirit of God?” (Genesis 41:38). “Pharaoh said to his servants: Can we find [a man] like this…?” “One is my faultless dove, the only one of her mother…” (Song of Songs 6:9). “One is my faultless dove” – this is Abraham, as it is stated: “Abraham was one, and he inherited the land” (Ezekiel 33:24). “The only one of her mother” – this is Isaac, who was his mother’s only son. “Pure [bara] to the one who bore her” (Song of Songs 6:9) – this is Jacob, as it was clear [barur] to the one who bore him that he was righteous. “Girls saw her and lauded her” (Song of Songs 6:9) – these are the tribes, “the news was heard in Pharaoh's house, [saying: Joseph's brothers have come; and it was good in the eyes of Pharaoh and the eyes of his servants]” (Genesis 45:16). “Queens and concubines, and praised her” (Song of Songs 6:9) – this is Joseph. “Pharaoh said to his servants: Can we find…like this…?” If we go from one end of the world to the other, we will not find one like this.
“Pharaoh said to Joseph: Since God has disclosed all this to you, there is no one as insightful and wise as you” (Genesis 41:39). “You will be in charge of my house, and my entire people will be sustained at your directive; only the throne will I make greater than you” (Genesis 41:40). “Pharaoh said to Joseph…You will be in charge of my house…” – there will be no person who will kiss me other than you.1Upon receiving a royal appointment one would kiss Pharoah as a sign of reverence; Pharaoh informed Joseph that no one would receive appointments without his approval (Etz Yosef; see there and Maharzu for additional interpretations).  “And my entire people will be sustained [yishak] at your directive” – there will be promotions only through you. “Only the throne” – Reish Lakish said: Moses gave us in writing two portions in the Torah, and we learn them from the portion of the wicked Pharaoh. One verse says: “You will be only [rak] above [and not below]” (Deuteronomy 28:13). Does it, perhaps, [mean you will be] on a par with Me? Impossible! The verse states: “Only” – My greatness will be above your greatness.2The word “only [rak]” is an expression of restriction, and indicates a limitation on what was stated previously.  We learn this from the wicked Pharaoh: “You will be” – does it, perhaps, [mean you will be] on a par with me? The verse states: “Only” – my greatness is above your greatness.  And this – “speak to the entire congregation of the children of Israel, and say to them: You shall be holy” (Leviticus 19:2) – does it, perhaps, [mean you will be] on a par with Me? The verse states: “For I, the Lord your God, am holy” (Leviticus 19:2) – My sanctity is above your sanctity. We learn this from the wicked Pharaoh. “I am Pharaoh” (Genesis 41:44) – does it, perhaps, [mean you will be] on a par with me? The verse states: “I am Pharaoh” – my greatness is above your greatness. Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: From the “I” of flesh and blood, you derive the “I” of the Holy One blessed be He. Just as regarding the “I” of flesh and blood, through the wicked Pharaoh saying to Joseph: “I am Pharaoh,” [Joseph] received all this honor; when the “I” of the Holy One blessed be He will come: “I have made, and I will bear” (Isaiah 46:4), all the more so.
“Pharaoh said to Joseph: See, I have set you over the entire land of Egypt” (Genesis 41:41). “Pharaoh removed his signet ring from upon his hand, and he placed it upon Joseph's hand, and he dressed him in linen garments, and he placed a gold chain on his neck” (Genesis 41:42). “He had him ride in the alternate chariot that he had, and they cried before him: Kneel [avrekh], and he was set over the entire land of Egypt” (Genesis 41:43). “Pharaoh said to Joseph…Pharaoh removed…” – Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: Joseph was given what he deserved: His mouth [piv] did not kiss [nashak] in transgression – “my entire people will be sustained at your directive [ve’al pikha yishak]” (Genesis 41:40). His body that did not touch in transgression – “he dressed him in linen garments” (Genesis 41:42). His neck that he did not bend for transgression – “he placed a gold chain on his neck” (Genesis 41:42). His hands that did not grope in transgression: “Pharaoh removed his signet ring from upon his hand, and he placed it upon Joseph's hand” (Genesis 41:42). His feet that did not stride in transgression, let them come and ride in coaches –“He had him ride in the alternate chariot that he had” (Genesis 41:43). The thought that he did not think in transgression, let it come and be called wisdom. “They cried before him: Kneel [avrekh]” – great [av] in wisdom, but tender [rakh] in years. But Nebuchadnezzar [is called] “commander [tafsar]” (Jeremiah 51:27) – foolish [tipesh] in wisdom and a prince [sar] in years.3He was advanced in years.  “Pharaoh said to Joseph: I am Pharaoh, and without you no man shall lift his hand or his foot in the entire land of Egypt” (Genesis 41:44). “Pharoah said to Joseph: I am Pharaoh, and without you no man shall life his hand” – utensils of the hand. “Or his foot” – utensils of the foot.4The reference is to bearing weapons, referred to here as utensils of the hand, or riding on a horse, referred to here as utensils of the foot. No one was to engage in warfare without Joseph’s command (Nezer HaKodesh). 
“Pharaoh called Joseph's name Tzafenat Paane’aḥ and he gave him Asenat, daughter of Potifera, priest of On, as a wife. Joseph went out over the land of Egypt” (Genesis 41:45). “Pharaoh called Joseph's name Tzafenat Paane’aḥ” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: He reveals hidden matters [tzefunot] and it is easy [noḥot] for him to state them. Rabbi Ḥizkiya said: With knowledge, he reveals hidden matters [tzefunot], and assuages [meniaḥ] the spirit of people with them. The Rabbis say: Tzadi – seer [tzofeh]; peh – redeemer [podeh]; nun – prophet [navi]; tav – supporter [tomekh]; Peh – interpreter [poter]; ayin – clever [arum]; nun – understanding [navon]; ḥet – prognosticator [ḥozeh].5These are the Hebrew letters that spell Tzafenat Paane’aḥ. “Joseph was thirty years old as he stood before Pharaoh, king of Egypt. Joseph came out from before Pharaoh, and he passed through the entire land of Egypt” (Genesis 41:46). Rabbi Aḥa said: You came to reveal that you are the son of the hidden one.6Rachel was hidden when Jacob and his family confronted Esau, as the midrash will go on to explain.  Regarding them all, it is written: “The maidservants approached” (Genesis 33:6); “Leah, too, approached…” (Genesis 33:7). But regarding Joseph it is written: “Then Joseph and Rachel approached” (Genesis 33:7). Joseph said: ‘This wicked one has a covetous eye…’7Joseph did not want Esau to direct his eyes at Rachel, and therefore he stood tall and obscured her (see Bereshit Rabba 78:10). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You obscured your mother from sight and stood tall. I will repay you and elevate you’ – “Joseph was thirty years old [as he stood before Pharaoh]” (Genesis 41:46).
“The earth produced, during the seven years of plenty, in abundance” (Genesis 41:47).  “The earth produced, during the seven years of plenty, in abundance [likmatzim]” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: From the reaping [kotzetz] kometz]> to the mill,8The produce could go directly from reaping to the mill, without the common intermediary processes such as threshing and winnowing.  for savings [dekamtzeta] and not for savings.9Many commentaries argue that this phrase should not appear in the statement of Rabbi Yoḥanan.  The Rabbis say: For savings and not for savings.10There was enough to eat, and to store away for future use. Alternatively, the produce filled the storehouses and there was even more.   “He gathered all the food of the seven years that were in the land of Egypt, and placed food in the cities; he placed the food of the fields that were around the city in it” (Genesis 41:48). “Joseph amassed grain like the sand of the sea, very much, until one stopped counting, as it was without number” (Genesis 41:49). “He gathered all the food…he placed the food of the fields that were around the city in it” – he placed what was in the outskirts of Tiberias into Tiberias, and what was on the outskirts of Tzippori into Tzippori,11These cities are located in the land of Israel and not in Egypt; they are cited merely as examples.  because each and every land preserves its own produce.12The produce will be better preserved when stored near the place where it was grown.  Rabbi Neḥemya said: He placed dust and ashes in them, materials that preserve produce. The Rabbis say: If all the residents of Tiberias were to gather and eat everything that is within the boundaries of Tiberias, and all the residents of Tzippori to eat what is within the boundaries of Tzippori, each of them would get not even a handful. That is what is said: Blessing is located in the storehouses – “Joseph amassed grain like the sand of the sea, very much…” (Genesis 41:49).13When the grain was stored away it increased. This is how it was possible for the grain grown around each city to suffice for the residents of that city, without resorting to using grain grown in outlying areas further from the city. 
“The seven years of plenty that was in the land of Egypt concluded” (Genesis 41:53). “The seven years of famine ensued, as Joseph had said; there was famine in all lands, but in all of the land of Egypt there was bread” (Genesis 41:54). “Concluded [vatikhlena]…” – they emerged perfect [mekholalot].  “Ensued [vateḥilena]…” – they entered ill [ḥolaniyot].14Although the Egyptians had eaten on the final day of the seventh year of plenty, on the first day of the first year of famine, they were already afflicted with hunger. By the time they sat at the table, they sought even coarse bread, but could find none. They said: ‘Is this not what Joseph said: “The food will be as a security [for the land for the seven years of famine]”? (Genesis 41:36).15They needed the security from the beginning of the seven years. “There was famine in all lands” – in three lands: Phoenicia, Arabia, and Philistia. “The entire land of Egypt was hungry, and the people cried out to Pharaoh for bread; Pharaoh said to all the Egyptians: Go to Joseph; what he says to you, you shall do” (Genesis 41:55). “The entire land of Egypt was hungry…what he says to you, you shall do” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: He compelled them to circumcise themselves.16When a Jew purchases a gentile slave, he is obligated to circumcise him. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: “Ḥiyitanu” is not written here, but rather, “you have saved our lives [heḥeyitanu]” (Genesis 47:25)17When the Egyptians tell Joseph “you have saved our lives,” the Hebrew term used is heḥeyitanu instead of the similar form ḥiyitanu. The extra heh in the word implies that something additional is included, and is interpreted as an allusion to life in the World to Come: By seeing to it that they became circumcised, Joseph assured them of life in the World to Come; alternatively, the meaning is that some Egyptians converted and thereby merited life in the World to Come (see Yefeh To’ar).  – you have given us life in this world, and in the World to Come. “The famine was on the entire face of the earth, and Joseph opened all that was in them, and sold grain to the Egyptians. The famine was intensified in the land of Egypt” (Genesis 41:56). “The famine was…everything that [asher] was in them” – the best [hame’usharim] of them.

=== 91 | 91 ===
“Jacob saw that there was grain in Egypt, and Jacob said to his sons: Why do you make yourselves conspicuous?” (Genesis 42:1). “Jacob saw that there was grain [shever] in Egypt” – “Happy is he whose help is from the God of Jacob, whose hope [sivro] is in the Lord his God” (Psalms 146:5). “Jacob saw that there was grain in Egypt” – “Behold, He demolishes, and it will not be rebuilt” (Job 12:14) – once the Holy One blessed be He stymied the intention of the tribes,1The plan of Joseph’s brothers to kill him.  it was not restored. “He shuts a man in, and it will not be opened” (Job 12:14) – these are the ten tribes, who were entering and exiting Egypt, and they did not know that Joseph was alive. But it was revealed to Jacob that Joseph was alive, as it is stated: “Jacob saw that there was shever in Egypt” – “that there was disaster [shever]”2The word shever, generally translated in Genesis 42:1 to mean grain, can also mean disaster; see, e.g., Lamentations 2:11.  – this is the famine; “that there was hope [sever]”3The midrash interprets the verse as though it said “hope [sever],” because the letters shin and sin are interchangeable.  – this is the plenty. “That there was disaster [shever]” – “Joseph was taken down to Egypt” (Genesis 39:1); “that there was hope [sever]” – “Joseph was the ruler over the land” (Genesis 42:6). “That there was disaster [shever]” – “they will be enslaved to them and they will oppress them” (Genesis 15:13); “that there was hope [sever]” – “then they will emerge with great wealth” (Genesis 15:14). “Who says to the sun and it does not shine” (Job 9:7) – this is Jacob; “and seals the stars” (Job 9:7) – these are the ten tribes, who were entering and exiting Egypt, and they did not know that Joseph was alive.4The verse in Job is thus understood to mean that God withheld the full “shine” of the divine spirit from Jacob, and although he had a sense that Joseph was alive, he did not have clear knowledge of the matter. On the other hand, God withheld this sense entirely from Joseph’s brothers (Etz Yosef).  But it was revealed to Jacob that Joseph was alive.
“Jacob said to his sons: Why do you make yourselves conspicuous?” – he said to them: ‘Do not take out bread [perusa] perutot]> in your hands,5The midrash is based on the premise that there was no shortage of food in Jacob’s household. and do not enter all of you in one entrance, due to the evil eye.’6So as not to arouse envy. “He said: Behold, I have heard that there is grain in Egypt. Go down there and acquire grain for us from there, and we will live and not die” (Genesis 42:2). “He said: Behold, I have heard…Go down [redu]…and acquire…for us from there” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: He informed them that they were destined to spend two hundred and ten years there, the numerical value of redu.7Reish – 200 + dalet – 4 + vav – 6 = 210. “Ten of Joseph’s brothers went down to acquire grain from Egypt” (Genesis 42:3). “But Benjamin, Joseph’s brother, Jacob did not send with his brothers, as he said: Lest disaster befall him” (Genesis 42:4). “Ten of Joseph’s brothers went down” – Rabbi Binyamin said: From the fact that it says “Joseph’s brothers,” do I not know that they are ten? Astonishing! It is, rather, nine parts were for fraternity, and one to acquire grain.8The primary motivation for the brothers in their journey to Egypt was to locate Joseph, rather than the purchase of grain.  “But Benjamin, Joseph's brother…”9Since the verse specifies that Joseph’s brothers came with the exception of Benjamin, it was obvious that there were ten. This confirms the need for the previous statement of the midrash (Hamidrash HaMevoar).
“The sons of Israel came to acquire grain among [betokh] those who came, as the famine was in the land of Canaan” (Genesis 42:5). “The sons of Israel came to acquire…” – from where is it derived that a congregation is ten [men]?10This is stated regarding the law that matters of sanctity, such as kaddish and kedusha, can be recited only with a quorum of ten men (see Megilla 23b). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana and Rabbi Yosei in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: “Congregation” (Numbers 35:24) is stated here,11Regarding the makeup of the Sanhedrin. and elsewhere it is stated: “Until when for this evil congregation…?” (Numbers 14:27); just as “congregation” that is written elsewhere is ten,12The reference in Numbers 14:27 is to the spies who delivered an evil report to the Israelites in the wilderness. This was done by ten of the twelve spies.  so, “congregation” that is written here is ten. Rabbi Simon said: It is stated here: “[I shall be sanctified] among [the children of Israel” (Leviticus 22:32), and “among” is stated elsewhere;13In Genesis 42:5, regarding the ten brothers of Joseph.  just as “among” that is stated elsewhere is ten, so, too, “among” that is stated here is ten. Rabbi Yosei bar Avon said: Were it from “among” it would be even many more.14It says “among those who came,” and there were many more than ten who came to Egypt. Rather, it is stated here “the children of Israel [benei Yisrael]” and it is stated elsewhere “the sons of Israel [benei Yisrael]”15Genesis 42:5.  – just as “the sons of Israel” stated elsewhere were ten, so, too, “the children of Israel” stated here are ten. Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi in the name of Rabbi: One may count a small child as the completion of ten.16If there are nine adults and one child, they may be considered to comprise a quorum.  But is it not taught: We are not particular regarding a minor?17A boy is considered an adult only when he reaches the age of thirteen and also has two pubic hairs, a sign of puberty. However, the teaching cited here by the midrash indicates that if he has two pubic hairs, one is not particular about whether he has reached the age of thirteen, and he may be counted toward the quorum (see Berakhot 47b–48a). This implies that a minor who does not yet have two pubic hairs may not be counted toward the quorum.  Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: It is necessary for the case of two minors, one [whose status] is uncertain and one who is [certainly] a minor;18The teaching that one is not particular regarding a minor refers to the case of two minors; one has two pubic hairs but has not yet reached the age of thirteen, and the other does not yet have two pubic hairs (Etz Yosef).  one renders the uncertain one as part of the quorum and the minor as a completion.19The minor whose status is certain may count only as the tenth man in the quorum.  It is taught: One may count a minor and a Torah scroll as the completion of ten.20If the minor is holding a Torah scroll, he may be considered the tenth man in the quorum.  Rabbi Yudan said: This is the baraita: One may count a minor as the completion for a Torah scroll.21One may include a minor in the tally of seven people called to the Torah during the Torah reading on Shabbat (Maharzu).  From when may one count his as the completion? Rabbi Avuna said: Rabbi Yudan and Rav Huna dispute [the answer to] this, both of them in the name of Rabbi Shmuel: One said: When he knows the nature of a blessing, and the other said: When he knows to Whom he is reciting the blessing. Rabbi Yehuda bar Pazi in the name of Rabbi Asi: Nine who appear like ten may recite the zimmun.22The name of God may be included in the zimmun when ten men participate. Rabbi Asi says that this is true even if there are nine who look like ten. The Gemara (Berakhot 47b) cites two opinions as to whether nine appear as ten when they are crowded together or when they are scattered.  What do they do when they are distinct?23Of what benefit is it if the nine appear as ten? There are still only nine, and nine do now comprise a quorum (Yefeh To’ar). It is, rather, even if there is a minor in their midst.24Rabbi Asi means to say that a minor can count as the tenth member of the quorum.   Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Yaakov bar Zavdi raised a question before Rabbi Yosef: Just as they render him a completion of ten, do they render him a completion of three?25To recite zimmun.  He said to him: Is this not a case of “all the more so” – if elsewhere, where it is a matter of mentioning God’s name, one counts him as the completion, here, where it is not a matter of mentioning God’s name, may one not count him as the completion?26If the minor can count to complete the quorum of ten to mention the name of God in zimmun, certainly he can count as the third individual so that zimmun may be recited without the name of God.  He said to him: That is what it says: They count him as the completion for Grace after Meals, but for the recitation of Shema and the Amida prayer, one does not count him as the completion until he grows two hairs.27The fact that it is stated that the minor may be the completion of the quorum for Grace after Meals but not for the recitation of the Amida prayer by the prayer leader indicates that the minor may count when it comes to mentioning the name of God, but not in order to bring about an obligation to recite a prayer that otherwise would not have been recited. Similarly, he may not count toward the three men necessary for zimmun, because without him they do not have the obligation to recite zimmun at all (Matnot Kehuna).  Rabbi Asi said: Many times I ate with Rabbi Taḥlifa and many times I ate with Rabbi Ḥanina bar Sisi my uncle, and they did not include me in the zimmun until I grew two hairs. From when may he read the Torah? Rabbi Avina said: Rav Huna and Rabbi Yehuda dispute [the answer to] this, both of them in the name of Rabbi Shmuel: One said: From when he knows how to recite a blessing. The other says: From when he knows the nature of the blessing and to Whom he recites a blessing. Rabbi Shmuel bar Shilat raised a question before Rav and some say: A question was raised before Shmuel bar Shilat: [If] nine [ate] bread and one [ate vegetables, what is [the ruling]? He said to them: One recites the zimmun. [If] eight [ate] bread and two [ate] vegetables, one recites the zimmun. [If] seven or six [ate] bread and four [ate] vegetables, what is [the ruling]? He said to them: One recites the zimmun. Rabbi Avina raised a question: Half and half, what is the ruling? Rabbi Ze’eira said to him: While I was there, I should have asked, and I regret that I did not ask it. Rabbi Yirmeya raised a question: The one who ate vegetables, what [is the ruling]; can he recite the zimmun on their behalf? It is taught: Three hundred nazirites ascended and were obligated to sacrifice nine hundred offerings28Each nazirite is obligated to bring three offerings at the conclusion of his naziriteship: A burnt offering, a sin offering, and a guilt offering. However, these nazirites did not have the means to pay for their offerings. in the time of Shimon ben Shataḥ. For one hundred and fifty of them, he found an opening,29He found a flaw in their initial vow which enabled him to nullify their nazirite vows and absolve them of the obligation of bringing the offerings. for one hundred and fifty of them, he did not find an opening. Rabbi Shimon ben Shataḥ went up to King Yannai. He said to him: ‘Three hundred nazirites ascended and are obligated to sacrifice nine hundred offerings, but they do not have [the means]. You give half from yours and I will give half from mine, and let them go and sacrifice.’ King Yannai gave half from his and they went and sacrificed. Someone came and spoke slander to King Yannai about Shimon ben Shataḥ: ‘Know that everything that they sacrificed, they sacrificed from yours, but Shimon ben Shataḥ did not give anything from his.’ King Yannai became angry at Shimon ben Shataḥ. [Shimon ben Shataḥ ] heard that he was angry at him, and he was distressed  and he fled.  Some time later, there were dignitaries from the Persian Empire who were eating at King Yannai’s table. They said to him: ‘Our lord the king, we remember that there was a certain elder here, who would say matters of Torah to us.’ [King Yannai] said to [Shimon ben Shataḥ’s] sister:30King Yannai’s wife was Shimon ben Shataḥ’s sister. ‘Send after him and have him brought here.’ She said to him: ‘Give me your word [that he will not be harmed] and send him your ring, and he will come.’ He gave her his word, sent his ring, and he came. When he came, he sat between the king and the queen. [King Yannai] said to him: ‘Why did you flee?’ [Shimon ben Shataḥ said:] ‘I heard that my lord the king was angry at me, and I was frightened of you [and wanted to ensure] that you would not kill me, so I fulfilled this verse: “Hide for a brief moment, until fury will pass”’ (Isaiah 26:20). He said to him: ‘Why did you deceive me?’ He said to him: ‘God forbid, I did not deceive you. Rather, you [gave] from your wealth and I [gave] of the Torah,31Shimon ben Shataḥ had used his Torah knowledge to annul the vows of half the nazirites, thus exempting them from bringing their sacrifices.  as it is written: “For in the shadow of wisdom, in the shadow of silver”’ (Ecclesiastes 7:12). He said to him: ‘Why did you not tell me?’ He said to him: ‘Had I told you, you would not have given.’ He said to him: ‘Why did you sit between the king and the queen?’ He said to him: ‘It is written in the book of ben Sira: “Prize it, and it will elevate you; and it will seat you between rulers.”’ He said: ‘Pour for him and let him recite the blessing.’ He said: ‘Blessed [is He] for [providing] the food that Yannai and his cohorts ate.’ He said: ‘Even now, you remain in your obstinacy? In all my days, I never heard Yannai in the blessing.’ He said: ‘What should I say, let us recite a blessing for what we ate? But I did not eat.’32Generally, when three men participate in a meal, Grace after Meals is preceded by zimmun, an introductory section in which one of the lines is: Blessed is He from whose [food] we have eaten. However, in this instance Shimon ben Shataḥ had not actually eaten.  He said: ‘Give him and let him eat.’33According to the Gemara (Berakhot 48a), Shimon ben Shataḥ merely drank the first cup of wine they had brought, and then they brought him an additional cup for the recitation of Grace after Meals.  Once he ate, he said: Blessed [is He from whose food] we have eaten.’  Rabbi Yoḥanan said: They disagree with him, with the statement of Shimon ben Shataḥ. Rabbi Abba said: Regarding the first.34The Sages disagreed with his recitation of the blessing: Blessed [is He] for [providing] the food Yannai and his cohorts ate (Etz Yosef).  Rabbi Yirmeya said: Regarding the second.35They disagreed with his reciting Grace after Meals for King Yannai and his guests after having only consumed a cup of wine. The Sages held that one must eat bread in order to recite Grace after Meals.  The opinions of Rabbi Yirmeya are contradictory. There, he is uncertain, here, it is obvious to him.36Rabbi Yirmeya was cited above as asking whether one who ate vegetables could recite Grace after Meals for others who ate bread, and now he is cited as being sure that one cannot do so.  The one where he is uncertain is in accordance to the opinion of the Rabbis, and the one where it is obvious to him is in accordance with the opinion of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, as it is taught in that regard: If he reclined with them and dipped with them, even though he did not eat an olive bulk of grain, one includes him in the zimmun, this is the statement of the Sages. Rabbi Yaakov bar Aḥa said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Actually, one does not include him in the zimmun, until he eats an olive-bulk of grain. But is it not taught: [If] two [ate] bread and one [ate] vegetables, they recite the zimmun? That baraita is in accordance with the opinion of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel.
“Joseph was the ruler over the land; he was the provider of grain to all the people of the land. Joseph's brothers came, and prostrated themselves to him, faces to the ground” (Genesis 42:6). “Joseph was the ruler…” – he issued three edicts: That no slave shall enter Egypt; that no man shall enter with two donkeys, and that donkey drivers shall not transport grain from place to place; that a person shall not enter until he writes his name, his father’s name, and his grandfather’s name.37All this was to increase the chances that Joseph’s brothers would come, and to ensure that if they were to come, Joseph would know. Manasseh was standing there collecting the notes [with the names]. [Joseph’s brothers] said: ‘Let us enter and see. If they make claims against us with a measured rate of taxes, that is fine. If not, in the morning we will see what we will do.’38When Manasseh saw their notes listing their names, he summoned them to appear before Joseph. The brothers thought, if we are being detained on account of the need to pay standard taxes, we will do so; otherwise, we will see what we need to do (Yefeh To’ar). 
Another matter: “Jacob saw that there was grain in Egypt.” It is written: “The withholder of grain, the nation will curse him, but blessing will be on the head of the provider” (Proverbs 11:26). “The withholder of grain, the nation will curse him” – this is Pharaoh; “but blessing will be on the head of the provider – this is Joseph. “The withholder of grain, the nation will curse him” – this is Pharaoh, who hoarded the grain during the years of famine, and the people were cursing him. But Joseph sustained the world during the years of famine, like a shepherd leading his flock. In his regard, David said: “Shepherd of Israel, listen. Appear to us, You who led Joseph like a flock” (Psalms 80:2). When there was a famine during the days of David, he asked for mercy from before the Holy One blessed be He and said: ‘Master of the universe, lead your flock like Joseph, who sustained the world during the years of famine.’  When the famine intensified, the Egyptians gathered and came to Joseph. They said to him: ‘Give us bread.’ He said to them: ‘My God does not sustain the uncircumcised. Go and circumcise yourselves and I will give to you.’ They went to Pharaoh and were crying out and weeping before him, as it is stated: “The entire land of Egypt was hungry, [and the people cried out to Pharaoh for bread]” (Genesis 41:55). He said: “Go to Joseph; what he says to you, you shall do” (Genesis 41:55). They said to him: ‘We went to him and he said empty matters to us, saying: Circumcise yourselves.’ He said to them: ‘Fools, did I not say to you from the outset: Obey him and acquire grain. Did he not proclaim to you during the years of plenty and command you: Know that there is a famine coming? You yourselves were negligent. Why did you not place in your houses grain to last two, three, or four years?’ They said to him: ‘The grain that was in our houses rotted.’ He said to them: ‘Is there no flour leftover for you from yesterday?’ They said to him: ‘Even the bread that was in the basket rotted.’ He said to them: “Go to Joseph; what he says to you, you shall do.” He said to them: ‘If he issues a decree upon grain and it rots, perhaps he will issue a decree upon us and kill us.’ He said to them: ‘“Go to Joseph,” if he tells you cut your flesh, heed him,’ as it is stated: “What he says to you, you shall do.”  “The famine was on the entire face [of the earth]” (Genesis 41:56). It would have been fitting for the verse to say: “On the earth.” Why does the verse say: “On the face”? Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: It is to teach you that the famine began only with the wealthy, as “the face of the earth” is only the wealthy. That is why it is stated: “The withholder of grain, the nation will curse him” – when a person is wealthy, his face is happy to see another, but when a person is indigent, he does not have a face to see, because he is ashamed in front of others.39This is implied in the phrase “the famine was on the entire face.”  That is why it was stated: “The withholder of grain, the nation will curse him.”40The word “nation [le’om]” is interpreted to refer to the wealthy, prominent members of the nation (Rashash). 
Another matter, “Jacob saw that there was grain [shever] in Egypt” – was Jacob in Egypt that he saw grain in Egypt, such that the verse states: “Jacob saw that there was grain in Egypt”? But did he not say [differently] to his sons, [as it is stated]: “He saidBehold, I have heard [that there is grain in Egypt]”? It is, rather, that from the day that Joseph was abducted, the Divine Spirit left him, and he would see but not see, hear but not hear.41He had from the Divine Spirit a vague idea of things that he would not otherwise know, but he did not have a clear understanding of them.  Why does it not say “there was food in Egypt,” but instead it is written: “That there was grain [shever] in Egypt”? Is it not already stated: “The entire land of Egypt was hungry”? Why does the verse state: “There was grain [shever]”? Rather, do not read it as “there was grain [shever],” but rather, “there was hope [sever],” as he foresaw that his hope was in Egypt. What was that? That was Joseph. “Jacob said to his sons: Why do you make yourselves conspicuous?” Jacob said to his sons: ‘You are mighty, you are handsome, do not enter through one gate and do not stand in one place, so that the evil eye will not have dominion over you.’ “Behold, I have heard that there is grain in Egypt. Go down there.” What is “go down”? He foresaw that they would descend and be enslaved in Egypt. Another matter, “go down there” – as anyone who purchases grain from the marketplace, descent is written in his regard.42This is because he is dependent upon market conditions for his basic sustenance (Etz Yosef).   “Joseph’s brothers descended” (Genesis 42:3). The verse should have said: “The children of Israel.” It is that initially, they did not treat him with brotherhood and sold him, but ultimately they had regrets and were saying: ‘When will we descend to Egypt and return our brother to his father?’ When their father told them to descend to Egypt, they all came to a consensus to return him. Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: Joseph, too, knew that his brothers were descending to Egypt to acquire food. What did he do? He positioned guards at all the entrances and said to them: ‘See each one who enters to acquire food, and write his name and his father’s name.’ In the evening, they would bring the notes to him. This is what they did. When Jacob’s sons came, each and every one entered through his own gate, and they wrote their names. In the evening, they brought [Joseph] the notes. This one read: ‘Reuben son of Jacob,’ another read: ‘Simeon son of Jacob,’ and another ‘Levi,’ and likewise, all the gatekeepers, each one brought his own. Immediately, Joseph said: ‘Seal all the storehouses and keep open one storehouse.’ He gave their names to the proprietor of the storehouse. He said to him: ‘See, when these people come to you, apprehend them, and send them before me.’ Three days passed and they did not come. Immediately, Joseph took seventy mighty men from the king’s palace and dispatched them to the marketplace. They went and found them in the marketplace of harlots. What was the nature of their presence in the marketplace of harlots? It is that they said: ‘Our brother Joseph is fair of form and fair of appearance; perhaps he is in a tent.’43Perhaps he was forced to work as a male prostitute (Matnot Kehuna).  They apprehended them and brought them before Joseph. “Joseph saw his brothers, and he recognized them, but he acted as a stranger to them, and spoke harshly to them; he said to them: From where did you come? They said: From the land of Canaan, to acquire food” (Genesis 42:7). “Joseph recognized his brothers, but they did not recognize him” (Genesis 42:8). “Joseph remembered the dreams that he dreamed about them, and said to them: You are spies; to see the nakedness of the land you have come” (Genesis 42:9). “They said to him: No, my lord, but your servants have come to acquire food” (Genesis 42:10). “We are all the sons of one man; we are sincere, your servants have not been spies” (Genesis 42:11). “And he said to them: No, to see the nakedness of the land you have come” (Genesis 42:12). “They said: We, your servants, are twelve brothers, sons of one man in the land of Canaan and, behold, the youngest is with our father today, and one is absent” (Genesis 42:13). Immediately, “he acted as a stranger [vayitnaker] to them, and spoke harshly to them” – it teaches that he became like a stranger [nokhri] to them. He took the goblet and struck it. He said to them: ‘I see in my goblet that “you are spies.”’ They said to him: ‘“We are sincere”; however, this is what our father commanded us: Do not enter through one gate…’ He said to them: ‘What is the nature of your presence in the marketplace of harlots? Were you not afraid of the evil eye? Was that not your father’s command?’ They said to him: ‘We lost something and we were seeking it there.’ He said to them: ‘What was the lost item? I see in my goblet that two of you destroyed the big city of Shekhem, and then you sold your brother to Arabs.’ Immediately, they were shocked and said to him: “We, your servants, are twelve brothers, sons of…our father.” He said to them: ‘And where are the other two?’ They said to him: “One is absent” – dead; and “the youngest is with our father today.” He said to them: “Bring your youngest brother to me…” (Genesis 42:34). He took Simeon and incarcerated him before their eyes, because it was he who had pushed him into the pit. He separated him from Levi, so they would not conspire against him. Simeon said to his brothers: ‘So you did to Joseph, and so you seek to do to me?’44You also sinned in the sale of Joseph. Do not leave me here; stay and bear the burden of punishment together with me (Maharzu).  They said to him: ‘What shall we do? The people of our household will die of starvation.’ He said to them: ‘Do what you want. Now, I will see who will take me into prison.’45Shimon planned to resist being taken to prison.  At that moment, Joseph sent to Pharaoh and said to him: ‘Send me seventy of your mighty men, as I have found robbers and I seek to shackle them.’ At that time he sent them to him, and Joseph’s brothers were looking to see what he sought to do.  Joseph said to those mighty men: ‘Take him into prison.’ When they drew near to him, he screamed at them. When they heard his voice, they fell on their faces and their teeth broke, as it is stated: “The roar of the lion and the voice of the great cat, and the teeth of the lion cubs are broken” (Job 4:10). Manasseh was sitting before his father. His father said: ‘You get up.’ Immediately, Manasseh stood and struck him with one blow, took him into prison, and shackled him. [Joseph] said to [his brothers]: ‘This one will be incarcerated until you bring your brother “and your statements will be verified”’ (Genesis 42:20). Immediately, “Joseph commanded and they filled their vessels” (Genesis 42:25). They went to their father and related to him the entire incident. Their father responded and said to them: ‘Where is Simeon?’ They said: ‘He seized him for our youngest brother.’ He said to them: “You have bereaved me.” “Reuben spoke to his father, saying: Kill my two sons.” [Jacob] said to him: ‘Are your sons not my sons?’ Judah said to them: ‘Leave the elder until the bread is finished.’46Jacob was refusing to send Benjamin. Judah advised his brothers not to continue pleading but to wait until the bread was finished, when Jacob would have to agree.  Judah said to him: ‘Father, if Benjamin goes with us, perhaps he will be apprehended and perhaps he will not be apprehended. But if he does not go with us, we will all die of starvation. It is preferable that you forsake the uncertain and seize the certain.’ He said: ‘Who will guarantee him?’ He said to him: ‘I will,’ as it is stated: “I will guarantee him; from me you can demand him” (Genesis 43:9). That is why it is stated: “Jacob saw that there was grain [shever] in Egypt.”47The midrash interprets the word shever to mean disaster, as Jacob was afraid of the possibility that Benjamin would be harmed (Matnot Kehuna). Some commentaries suggest that this last line is an error and should not appear in the text (Nezer HaKodesh; Etz Yosef). 
“Joseph saw his bothers [and he recognized them, but he acted as a stranger to them]” (Genesis 42:7) – Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya said: He became like a stranger to them. “Joseph recognized his brothers…” (Genesis 42:8) – Rabbi Levi and the Rabbis, Rabbi Levi said: When they fell into his hands: “Joseph recognized his brothers.” When he fell into their hands: “But they did not recognize him.”48He treated them as brothers when they descended to Egypt; they did not treat him as a brother when he came to them in Dotan. The Rabbis say: He parted from them when they were bearded, so “Joseph recognized his brothers.” “But they did not recognize him,” as they parted from him when he was not bearded. “Joseph remembered…and said to them…[They said to him:] We are all the sons of one man” (Genesis 42:9–11) – they had a spark of the Divine Spirit. They said to him: ‘We and you are the sons of one man.’ “Joseph said to them: That is what I spoke to you, saying: You are spies” (Genesis 42:14). “They said: We, [your servants,] are twelve [brothers, sons of one man…and one is absent]” (Genesis 42:13) – He said to them: ‘Where is he?’ [They said:] ‘We sold him.’ He said to them: ‘For how much did you sell him?’ They said to him: ‘For five sela.’ He said to them: ‘And if a person would say to you: Give me five sela for him, and I will give him to you, would you do it?’ They said to him: ‘Yes.’ And if a person would say to you: ‘Give me double for him and I will give him to you, would you do it?’ They said: ‘Yes.’ ‘And if a person would say to you, even if you would give one thousand for him, we will not give him to you, what would you do?’ They said to him: ‘It is for that purpose that we descended, either to kill or to be killed.’ He said to them: “That is what I spoke to you, [saying: You are] spies.” “With this you shall be put to the test: As Pharaoh lives, you shall not depart from here, unless your youngest brother comes here” (Genesis 42:15). “Dispatch one of you and he will take your brother, and you shall be incarcerated, that your statements may be verified, whether there is truth with you; and if not, by Pharaoh’s life, you are spies” (Genesis 42:16). “With this you shall be put to the test: As Pharaoh lives” – when he would seek to take a false oath, he would take the oath by Pharaoh’s life. Rabbi Levi said: This is analogous to a goat that fled from the pasture and went to a widowed woman. What did she do? She stood, slaughtered it, flayed it, placed it in the bed, and covered it with a sheet. They came and sought it from her. She said: ‘This woman will tear from the flesh of this one and eat it if she knows about it.’49She placed the goat on a bed as though it were a child, and swore that if she knew anything about the whereabouts of the goat, she would tear the flesh of “this one” and eat it.  So, “as Pharaoh lives, you shall not depart…dispatch one of you.” “He gathered them into custody for three days” (Genesis 42:17). “He gathered them into custody for three days” – the Holy One blessed be He never leaves the righteous in distress for three days, and likewise they learned from Joseph, Jonah, Mordekhai, and David, and likewise it says: “He will revive us after two days; on the third day” (Hosea 6:2) of the tribes “He will raise us” (Hosea 6:2)50Meaning, “one the third day He will raise us,” just as Joseph released his brothers, the progenitors of the tribes, on the third day.  – “Joseph said to them on the third day.”
“If you are sincere, one of your brothers will be incarcerated in the place of your custody and you, go bring grain for the hunger of your houses” (Genesis 42:19). “And bring your youngest brother to me and your statements will be verified, and you will not die. They did so” (Genesis 42:20).  “They said one to another: But we are guilty in our brother’s regard, that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he pleaded with us and we did not heed; that is why this anguish has befallen us” (Genesis 42:21). “If you are sincere…and [bring] your youngest brother…They said one to another: But [aval] we are guilty” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: It is a southern dialect: Aval – truthfully. “That we saw the anguish of his soul, when he pleaded with us” – Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan bar She’ila: Is it possible that Joseph, at seventeen years old, would see his brothers selling him, and be silent? Rather, it teaches that he prostrated himself before the feet of each and every one so that they would be filled with mercy for him, but they were not filled. “Reuben responded to them, saying: Did I not speak to you, saying: Do not sin against the child, and you did not heed? And, indeed, here is a reckoning for his blood” (Genesis 42:22). “Reuben responded to them, saying…” – did I not say this to you? “Did I not speak to you, saying: Do not sin against the child,” but this is what you said: “Now let us go and kill him” (Genesis 37:20).  “And, indeed [vegam], here is a reckoning for his blood” – his blood and the blood of the elder.51Instead of “his blood vedamo],” it says “indeed…his blood [vegam damo].” The word vegam comes to include the blood of his father. “They did not know that Joseph understood, as the interpreter was between them” (Genesis 42:23). “They did not know that Joseph understood, as the interpreter” – this was Manasseh. “He turned from them and wept, and he returned to them; he spoke to them, and took Simeon from them, and incarcerated him before their eyes” (Genesis 42:24). “He turned from them” – Rabbi Ḥagai said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: he incarcerated him before their eyes. When they departed, he fed him, gave him to drink, bathed him, and anointed him.
“Joseph commanded to fill their vessels with grain, and to restore each man's silver to his sack, and to give them provisions for the way, and he did so to them” (Genesis 42:25). “They loaded their grain onto their donkeys, and went from there” (Genesis 42:26). “One of them opened his sack to give feed to his donkey at the inn. He saw his silver; behold, it was in the opening of his sack” (Genesis 42:27). “He said to his brothers: My silver was returned and, behold, it is in my sack. Their hearts sank, and they trembled one with another, saying: What is this that God has done to us?” (Genesis 42:28). “Joseph commanded to fill…They loaded their grain onto their donkeys…One of them opened…Each one said to his brother.”52The last citation is a paraphrase of Genesis 42:28. When Rabbi Simon bar Zevida died, Rabbi Ela entered and began [his eulogy] for him: “But wisdom, where will it be found? …It is vanished from the eyes of all living… The deep says: It is not…” (Job 28:12, 21, 14). There are four matters that are essential for the world’s needs, and all of them have replacements. These are: “For there is a source of silver and a place where gold is refined. Iron is taken from the dust, and copper is smelted from rock” (Job 28:1–2). But when a Torah scholar dies, we cannot find a replacement for him. Rabbi Levi said: When the tribes found something,53Whey they found the silver that had been returned to the sack.  it is written: “Their hearts sank”; we who lost Rabbi Simon, all the more so. “They came to their father Jacob, to the land of Canaan, and they told him all that had befallen them, saying” (Genesis 42:29). “They came to their father Jacob…[and they told him all that had befallen [hakorot] them]” – it teaches that the matters weighed heavily upon them like beams [kekorot].54Like the beams of an olive-press that weigh heavily upon the olives. “The man, lord of the land, spoke harshly with us, and accused us as spies of the land” (Genesis 42:30). “It was as they were emptying their sacks, and, behold, each man's packet of silver was in his sack. They and their father saw their bags of silver, and they were afraid” (Genesis 42:35). “The man, lord of the land, spoke… It was as they were emptying their sacks…” – it teaches that their father suspected them.55When Jacob saw the silver, he suspected them of stealing it, and therefore also suspected them of wrongdoing regarding the disappearance of Joseph and Simeon, as the following verse suggests. “Jacob their father said to them: You have bereaved me: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and Benjamin you will take; all of these have come upon me” (Genesis 42:36). “Jacob their father said to them… [all of these have come upon me]” – Joseph is already not [with us], and Simeon is not, but it is incumbent “upon me” to produce twelve tribes. “Reuben said to his father, saying: Kill my two sons if I do not bring him back to you; place him in my charge, and I will return him to you” (Genesis 42:37). “Reuben said to his father…” – Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi] says: This is a firstborn imbecile. Are your sons not my sons? I wonder. “He said: My son will not go down with you, for his brother is dead, and only he remains, and disaster will befall him on the path on which you will go; you will cause my old age to descend in sorrow to the grave” (Genesis 42:38).  “He said: My son will not go down with you…” – Rabbi Ḥanina and Rabbi Marinos, both of them said in the name of Abba Nehorai: When a person would say a worthy statement before Rabbi Tarfon, he would say: “A knob and a flower [kaftor vaferaḥ].”56These were parts of the ornamentation of the candelabrum and referring to them indicates that the statement was pleasing.  But when he would say nonsense, he would say: “My son will not go down with you.”57Just as Jacob refused to agree to Reuben’s suggestion, Rabbi Tarfon was indicating his refusal to agree with the statement that had been made.   “On the path on which you will go; [you will cause my old age to descend in sorrow to the grave]” – but not in the house?58Was it only on the path that disaster could befall Benjamin?  From here it is derived that the accuser accuses only in a time of danger.
“The famine was severe in the land” (Genesis 43:1). “It was, when they had consumed the grain that they had brought from Egypt, their father said to them: Return, acquire a little food for us” (Genesis 43:2). “Judah said to him, saying: The man forewarned us, saying: You shall not see my face, unless your brother is with you” (Genesis 43:3). “If you send our brother with us, we will go down and acquire food for you” (Genesis 43:4). “But if you will not send him, we will not go down, for the man said to us: You shall not see my face unless your brother is with you” (Genesis 43:5). “The famine was severe… It was, when they had consumed…Judah said to him… If you send… But if you will not send…” – They said to [Jacob]: What, will he say to us reasonable matters and we respond to him with nonsense?59They argued to Jacob that Joseph had made a reasonable demand by saying that they should bring Benjamin to Egypt in order to prove the veracity of their claims. If the brothers were to return without Benjamin, and say that they could not bring him lest he be harmed along the way, Joseph could be expected to reject that explanation as nonsensical.  “Israel said: Why have you done me wrong, to tell the man that you have another brother?” (Genesis 43:6). “Israel said: Why have you done me wrong…” – Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina: Jacob never spoke nonsense.60Jacob never attributed his troubles to chance; he always realized that God was directing the events of his life – except for on this occasion (Etz Yosef).  Rather, this is what the Holy One blessed be He said: ‘I am involved in crowning his son in Egypt, and he says: “Why have you done me wrong?”’ That is what is said: “[Why do you say, Jacob…]: My way is hidden from the Lord, and from my God” (Isaiah 40:27). “They said: The man asked regarding us and regarding our relatives, saying: Is your father still alive? Do you have a brother? We told him regarding those matters; could we know that he would say: Bring your brother down?” (Genesis 43:7). “They said: The man asked [regarding us and regarding our relatives]” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: He revealed to us even the wood of our cradles.61The word “our relatives [moladtenu]” can also be understood to mean “our birthplace” or “the conditions of our birth." Joseph knew what their cradles had been made out of, and asked if they still existed (Etz Yosef).  “Judah said to Israel his father: Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go, and we will live, and not die, both we, and you, and our children” (Genesis 43:8). “I will guarantee him; from me you can demand him; if I do not bring him back to you, and present him before you, I will have sinned to you forever” (Genesis 43:9). “Judah said to Israel his father” – it is preferable for one person to be in a state of uncertainty than for all of us to be in a state of certainty.62If Benjamin does not accompany us, we will all certainly starve to death. “I will guarantee him…forever [kol hayamim]” – this is the World to Come, which is entirely day [shekulo yom].63I will have sinned against you even in the World to Come.
“Since, had we not tarried, we would now have returned twice” (Genesis 43:10). “Their father, Israel, said to them: If so then, do this: Take of the choice produce of the land in your vessels, and take a gift down to the man, a little balm, and a little honey, spices and ladanum, pistachio nuts and almonds” (Genesis 43:11). “Since, had we not tarried… Their father, Israel, said to them: If so then [efo]” – Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Tanḥum ben Ḥanilai: Can it be that the same trembling that I caused my father to tremble – “[Isaac was overcome with great trembling, and he said:] Who then [efo] is he [who hunted game and brought it to me? And I ate from all before you came, and I blessed him]” (Genesis 27:33) – is causing my trembling here? I wonder.  “Take of the choice produce [mizimrat] of the land in your vessels” – Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin in the name of Rabbi Levi: Items that bring song [mizmarin] to the world: Snail [ḥilazon],64The snail from which the expensive tekhelet dye was produced.  wine with balsam,65Wine enhanced with the scent of balsam (Midrash HaMevoar; see Matnot Kehuna, Etz Yosef).  myrrh with the oil accumulated within it. “A little balm” – balsam oil, “a little honey” – Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi said: Honey that is hard as a rock;66This was a special honey that was very valuable because it would last a long time, could be easily transported, and provided a high quality flavor.  “spices” – beeswax; “ladanum” – gum Arabic; “pistachio nuts and almonds” – nut oil and almond oil. “And take double the silver in your hand, and the silver that was returned in the opening of your sacks return in your hand; perhaps it was an oversight” (Genesis 43:12). “And take your brother, and arise and return to the man” (Genesis 43:13). “And may God Almighty grant you mercy before the man, and he will send with you your other brother, and Benjamin; and me, as I am bereaved, I am bereaved” (Genesis 43:14). “And take double the silver in your hand” – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Perhaps the price has risen. “And the silver that was returned…And…your…brother” – he said to them: ‘Here is the silver, here is the gift, and here is your brother, do you need anything else?’ They said to him: ‘We need your prayer.’ He said to them: ‘If you need my prayer, “and may God Almighty grant you mercy…”.’

=== 92 | 92 ===
“And may God Almighty grant you mercy before the man, and he will send with you your other brother and Benjamin; and me, as I am bereaved, I am bereaved” (Genesis 43:14). “And may God Almighty grant you mercy” – Rabbi Pinḥas in the name of Rabbi Ḥanin of Tzippori began: “Happy is the man whom You chastise, Lord” (Psalms 94:12). And if he resents it – “You instruct him from Your Torah” (Psalms 94:12).1He can learn from the Torah that God-given chastisement in this world is for his ultimate benefit.  What is written regarding Abraham? “[Go for yourself from your land…to the land that I will show you.] And I will bless you and I will make your name great” (Genesis 12:1–2) – when he departed, he encountered famine and he did not object and did not protest. You, too, if suffering has befallen you, do not object and do not accuse. Rabbi Alexandri said to him: You have no man without suffering. Happy is the man whom suffering befalls through the Torah,2His allotment of suffering is met through his exertion in Torah study (Nezer HaKodesh).  as it is stated: “You instruct him from Your Torah.” Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: All suffering that befalls a person and causes him to be idle from Torah matters, is suffering of rebuke, but suffering that befalls a person and does not cause him to be idle from Torah matters, is suffering of love, as it is written: “For whom the Lord loves, He rebukes” (Proverbs 3:12). Rabbi Ḥama saw a certain blind person sitting and toiling in Torah. He said to him: ‘Greetings, free man.’ He said to [Rabbi Ḥama]: ‘From where did you hear that this man3Referring to himself. is the son of slaves?’ He said to him: ‘No, [that was not my intention,] but rather that you are a free man in the World to Come.’4You will be free of sin because of your great dedication to Torah study under difficult circumstances.  Rabbi Yudan said: It is written: “If he shall dislodge the tooth of his slave or the tooth of his maidservant, he shall send him to freedom” (Exodus 21:27) – if due to these, which are not the person’s entire body, but rather, one of his limbs, the Torah said: “He shall send him to freedom,” one for whom suffering afflicts his entire body, all the more so. Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Hoshaya: “Happy is the man whom You chastise, Lord” is not written here,5“Lord” is not written as the Tetragrammaton.  but rather, “whom You chastise, Lord [Yah]” – one who is sentenced before the judge screams and is aggrieved, and says: ‘Ya, ya – enough [dai], enough!’ So, Jacob said: ‘He who is destined to say enough [dai] to suffering, let Him say enough to my suffering,’ as it is stated: “And may God Almighty [Shadai] grant you mercy before the man….”
“For this, let every pious man pray [at the time of searching]” (Psalms 32:6) – Zavdi ben Levi, Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, and Rabbi Yosei bar Patron, the three of them recited [some of] the following verses when they died. One of them recited: “For this, let every pious man pray”; “for our heart rejoices in Him” (Psalms 33:21). Another said: “You prepare a table before me” (Psalms 23:5); “But let all who put their trust in You rejoice…” (Psalms 5:12). Another said: “For one day in Your courtyard is better” (Psalms 84:11); “for Your kindness is better than life” (Psalms 63:4). Some say: “How great is your goodness” (Psalms 31:20). Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Hoshaya: The Holy One blessed be He, , took the legs of our patriarch Jacob and stood them on the sea and said to him: ‘See the miracles that I am performing with your descendants.’ That is what is written: “When Israel departed from Egypt” (Psalms 114:1) – Israel the elder. Rabbi Huna said in the name of Rav Aḥa: He stood the feet of the patriarchs, too, on the sea. That is what is written: “He performed wonders before their fathers” (Psalms 78:12). “At the time of searching [le’et metzo]” (Psalms 32:6) – at the time of completion [mitzui] of the day; at the time of completion of the judgment; at the time of completion of the soul; at the time of completion of the accounting. When our forefather Jacob saw that the accounting had been completed,6When he saw that he had done all he could to prepare his sons for their encounter with the Egyptian viceroy (Matnot Kehuna; cf. Etz Yosef).  he began to pour forth supplications; “And may God Almighty grant you mercy…”
Rabbi Yashya ben Levi interpreted the verse regarding the exiles: “And may God Almighty grant you mercy” – “He caused them to be pitied” (Psalms 106:46). “Before the man” – the Holy One blessed be He, as it is stated: “The Lord is a Man of war, the Lord is His name” (Exodus 15:3). “And he will send with you your…brother” – these are the Ten Tribes. “Other…and Benjamin” – this is the tribe of Judah and Benjamin. “And me, as I am bereaved” – in the first destruction, “I am bereaved” – in the second destruction. “And me, as I am bereaved” – in the first and second destructions; I will not be bereaved again. Another matter, “and may God Almighty grant you mercy before the man” – this is the ruler.7Joseph, viceroy of Egypt.  “And he will send with you your…brother” – this is Joseph; “other” – this is Simeon; “and Benjamin” – in its plain sense. “And me, as I am bereaved” regarding Joseph, [and] “I am bereaved,” regarding Simeon, I will not be bereaved again.
“The men took that gift, and they took in their hand double the silver, and Benjamin, and they arose, and they went down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph” (Genesis 43:15). “Joseph saw Benjamin with them, and he said to the one in charge of his house: Bring the men to the house and slaughter and prepare, as the men shall dine with me at noon” (Genesis 43:16). “The men took…Joseph saw…with them…and prepare [vehakhen]” – prepare is for nothing other than Shabbat, just as it says: “It will be on the sixth day, they shall prepare…” (Exodus 16:5). This is to say that Joseph observed the Shabbat before it was given. “The man did as Joseph said, and the man brought the men to Joseph's house” (Genesis 43:17). “The men were afraid when they were brought to Joseph's house; they said: We have been brought on the matter of the silver that was restored before to our sacks, to falsely accuse us, and attack us, and take us as slaves, and our donkeys” (Genesis 43:18). “They approached the man in charge of Joseph's house, and they spoke to him at the entrance of the house” (Genesis 43:19). “The man did…The men were afraid…They approached the man” – it teaches that he was pushing them inside, and they were pushing him outside. “They said: Please my lord, we initially descended to acquire food” (Genesis 43:20). “We…descended” – it is a descent for us. In our land, we would support others, now we need your support. “He said: Peace be with you, fear not; your God, and the God of your father, gave you hidden treasure in your sacks; your silver came to me. And he took Simeon out to them” (Genesis 43:23). “He said: Peace be with you, fear not” – whether it is due to your merit or due to the merit of your fathers. “Your God…gave you hidden treasure…” – in any case, “your silver came to me.” “He took Simeon out to them” – Rabbi Ḥagai said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: He rendered him like a cruse of oil when he incarcerated him,8A cruse of oil is wide on the bottom. So too, Simeon had grown fat due to the large quantity of food with which he was provided (Etz Yosef; see Bereshit Rabba 91:8).  as it is written: “And incarcerated him before their eyes” (Genesis 42:24).  “They prepared…Joseph came…” (Genesis 43:25–26).
“He asked them regarding their wellbeing, and he said: Is all well with your father? Is the elder whom you mentioned still alive?” (Genesis 43:27). “They said: All is well with your servant, with our father, he is still alive; they bowed, and they prostrated themselves” (Genesis 43:28). “He asked them regarding their wellbeing…They said: All is well…” – Rabbi Ḥiyya Rabba saw a certain Babylonian: He said to him: ‘How is Father?’9Rabbi Ḥiyya lived in the land of Israel and his father lived in Babylonia.  He said to him: ‘Your mother inquired after you.’ He said to him: ‘I said this to you and you said that to me?’ He said to him: ‘One asks about the living, and one does not ask about the dead.’ So, “is all well with your father?” – this is Jacob; “the elder that you mentioned” – this is Isaac. “They said: All is well with your servant, with our father.”10They answered about Jacob, who was alive, but not about Isaac, who was not. “He lifted his eyes and saw his brother Benjamin, his mother's son, and he said: Is this your youngest brother whom you mentioned to me? He said: God be gracious to you, my son” (Genesis 43:29). “He lifted his eyes, and saw…” – Rabbi Binyamin said: Because we have heard grace [mentioned] regarding the eleven tribes,11Jacob said of them: “The children with whom God has graced your servant” (Genesis 33:5). Binyamin had not yet been born at that time.  but did not hear grace regarding the tribe of Benjamin. Where did we hear it? We heard it here: “God be gracious to you, my son.” “Joseph hurried, because his mercy was aroused toward his brother and he sought to weep; he entered the chamber, and wept there” (Genesis 43:30). “They sat before him, the firstborn according to his seniority, and the younger according to his youth, and the men wondered to one another” (Genesis 43:33). “Joseph hurried…They sat before him…” – he took the goblet and created the false impression that he was smelling the goblet. He said: ‘Judah, who is king, sits at the head. Reuben who is the firstborn, will sit alongside him,’ and likewise regarding them all. He said: ‘I have no mother and Benjamin has no mother, when his mother bore him, she died. Therefore, let him come and place his head alongside mine.’ That is why, “the men wondered…” “He gave gifts from before him, and Benjamin's gift was five times greater than the gifts of all of them. They drank, and became inebriated with him” (Genesis 43:34). “He gave gifts from before him…” – Joseph gave him, Asenat gave him, Manasseh gave him, Ephraim gave him, and [he received] his portion with his brothers. That is what is written: “Benjamin's gift was five times greater than the gifts of all of them.” “They drank, and became inebriated with him” – with him, they drank, but other than with him, they did not drink, as Rabbi Levi said: All twenty-two years that he did not see them, he did not taste the taste of wine. They, too, did not taste the taste of wine until they saw him. That is what is written: “They drank, and became inebriated with him” – with him, they drank, but other than with him, they did not drink.
“He commanded the one in charge of his house, saying: Fill the men's sacks with food, as much as they are able to carry, and place each man's silver at the opening of his sack” (Genesis 44:1). “And place my goblet, the silver goblet, at the opening of the sack of the youngest, and the silver of his purchase of the grain. He did in accordance with the statement that Joseph had spoken” (Genesis 44:2).  “Morning broke, and the men were dispatched, they and their donkeys” (Genesis 44:3). “He commanded the one in charge of his house…Morning broke...” Rabbi Levi said: There was an incident in the South12In the land of Judah. regarding a certain innkeeper, who would rise and don his garments at night and he would say to those who were there: ‘Arise and go on your way, as I will arrange a caravan to accompany you.’ They would go out, robbers would meet them and plunder them, and they would come and divide [the spoils] with him. One time, Rabbi Meir went and was received there. [The innkeeper] arose and donned his garments and he said to him: ‘Arise and go on your way, as I will arrange a caravan to accompany you.’ He said to him: ‘I have a brother, and I am sitting and waiting for him.’ He said to him: ‘Where is he?’ He said to him: ‘In the synagogue.’ He said to him: ‘What is his name? I will go and call him.’ He said to him: ‘Ki tov.’ That entire night, that innkeeper shouted at the entrance of the synagogue: ‘Ki tov, Ki tov,’ but no one answered him. In the morning, Rabbi Meir rose and bridled his donkey in order to depart. The innkeeper said to him: ‘Where is that brother of whom you spoke?’ He said to him: ‘He has arrived: “God saw the light, that it was good [ki tov]”’ (Genesis 1:4).
“Behold, silver that we found in the opening of our sacks, we returned to you from the land of Canaan; how would we steal from the house of your lord silver or gold?” (Genesis 44:8). “Behold, silver…” – Rabbi Yishmael taught: This is one of the ten a fortiori inferences that are written in the Torah: “Behold, silver…we returned to you,” all the more so, “how would we steal?” “Behold, the children of Israel did not heed me” (Exodus 6:12), and all the more so, “how will Pharaoh heed me?” (Exodus 6:12). “The Lord said to Moses: And if her father spit in her face, would she not be ashamed seven days?” (Numbers 12:14), all the more so, for [a rebuke from] the Divine Presence, [she should be ashamed] fourteen days. “Behold, while I am still alive with you today, you have been defiant” (Deuteronomy 31:27), all the more so, “so too, after my death” (Deuteronomy 31:27). “For you ran against those on foot and they exhausted you” (Jeremiah 12:5), all the more so, “how will you compete with horses?” (Jeremiah 12:5). “In a land of peace where you are secure” (Jeremiah 12:5), [you are overcome], all the more so, “how will you fare in the thickets of the Jordan?” (Jeremiah 12:5). “Behold, here in Judah we are afraid” (I Samuel 23:3), “all the more so, if we go to Ke'ila” (I Samuel 23:3). “Behold, restitution will be made to the righteous on earth, all the more so the wicked and the sinner” (Proverbs 11:31). “The king said to Queen Esther: In Shushan the citadel [the Jews have killed and eliminated five hundred men]” (Esther 9:12), all the more so, “what must they have done in the rest of the king’s provinces?” (Esther 9:12). “Behold, when it was whole it could not be used for labor, all the more so when fire has consumed it and it is charred” (Ezekiel 15:5).
“He said: Now too, it shall be in accordance with your words; the one with whom it shall be found will be a slave to me, and you shall be exonerated” (Genesis 44:10). “He said: Now too, it shall be in accordance with your words” – ten people, one of whom is implicated in theft, are they not all incarcerated? But I will not do so. “The one with whom it shall be found will be a slave to me.” “He searched, he began with the eldest, and with the youngest he concluded; the goblet was found in Benjamin's sack” (Genesis 44:12). “He searched, he began with the eldest and with the youngest he concluded” – why did he do so? It was so they would not say that he knew where it had been placed. “The goblet was found in Benjamin's sack” – once the goblet was found, they said to him: ‘What [have you done,] thief who is son of a thief?’13The other brothers accused Benjamin of stealing the goblet and endangering them all, and criticized him as a thief son of a thief, as his mother, Rachel, stole her father’s household idols (Genesis 31:19). He said to them: ‘Is the man [who sold] Joseph here? Are there goats here?14A reference to the goat the brothers had slaughtered in order to dip Joseph’s tunic in its blood so that Jacob would assume that Joseph had been mauled to death (Genesis 37:31).  Can brothers who sold their brother [accuse me in this manner]? Astounding!’ “They rent their garments, and each man loaded his donkey, and they returned to the city” (Genesis 44:13). “They rent their garments…” – Rabbi Pinḥas in the name of Rabbi Hoshaya: The tribes caused their father to rend,15Jacob rent his garments upon learning of Joseph’s disappearance (Genesis 37:34).  that is why, they, too, were afflicted. “Each man loaded his donkey…” – each of them would take his burden with one hand and place it on his donkey.16This was an expression of their great strength. “They returned to the city…” – Rabbi Abahu said: It was a metropolis, and it says: “To the city”?17The verse could have stated “to Egypt.” The phrase “to the city” implies that it was like any other city, not the seat of power of the Egyptian empire (Maharzu). Rather, it teaches that it was no more significant in their eyes than a city of ten people.18The brothers were not afraid of having to wage war and conquer the city (Etz Yosef). 
“Judah said: What shall we say to my lord, what shall we speak, and how shall we justify ourselves? God has revealed the iniquity of your servants; behold, we are my lord's slaves, both we, and he in whose possession the goblet was found” (Genesis 44:16). “Judah said: What shall we say to my lord?” – regarding the first silver;19The silver that had been returned to their sacks on their first trip to Egypt (Genesis 42:25–35).  “what shall we speak?” – regarding the second silver;20The silver that was returned to their sacks on their second visit (Genesis 44:1).  “how shall we justify ourselves?” – regarding the goblet.21Judah was hinting that just as it was Joseph who knew why the silver had been returned to their sacks, it was he who knew about the placement of the goblet in Benjamin’s sack (Etz Yosef).  “What shall we say to my lord?”22This is now interpreted as a reference to God.  – regarding the act of Tamar; “what shall we speak?” – regarding Bilha; “how shall we justify ourselves?” – regarding Dina.23In these instances, the brothers did not consider themselves to have sinned, yet their actions are recorded in the Torah in a manner that casts them in a negative light (Etz Yosef, citing Yad Yosef).  “What shall we say?” to Father in the land of Canaan – regarding Joseph; “what shall we speak?” – regarding Simeon; “how shall we justify ourselves?” – regarding Benjamin. If we say to You that we sinned: It is revealed and known before You that we did not sin. If we say that we did not sin, “God has revealed [matza] the iniquity of your servants” (Genesis 44:16) – Rabbi Yitzḥak said: The creditor has found the opportunity to collect on his promissory note. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Like one who draws everything [mematze] from the barrel and leaves it with its dregs. “He said: Far be it from me that I should do so; the man in whose hand the goblet was found, he shall be my slave and you, go up in peace to your father” (Genesis 44:17). “He said: Far be it from me…” – Rav Huna in the name of Rabbi Aḥa – he shook out his purple robe.24This was an expression of taking an oath, that he would not do so. He expressed that his royal garment should be empty, i.e. he should be stripped of his position of authority, if he were to do so (Yefeh To’ar).  “The man in whose hand the goblet was found, he shall be my slave and you, go up in peace to your father” – they said to him: ‘This is peace that has been completely emptied of meaning.’ But the Divine Spirit was shouting: ‘[There will be] “Great peace for those who love Your Torah”’ (Psalms 119:165).

=== 93 | 93 ===
“Judah approached him, and said: My lord, may your servant please speak a word in my lord's ears, and do not become incensed with your servant, as you are like Pharaoh” (Genesis 44:18). “Judah approached him, and said: Please my lord, may your servant speak a word in my lord's ears, and do not become incensed with your servant, as you are like Pharaoh.” “My son, if you became a guarantor for your friend… you have been snared by the sayings of your mouth…Do this [and be delivered]…” (Proverbs 6:1–3) – Rabbi Ḥanina said: Flee from three things, and adhere to three things: Flee from deposits,1This refers to one who deposits an object with someone for safekeeping.  from refusals,2If a girl has been orphaned of her father, the Rabbis instituted a rule that her mother and brothers can accept a betrothal on her behalf. It is betrothal by rabbinic law, and she has the right to refuse to remain in this relationship when she reaches age twelve. Rabbi Ḥanina said that one should not counsel the girl to refuse to remain. and from serving as a guarantor between one person and another. Adhere to ḥalitza,3If a married man dies without children, it is a mitzva for the man’s brother to marry his widow in a levirate marriage. If he refuses, the widow performs ḥalitza, in order to dissolve the levirate bond. to nullification of vows, and to introducing peace between one person and another. Rabbi Berekhya said that Rabbi Shimon bar Abba said: Its name is not a deposit [pikadon], but rather, puk don – take this out.4Do not allow a deposit into your house.  Another matter, “my son, if you became a guarantor for your friend” – this is Judah, [as it states]: “I will guarantee him” (Genesis 43:9). “If you have shaken your hands for a stranger”5By which you are agreeing to become a guarantor. (Proverbs 6:1) – “from my hand you can demand him” (Genesis 43:9).6The midrash relates Judah’s acceptance of responsibility for Benjamin, “from my hand you can demand him,” to the statement in the verse in Proverbs about shaking hands when becoming a guarantor.  “You have been snared by the sayings of your mouth” – “if I do not bring him to you” (Genesis 43:9). “Do this, then, my son, and be delivered” (Proverbs 6:3) – go and cleave to the dust of his feet and accept his kingdom and lordship – “Judah approached him.”7According to this, Judah approached Joseph in order to kiss his feet and accept his kingship (Etz Yosef). 
“Behold, the kings convened, passed together” (Psalms 48:5). “Behold the kings” – this is Judah and Joseph. “Passed [avru] together” – this one became filled with fury [evra] against that one, and that one became filled with fury against this one.8Joseph and Judah became angry with one another.  “They saw it and were astonished” (Psalms 48:6) – “The men wondered to one another” (Genesis 43:33). “They were terrified; they hastened” (Psalms 48:6) – “[Joseph said to his brothers: I am Joseph; does my father still live?] And his brothers could not [answer him because they were alarmed before him]” (Genesis 45:3). “A fearful trembling seized them there” (Psalms 45:6) – these are the tribes. They said: ‘Kings are contending with one another; of what concern is it to us?9The other brothers felt it was not their place to intervene in the confrontation between Joseph and Judah.  It is appropriate for a king to contend with a king.’  “Judah approached him” – “One approaches another” (Job 41:8) – this is Judah and Joseph. “Not even a breath comes between them” (Job 41:8) – these are the tribes. They said: ‘Kings are contending with one another; of what concern is it to us?’
Another matter, “Judah approached him.” It is written: “Like golden apples in silver ornaments [is a well-turned phrase]” (Proverbs 25:11) – Akilas the proselyte translated: Golden apples in silver bowls. “A well-turned phrase [davar davur al ofanav]” – just as the wheel [ofan] shows its face on all sides, so, Judah’s words were deemed logical to all parties when he spoke with Joseph.
Another matter, “Judah approached him.” It is written: “Like deep water is counsel in the heart of a man…” (Proverbs 20:5) – this is analogous to a deep well filled with cold water; its water was cold and good, but no person could drink from it. Someone came and tied rope to rope, thread to thread, and cord to cord, and he drew from it and drank. Everyone began drawing from it and drinking. So, Judah did not relent from responding to Joseph regarding each and every matter, until he touched his heart.
Another matter, “Judah approached him.” “Behold, days are coming, the utterance of the Lord, and the plowman will encounter [the reaper]…” (Amos 9:13); “plowman” – this is Judah;10See Hosea 10:11. “the reaper” (Amos 9:13) – this is Joseph, as it is stated: “Behold, we were binding sheaves” (Genesis 37:7). “And the treader [dorekh] of grapes” (Amos 9:13) – this is Judah; “For I will bend [darakhti] Judah as a bow for Me” (Zechariah 9:13). “The sower of seed [bemoshekh hazara]” (Amos 9:13) – this is Joseph, who drew the offspring [shemashakh zaro] of his father, and caused him to descend to Egypt, as it is written: “With ropes of man, I would draw them” (Hosea 11:4).11The “rope” that drew Jacob to Egypt was a man, namely Joseph.  “The mountains will drip nectar” (Joel 4:18)12The Sages often view mountains as metaphors for the righteous. They “drip nectar” meaning that their words were sweet and so they succeeded in avoiding unnecessary confrontation (Matnot Kehuna). – these are the tribes. They said: ‘Kings are contending with one another; of what concern is it to us?’
Another matter, “Judah approached [vayigash] him” – Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Neḥemya, and the Rabbis. Rabbi Yehuda says: An approach for war, just as it says: “Yoav and the people who were with him advanced [vayigash] to the battle” (II Samuel 10:13). Rabbi Neḥemya says: An approach for conciliation, just as it says: “The children of Judah approached Joshua” (Joshua 14:6) – to placate him.13Members of the tribe of Judah sought to placate Joshua so that he would grant Caleb’s request. The Rabbis say: An approach for prayer – “Elijah the prophet approached, and he said: Lord, God of …” (I Kings 18:36). Rabbi Elazar resolved it in accordance with all of them: If [I must engage in] war, I am coming; if [I must engage in] conciliation, I am coming, if [I must engage in] prayer, I am coming. “Please my lord [bi adoni]” (Genesis 44:18) – [take] me [bi] and not him [bei] – whether it is to fill water, it is I; for service, it is I; to split logs, it is I.14Judah was telling Joseph that he would be a better servant than Benjamin, and therefore Joseph should take him and not Benjamin.  Another matter, “Please my lord [bi adoni]” – injustice [baya] you are bringing upon us, my lord, as so you said to us: “Bring him down to me, [and I will set my eye upon him]” (Genesis 44:21); is this the setting of an eye? It is the opposite of what you said: It is blindness of the eye.15You obscured the truth from us. Rabbi Simon said:16This statement is an explanation of Judah’s argument that Joseph was acting unjustly in demanding that Benjamin become his slave.  It is written in our law books: “If he has nothing, he shall be sold for his theft” (Exodus 22:2), but this one has the means to pay. “May your servant please speak [a word in my lord's ears]” – may my words enter your ears. This one’s grandmother, because Pharaoh abducted her for one night, he and his household were stricken with leprosy, as it is written: “The Lord afflicted Pharaoh [and his household with great afflictions over the matter of Sarai, Abram’s wife]” (Genesis 12:17), take care that this person17A reference to Joseph himself. will not be stricken with leprosy. The mother of this one died only due to our father’s curse. You cite it from here: “With whomever you find your gods, he shall not live” (Genesis 31:32);18The midrash understands that due to this statement, uttered by Jacob, Rachel died.  take care that a curse will not take effect upon you and that man19A reference to Joseph himself. will die. Two of us entered a certain city and destroyed it in its entirety. There it was on behalf of a female, here it is on behalf of a male.20Judah suspected that Joseph intended to sexually abuse Benjamin, and considered homosexual abuse to be worse than Shekhem’s abuse of Dina, or Pharoah’s intent to abuse Sarah (Etz Yosef).  For coming against the apple of [Jacob’s] eye, against the host of the Holy One blessed be He, in whose regard it is stated: “He hovers over him all the day” (Deuteronomy 33:12),21The Sages viewed this verse as an allusion to the fact that the Temple was located in the territory of Benjamin (see Yoma 12a).  all the more so. Another matter, “may your servant please speak [yedaber na]…” – Rabbi Yirmeya bar Shemaya said: I will remove something [davar] from within and introduce pestilence [dever] into No,22Another name for Egypt, or the capital city of the Egyptian empire.  and exterminate you. Rabbi Ḥanin said: When Judah was filled with rage, the hairs over his heart would rip through his garments and emerge, and he would place chunks of iron in his mouth and expel them as dust. “As you are like Pharaoh” – just as Pharaoh decrees and does not fulfill, so, too, you decree and do not fulfill. Just as Pharaoh lusts after males, so, too, do you. Just as Pharaoh is king and you are second to him in the land of Egypt, so, too, my father is king in the land of Canaan and I am second to him. If I draw my sword, I will begin with you and conclude with Pharaoh your master. Had he said: ‘I will begin with Pharaoh,’ [Joseph] would have left him alone. Since he said: ‘I will begin with you,’ [Joseph] signaled to Manasseh, who stamped one foot and the entire palace quaked. [Judah] said: ‘This is a stamp from Father’s household.’23No one but members of Jacob’s family were so powerful.  When he saw that matters were thus,24When Judah saw he would not be able to overpower Manasseh (Etz Yosef).  he began speaking gentle words – “my lord asked” (Genesis 44:19).
Another matter, “Judah approached him” – this is what was stated through the Divine Spirit by Solomon: “Wisdom will fortify the wise [more than ten rulers who were in a city]” (Ecclesiastes 7:19). Corresponding to whom did Solomon say this verse? He said it only corresponding to Joseph the righteous. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: When Joseph the righteous seized Benjamin and said to his brothers: “The man in whose hand the goblet was found, he shall be my slave [and you, go up in peace to your father]” (Genesis 44:17), Judah said to him: ‘Benjamin, you are seized; can there be peace in Father’s household?’ Immediately, Judah grew angry and roared in a loud voice. His voice traveled four hundred parsangs, until Ḥushim son of Dan heard and leapt from the land of Canaan and came to Judah. Both of them roared and the land of Egypt was on the verge of being upended. In their regard Job said: “The roar of the lion and the voice of the great cat” (Job 4:10). “The roar of the lion” – this is Judah, in whose regard it is written: “Judah is a lion cub” (Genesis 49:9). “And the voice of the great cat” – this is Ḥushim son of Dan, as both of them were likened to a lion, as it is stated: “To Dan he said: Dan is a lion cub” (Deuteronomy 33:22). “The teeth of the young lions are broken” (Job 4:10) – these are Joseph’s warriors. When Judah grew angry, the teeth of all of them fell out. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: When [the brothers] saw that Judah grew angry, they too, were filled with anger. They kicked the ground and caused it to be full of furrows, as it is stated: “The lion perishes for lack of prey” (Job 4:11) – this is Judah, who risked his life on Benjamin’s behalf. He said: ‘Perhaps, the Holy One blessed be He will forgive me for that iniquity of misleading my father and saying: I will bring him to you.’25Judah had guaranteed to return Benjamin, who was now being seized by Joseph. Judah was willing to risk his life in order to attempt to fulfill that guarantee, thinking that even if he was unsuccessful, perhaps he would at least not be held accountable for the sin of failing to fulfill his guarantee (Etz Yosef). Alternatively, it had been Judah who had misled Jacob about Joseph’s disappearance and caused him to think that Joseph was dead (Maharzu).  At that moment he became filled with rage at Joseph. When Joseph saw the signs of Judah’s [rage], he was immediately shaken and alarmed. He said: ‘Woe is me, perhaps he will kill me.’  What were the signs [of rage] upon Judah? Those of the house of Shilo said: Blood flowed from his two eyes. Some say: He would wear five garments that were like warriors’ armor. When he would grow angry, there was one hair over his heart that would rip through them all. What did Joseph do at that moment? That stone pillar upon which he was seated, he kicked it and rendered it a heap of pebbles. At this Judah was astonished and said: ‘This one is mightier than I am.’ At that moment, Judah grasped his sword and sought to draw it from its scabbard, but it would not be drawn for him. Judah said: ‘This one must be a God-fearing man; that is why it is stated: “Wisdom will fortify the wise”’ (Ecclesiastes 7:19).26The midrash understands the term wisdom in this verse as a reference to fear of God, as in Job 28:28. 
“My lord asked his servants, saying: Do you have a father or a brother?” (Genesis 44:19). “My lord asked his servants…” – [Judah] said to him: ‘From the outset you came against us with malice. How many countries descended to Egypt to purchase food? But you did not ask [this of] any of them. Did we, perhaps, come to take our daughter, or are you planning to marry our sister? Nevertheless, we hid nothing from you.’ [Joseph] said to him: ‘I see that you are a prattler. Is there among your brothers a prattler like you?’27Why are you the only one of the brothers talking? According to Tanḥuma (Vayigash 5), Joseph claimed that he knew through divination that Judah was not the oldest of the brothers, and therefore it was even more surprising that he was doing all the talking.  [Judah] said to him: ‘All this that you see is because I became a guarantor for him.’ [Joseph] said to him: ‘Why did you not do so on behalf of your brother when you sold him to the Ishmaelites for twenty silver pieces, and you brought anguish to your father and said to him: “Joseph was mauled”?’ (Genesis 37:33). When Judah heard this he screamed and cried in a loud voice.28Judah screamed and cried because Joseph was not giving in to his demand to release Benjamin.  He said: “For how will I go up to my father?” (Genesis 44:34). Judah said to Naphtali: ‘Go and see how many marketplaces there are in Egypt.’ He leapt and returned and said to him: ‘Twelve.’ Judah said to his brothers: ‘I will destroy three of them, and each and every one of you take one each, “and no man will be left among them”’ (I Samuel 14:36). His brothers said to him: ‘Egypt is not like Shekhem. If you destroy Egypt you will be destroying the entire world.’  “Joseph could not restrain himself before all those standing before him, and he called: Remove every man from before me. No man stood with him when Joseph revealed himself to his brothers” (Genesis 45:1). “He raised his voice in weeping; the Egyptians heard, and the house of Pharaoh heard” (Genesis 45:2). “Joseph said to his brothers: I am Joseph; does my father still live? And his brothers could not answer him because they were alarmed before him” (Genesis 45:3). “Joseph said to his brothers: Please approach me, and they approached. He said: I am Joseph your brother whom you sold to Egypt” (Genesis 45:4). At that moment, “Joseph could not restrain himself” (Genesis 45:1). When Joseph saw that they had come to an agreement to destroy Egypt, Joseph said to himself: ‘It is preferable that I reveal myself to them and they will not destroy Egypt.’ Joseph said to them: ‘Did you not say that this one’s brother was dead? I will call him and he will come to you.’ He was calling: ‘Joseph son of Jacob, come to me. Joseph son of Jacob come to me.’ They were looking to the four corners of the palace. He said to them: ‘What are you looking for? “I am Joseph your brother”’ (Genesis 45:4). Immediately, their souls departed, as it is stated: “His brothers could not [answer him because they were alarmed before him]” (Genesis 45:3). But they did not believe him until he uncovered himself and showed them his circumcision.
Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: In all the matters that you read that Judah spoke to Joseph in the presence of his brothers until you reach: “Joseph could not restrain himself,” there is conciliation for Joseph, conciliation for his brothers and conciliation for Benjamin. Conciliation for Joseph, saying: See how he is giving his life for the sake of Rachel’s sons.29Joseph saw how Judah was willing to give his life for Benjamin, whereas earlier he had been one of the initiators when the brothers sold him. This showed that Judah had repented.  Conciliation for his brothers, saying: See how he is giving his life for his brother’s sake.30Thus, Judah was reconciled with his brothers, who had demoted him from his position of leadership after the sale of Joseph (Etz Yosef; see Bereshit Rabba 42:3).  Conciliation for Benjamin, he said to him: ‘Just as I am giving my life for your sake, so I am willing to give my life for your brother’s sake.’31Benjamin had suspected his brothers in the disappearance of Joseph, but was conciliated through this process.  “Joseph could not restrain himself…” – Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: Joseph did not act properly,32It was unwise for him to be alone with his brothers. as had one of them kicked him, he would have immediately died. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: He acted appropriately and properly. He was aware of his brothers’ righteousness. He said: ‘God forbid, my brothers are not suspected of bloodshed.’
“He raised his voice in weeping…. And his brothers could not answer him” – Abba Kohen Bardela said: Woe unto us from the Day of Judgment; woe unto us from the day of rebuke. Bilam, the wise man of the idolaters, could not withstand the rebuke of his donkey. That is what is written: “Have I been in the habit of doing so to you? He said: No” (Numbers 22:30). Joseph was the youngest of the tribes and they were unable to withstand his rebuke. That is what it is written: “And his brothers could not answer him because they were alarmed before him.” When the Holy One blessed be He will come and rebuke each and every one according to his status, as it is stated: “I would reprove you and set it before your eyes” (Psalms 50:21), all the more so.  “Please approach me, and they approached” – he showed them the circumcision. “I am Joseph.” “And now, it was not you that sent me here, but God. He made me into a father to Pharaoh, and into a lord for all his house, and ruler over the entire land of Egypt” (Genesis 45:8). “And now it was not you that sent…He made me into a father to Pharaoh, [and into a lord [uladon] for all his house, and ruler [umoshel] over…]” – a patron to the king, “uladon” – a lord; umoshel – a ruler.  “Hurry and go up to my father, and say to him: So said your son Joseph: God has made me lord for all Egypt; come down to me, do not tarry” (Genesis 45:9). “Hurry and go up to my father, and say to him” – do not miss the opportunity.  “And, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that is speaking to you” (Genesis 45:12). “That it is my mouth that is speaking to you” – in the sacred tongue.
Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya said: Woe unto us from the Day of Judgment; woe unto us from the day of rebuke. If the righteous Joseph, who is flesh and blood, when he rebuked his brothers, they were unable to withstand his rebuke, the Holy One blessed be He who is Judge, Litigant, sits on the bench of judgment, and judges each and every one, all the more so, that all flesh and blood people will be unable to stand before Him.
“He fell upon the neck of his brother Benjamin and wept, and Benjamin wept upon his neck” (Genesis 45:14). “He fell upon the neck [tzaverei]33This Hebrew term is plural, such that a literal translation would be “necks.”  of his brother Benjamin, and wept” – did Benjamin have two necks? Rather, Rabbu Elazar ben Pedat said: Joseph saw through the Divine Spirit that two Temples were destined to be built in Benjamin’s portion and were destined to be destroyed. “And Benjamin wept upon his neck” – he saw that the Tabernacle in Shilo was destined to be fashioned in Joseph’s portion and was destined to be destroyed. “He raised his voice in weeping” (Genesis 45:2) – just as Joseph placated his brothers only through weeping, so, the Holy One blessed be He will redeem Israel only through weeping, as it is stated: “They will come with weeping, and with supplications I will lead them” (Jeremiah 31:9).

=== 94 | 94 ===
“The news was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying: Joseph's brothers have come; and it was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and the eyes of his servants” (Genesis 45:16). “The news was heard in Pharaoh's house.” It is written: “One is my faultless dove” (Song of Songs 6:9) – this is Abraham, as it is stated: “Abraham was one” (Ezekiel 33:24). “One to her mother” (Song of Songs 6:9) – this is Isaac, who was his mother’s only son. “Pure [bara] to the one who bore her” (Song of Songs 6:9) – this is Jacob, as it was clear [barur] to his mother that he was righteous. “Girls saw her and lauded her” (Song of Songs 6:9) – these are the tribes, as it is stated: “The news was heard in Pharaoh's house…” “Queens and concubines, and praised her” (Song of Songs 6:9) – this is Joseph, as it is stated: “Can we find [a man] like this [in whom there is the spirit of God]” (Genesis 41:38).
“Pharaoh said to Joseph: Say to your brothers: Do this: Load your animals, and go, and come to the land of Canaan, and take your father and your households, and come to me, and I will give you the finest of the land of Egypt, and you shall eat the fat of the land” (Genesis 45:17-18). “Do this…and take your father…the finest” – this is split beans, which are effective in soothing the uneasiness of the soul. “To all of them he gave, each man changes of garments, and to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of garments” (Genesis 45:22).  “And to his father he sent as follows: Ten donkeys laden with the bounty of Egypt, and ten female donkeys laden with grain, and bread, and food for his father for the journey” (Genesis 45:23). “To all of them he gave, each man…. And to his father he sent as follows: Ten donkeys…[ten female donkeys laden with grain [bar], and bread [veleḥem], and food[mazon]]” – Rabbi Yoshiya said: Regarding vows, one follows colloquial speech. Bar – grain, leḥem – [bread], in its plain sense, mazon – Rav Aḥa bar Eila said: From here [it may be derived] that all foodstuffs are called mazon. [But] Rabbi Yoḥanan, when he would eat boiled grain, would say: I did not eat mazon today. “He sent his brothers and they went, and he said to them: Do not quarrel on the way” (Genesis 45:24). “He sent his brothers…” – he said to them: ‘Do not stride long strides, do not refrain yourselves from [studying] matters of Torah, and enter the city while the sun [still shines].’
“They went up from Egypt, and they came to the land of Canaan, to Jacob their father” (Genesis 45:25).  “They told him, saying: Joseph is still alive, and he is ruler over the entire land of Egypt. His heart was faint because he did not believe them (Genesis 45:26). “They went up from Egypt…. They told him, saying: Joseph is still alive…his heart was faint” – Rabbi Ḥiyya taught: What is the plight of the liar? Even if he says truthful matters, he is not believed. “They spoke to him all the words of Joseph that he had spoken to them, and he saw the wagons that Joseph sent to convey him, and the spirit of Jacob their father was revived” (Genesis 45:27). “He saw the wagons” – the wagons that Pharaoh had sent to carry him had idols etched on them. Judah stood and burned them. That tribe is experienced in burning idols.1See II Samuel 5:21; I Chronicles 14:12. Rabbi Levi [said] in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan bar Shaul: [Joseph] said to them: ‘If he believes you, fine. If not, say to him: “At the moment that I took my leave of you, was I not engaged in [studying] the passage of the beheaded calf [egla]?’ That is what is written: “He saw the wagons [haagalot]…and the spirit…was revived.” “Israel said: Enough, Joseph my son is still alive; I will go and see him before I die” (Genesis 45:28). “Israel said: Enough [rav]” – the power of my son Joseph is great [rav], as many troubles befell him, but still he remained in his righteousness much more than I did, as I sinned when I said: “My way is hidden from the Lord” (Isaiah 40:27). But I am certain that I have a portion in “how great is Your goodness” (Psalms 31:20).2Jacob knew through divine inspiration that if none of his sons were to die during his lifetime, he would be assured of a place in the World to Come (Etz Yosef, based on Tanḥuma (Warsaw ed.) Vayigash 9). 
“Israel, and everything that he had, traveled and came to Beersheba, and he slaughtered feast-offerings to the God of his father Isaac” (Genesis 46:1). “Israel, and everything that he had, traveled and came to Beersheba” – where did he go? Rav Naḥman said: He went to cut down the cedars that his grandfather Abraham had planted in Beersheba, just as it says: “He planted…[in Beersheba]” (Genesis 21:33). It is written: “And the central bar inside the boards” (Exodus 26:28). Rabbi Levi said: The central bar was thirty-two cubits long. Where did they find it at that time?3Where did they get such a long piece of wood in the wilderness, just when they needed it to build that part of the Tabernacle?  It teaches that they were hidden with them from the days of Jacob our patriarch. That is what is written: “And everyone with whom acacia wood was found” (Exodus 35:24). “With whom [acacia wood] could be found” is not written here, but rather, “with whom [acacia wood] was found.”4This implies that it was already in their possession.   Rabbi Levi said: They chopped them down from Migdal Tzevaaya,5This is the name of a place in the Land of Israel. and they brought them with them to Egypt, and neither was a knot nor a crack was found in them. There were acacia trees in Migdela, and they treated them as prohibited due to the sanctity of the Ark.6Even in the times of the Sages of the midrash, acacia trees grew in Migdela, but due to the tradition that the wood eventually used for the Ark and the rest of the Tabernacle had been cut from there, the people of Migdela would not make use of the acacia trees.  They came and asked Rabbi Ḥanina, colleague of the Rabbis. He said to them: ‘Do not deviate from the custom of your fathers.’
“He slaughtered feast-offerings to the God of his father Isaac” – Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: I circulated among all of the aggada experts in the south so that they would explain this verse to me,7His question was why Jacob invoked the God of Isaac and did not mention Abraham.  but they could not tell me [the explanation] until I stood with Yehuda ben Pedaya, the son of ben Kappar’s sister. He said to me: ‘If a teacher and disciple are walking on the way, one first inquires after the wellbeing of the disciple, and then one inquires after the wellbeing of the teacher.’8The disciples would walk before the teacher. That is why Jacob invoked the name of the God of Isaac and not the God of Abraham. Rav Huna said: When Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi came to Tiberias, he asked Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: ‘A person is obligated in the honor of his father more than the honor of his grandfather.’ Reish Lakish said: He sacrificed offerings for the covenant of the tribes.9This is the covenant that God made with Abraham that would be fulfilled through Isaac and not Ishmael (see Genesis 17:21). Bar Kappara and Rabbi Yosef bar Patros, one said: [Jacob said:] ‘Just as Father was eager to satisfy his throat, I, too, am eager to satisfy my throat.’10Isaac had loved Esau because of the food he brought him (see Genesis 25:28), and Jacob was descending to Egypt to be sustained by Joseph (see Etz Yosef).  The other said: [Jacob said:] ‘Just as Father distinguished one son from his other son, so, too, I distinguished one son from my other sons.11Jacob had shown preferential treatment toward Joseph, which had led to the events that brought Jacob to travel to Egypt, and he now brought offerings in order to achieve atonement (Etz Yosef). Alternatively, in Egypt, Joseph would rule over and provide for the entire family, which would give him an elevated status (Yefeh To’ar). Therefore, Jacob said he was going to Egypt despite this danger only because of the needs of the many people who required sustenance.  Then I said: Father had only the burden of one life, but I have the burden of seventy lives upon me.’12Jacob said he was descending to Egypt. Rabbi Yudan said: [Jacob said:] ‘Father blessed me with five blessings. Corresponding to them, the Holy One blessed be He appeared to me five times and blessed me.’  Rabbi Yudan said another [explanation], Rabbi Yudan said: [Jacob said:] ‘I was under the impression that He would give me a taste of those blessings.’ What were those blessings? “Peoples will serve you and nations will prostrate themselves to you” (Genesis 27:29) – this is Joseph.13Jacob saw that one of the blessings granted to him by Isaac was being fulfilled through Joseph, so he brought offerings of thanksgiving, and particularly mentioned “the God of his father Isaac.”  Rabbi Berekhya said two [statements], Rabbi Berekhya said: The Holy One blessed be He associates His name with a living person only for those who undergo suffering. That is why it is not written here: “He slaughtered feast-offerings to the God of Jacob,” but rather, “to the God of his father Isaac,” who was already dead. Rabbi Berekhya said another [explanation]: It is because he had undergone suffering. The Rabbis say: Isaac’s ashes are viewed as though they are accumulated upon the altar. That is why he mentioned Isaac.
“God spoke to Israel in the visions of the night, and said: Jacob, Jacob, and he said: Here I am” (Genesis 46:2).  “He said: I am God, the God of your father; do not fear to go down to Egypt, as I will make you a great nation there” (Genesis 46:3).  “I will go down with you to Egypt and I will also take you up again and Joseph will place his hand over your eyes” (Genesis 46:4). “God spoke to Israel in the visions of the night…He said: I am the God Beit El14These words do not appear in the verse and should be deleted (Rashash). … and I will also take you up again” – you and all the righteous like you. “And Joseph will place his hand over your eyes…” – Rabbi Ḥagai said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: Provided that “Joseph will place his hand over your eyes.”15This means that Joseph would take care of Jacob, and provide for all his needs, and Jacob would not have to attend to his own livelihood. Alternatively, it means that Joseph would close Jacob’s eyes after his death, in which case God is stating that He will bring Jacob back to the Land of Israel eventually, but not in his lifetime (Yefeh To’ar).  “Jacob arose from Beersheba and the sons of Israel conveyed Jacob their father, and their children, and their wives, in the wagons that Pharaoh sent to convey him” (Genesis 46:5).  “They took their livestock, and their property that they had acquired in the land of Canaan, and they came to Egypt: Jacob, and all his descendants with him” (Genesis 46:6).  “His sons, and his sons’ sons with him, his daughters, and his sons’ daughters, and all his descendants, he brought with him to Egypt” (Genesis 46:7). “Jacob arose…. They took their livestock…His sons, and his sons’ sons…” – Rabbi Yehuda bar Ilai said: Daughters of sons are considered like sons. Sons of daughters are not considered like sons.
“And these are the names of the children of Israel who were coming to Egypt, Jacob and his sons: The firstborn of Jacob, Reuben” (Genesis 46:8). “And the sons of Issachar: Tola, and Puva, and Yov, and Shimron” (Genesis 46:13). “And these are the names of the children of Israel who were coming to Egypt…. And the sons of Issachar: Tola, and Puva, and Yov, and Shimron” – Rabbi Meir saw a certain Samaritan. Rabbi Meir said to him: ‘From where did you descend?’ He said to him: ‘From Joseph.’ Rabbi Meir said to him: ‘No.’ The Samaritan said to him: ‘But rather from whom?’ He said to him: ‘From Issachar.’ He said to him: ‘From where do you know?’ He said to him: ‘As it is written: “And the sons of Issachar: Tola, and Puva, and Yov, and Shimron” – these are the Samaritans.’ He went to the [Samaritan] patriarch. He said to him: ‘A Jewish elder said to me a certain matter and it is astonishing.’ He said to him: ‘What is it?’ He said to him: ‘He said to me: From where did you descend? I said to him: From Joseph. He said to me: No, from Issachar, as it is written: “And the sons of Issachar: Tola, and Puva, and Yov, and Shimron” – these are the Samaritans.’ He said to him: ‘As you live, from Joseph he removed you, but he has not brought you to be from Issachar.’16The Samaritans were not actually Jewish at all. Rabbi Meir’s intent was merely to undermine their claim to be descended from Joseph, but not to say that actually they had descended from Issachar (see Yefeh To’ar). 
“And the sons of Benjamin: Bela, and Bekher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Eḥi, and Rosh, Mupim, and Ḥupim, and Ard” (Genesis 46:21). “And the sons of Benjamin: Bela…” – when Joseph stood with Benjamin, he asked him: ‘Do you have sons?’ He said to him: ‘Yes.’ He said to him: ‘How many?’ He said to him: ‘Ten.’ He said: ‘What are their names?’ He said to him: ‘I had one brother. His actions were fine and pleasant, and he was taken captive from me, and I gave them names based on his experience. “Bela” – as he was swallowed [nivla] up from me; “Bekher” – as he was my firstborn [bekhor] [brother]; “Ashbel” – as he was taken captive [nishba] from me; “Gera” – as he resides [gar] in another land; “Naaman” – as his actions were fine [na’im] and pleasant [ne’imim]; “Eḥi” – as he was my full-fledged brother [aḥi]; “and Rosh” – as he was a leader [rosh] for me, and he was the head [roshan] of his brothers, as it is stated: “May his blessing rest on the head of [lerosh] Joseph” (Deuteronomy 33:16); “Mupim” – as he was very fine [yafeh] in all respects, and all the halakhot that Shem and Ever transmitted to Jacob, he transmitted to him.17Mupim – mo pihem – directly from their mouths. “And Ḥupim” – as he did not see my wedding canopy [beḥupati] and I did not see his wedding canopy [beḥupato], and they concealed [veḥipu] matters in his regard and said: “A savage beast devoured him” (Genesis 37:33). “And Ard” – as he was like a rose [vered]. “And Ard” – after: [Jacob said:] “For I will descend [ered] mourning to my son to the grave” (Genesis 37:35).’ “And the sons of Naphtali: Yaḥtze'el, and Guni, and Yetzer, and Shilem” (Genesis 46:24). “And the sons of Naphtali” – their [creations] were twisted [muftalin] on seventy-two heddles;18A heddle is an integral part of a loom. as they twisted [potelin] the work of heddles.19They were expert weavers.  “Yaḥtze'el” – they broke [sheḥitzu] the gods in their hand and they cut [metzaḥtzeḥin] with their teeth and would sneer with their lips.20They would break idols, and make cutting remarks and disdainful facial expressions about idolatry (see Yefeh To’ar; Etz Yosef). However, see Matnot Kehuna, where these statements are interpreted to mean that they fashioned idols and made disparaging comments toward God.  “And Guni” – they spoke in derogatory [megunim] language. “And Yetzer” – their [evil] inclination was stronger than that of all [other] people. “And Shilem” – they were devoted [mushlamim] to their inclination21Alternatively, they were devoted to God despite their strong evil inclination (Yefeh To’ar).  and would repay [umshalmin] goodness with evil.
“All the people who were coming with Jacob to Egypt, the products of his loins, aside from the wives of Jacob's sons; all the people were sixty-six” (Genesis 46:26). “And the sons of Joseph, who were born to him in Egypt, were two people; all the people of the house of Jacob, who came to Egypt, were seventy” (Genesis 46:27). “All the people who were coming…. And the sons of Joseph, who were born to him…” – Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: Have you ever in your days seen a person give another sixty-six cups, and then give him another three, and he counts them as seventy? Rather, this is Yokheved, who completed the tally of Israel in Egypt.22The verses list a total of sixty-nine people but it then states that the total was seventy. This is an allusion to Yokheved, who was born as they arrived in Egypt, and is counted in the final tally even though she is not listed by name.  Rabbi Levi said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: Yokheved was conceived in the land of Canaan, and born in the land of Egypt. That is what is written: “The name of Amram's wife was Yokheved, [daughter of Levi, who was born to Levi in Egypt]” (Numbers 26:59) – she was born at the gates of Egypt.  And Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: The Holy One blessed be He is accustomed to count this tribe while it is still in its mother’s womb. That is what is written: “For Yedutun, the sons of Yedutun: Gedalyahu, and Tzeri, and Yeshayahu, Ḥashavyahu, and Matityahu, [six]” (I Chronicles 25:3) – they are five [who are mentioned] specifically, but a total of six. However, there is “Shimi” (I Chronicles 25:17). The Holy One blessed be He counted him while he was still in his mother’s womb. And were a person to say to you: “The tenth was Shimi” (I Chronicles 25:17), say to him: Tenth for the platform.23This is regarding the order in which they would perform their role as singers on the platform in the Temple. And Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: [From the time] our patriarch Jacob would engage in conjugal relations, the Holy One blessed be He would call [his future children] souls. That is what is written: “Or tallied one-quarter [rova]24Rova is understood as a reference to the sexual act (see, similarly, Leviticus 18:23). The Holy One blessed be He counts them even before conception. of Israel” (Numbers 23:10). Rabbi Berekhya said: It is like sap, which is absorbed even before it has emerged. Some say: Jacob completed the tally with them.25The final tally of seventy includes Jacob himself. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: This is analogous to two of the emperor’s legions, the Decumani and the Augustiani. When the emperor is counted with these they are deemed complete, and when the emperor is counted with those, as well, they are deemed complete.26Since the emperor is sometimes found with each legion, he is included in their official number.  Some say: The Holy One blessed be He completed the tally with them.27The final tally of seventy includes God Himself, who accompanied Jacob and his family into exile in Egypt. Some say: Ḥushim son of Dan completed the tally with them.28The verse states: “The sons of Dan: Ḥushim” (Genesis 46:23) – it says “the sons” in plural, because Ḥushim was counted as two. This is because he had many offspring. In Rabbi Meir’s Torah they found it written: “The son of Dan: Ḥushim.”29The word “son” appeared in the singular rather than in the plural. Some explain that this means that Rabbi Meir wrote the word “son” on the side of his scroll next to the word “sons” as an explanatory note, so that it would not be understood that Dan actually had more than just one son. This supports the idea that the word “sons” is written in plural to indicate that Ḥushim counted as two in the count of the seventy members of Jacob’s family (Yefeh To’ar).  That is what is written: “They came to the Gilad, and to the land of Taḥtim Ḥodshi, [and they came to Dan Yaan]” (II Samuel 24:6) – Beit Yeraḥ, Yeraḥ Sinim.30These were the names of these places in the talmudic period. A measure for a measure:31This is the way the midrash expounds the word Yaan that is appended to the name Dan, as this word means “because” and indicates a “measure for measure” cause and effect. See, similarly, Leviticus 26:43.  Dan entered in his darkened state32With just one son, who was deaf. before his father, and was blessed with seventy thousand.33In the two censuses in the Book of Numbers, the tribe of Dan numbered between sixty and seventy thousand (see Numbers 1:39, 26:43).  Benjamin entered with ten, and was blessed with forty thousand.34Although Benjamin had ten sons, his tribe numbered only around thirty-five thousand and forty-five thousand respectively during the two censuses in the Book of Numbers (see Numbers 1:37, 26:41).  Some say: Seraḥ daughter of Asher completed the tally with them. That is what is written: “A wise woman called from the city…. He approached her, and the woman said: Are you Yoav?” (II Samuel 20:16–17). She said to him: ‘Your name is Yoav, to say that you are a father [av] to Israel, but you are nothing but a reaper,35A killer. and you do not correspond to your name. Are you and David not versed in Torah, or has Torah now ceased [to be in effect]? Is it not written: “When you approach a city to wage war against it, you shall call to it for peace”?’ (Deuteronomy 20:10). He said to her: ‘Who are you?’ She said to him: “I am the peaceful [shelumei] and loyal [emunei] of Israel” (II Samuel 20:19)36The plural terms shelumei and emunei are difficult in context, and the midrash therefore expounds these terms.  – I am the one who completed [shehishlamti] the tally [minyanan] of Israel in Egypt. I am the one who delivered the loyal to the loyal – Joseph to Moses.37Seraḥ showed Moses where Joseph was buried so that he could take Joseph’s bones from Egypt to the Land of Israel (Sota 13a).  Why “do you seek to destroy a city” (II Samuel 20:19), and I, who am “a mother in Israel”? (II Samuel 20:19). Immediately, “Yoav answered and said: Far be it, far be it from me [that I would ruin or destroy]” (II Samuel 20:20). “Far be it, far be it,” twice – far be it from David, far be it from Yoav, far be it from the kingdom of the house of David. “[The matter] is not so. Rather, a man from Mount Ephraim, Sheva son of Bikhri is his name, has raised his hand against the king, against David (II Samuel 20:21) – if [he already said] “against the king,” why [did he also say] “against David”; if “against David,” why “against the king”? Rabbi Azarya said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon: Anyone who is impudent to a king, it is as though he was impudent to a Torah scholar; all the more so, [if he is impudent] to a king and a Torah scholar. Rabbi Yudan said: Anyone who is impudent to a king, it is as though he is impudent to the Divine Presence.  “[The woman] said…Behold, his head will be cast to you” (II Samuel 20:21). How did she know?38How did she know she would be able to apprehend Sheva ben Bikhri. It is because she said: ‘Anyone who is impudent to the kingdom of the house of David, will be beheaded from above.’39God will ensure that he is apprehended.  Immediately, “the woman came to all the people, in her wisdom” (II Samuel 20:22). She said to them: ‘Do you not know the exploits of David? What nation stood against him? What kingdom stood against him?’ They said to her: ‘What does he want?’ She said to them: ‘One thousand men; are one thousand men not preferable to destroying your entire city?’ They said to her: ‘Let each and every one give in accordance with what he has.’40Each household will turn over a proportion of its members.  She said to them: ‘Perhaps, as the result of appeasement, he will forgo a bit.’ She made herself out as though she was going to appease and returned; from one thousand to five hundred,41She made them believe she had negotiated Yoav down from the one thousand men that he demanded to only five hundred.  to one hundred, to ten, to one, and he is a guest. ‘Who is it?’ ‘It is Sheva son of Bikhri.’ Immediately, they severed his head.  It is taught: A group of people to whom the gentiles said: ‘Give us one of you and we will kill him, and if not, we will kill all of you,’ they shall all be killed, and they shall not deliver one soul of Israel. But if they designated him for them, like Sheva son of Bikhri, they shall give, and all of them shall not be killed. Rabbi Yehuda said: In what case are these matters stated? It is when he is inside and they are outside.42When he is trapped by the besieging army but they are not totally trapped, it is possible they will escape the army even if they do not deliver him to the army. Consequently, they may not turn him over.  But if he is inside and they are inside, since he will be killed and they will be killed, they shall deliver him to them and all of them will not be killed. Like it says: “The woman came to all the people” (II Samuel 20:22) – since he will be killed and you will be killed, give him to them and let you all not be killed. Rabbi Shimon says: Anyone who revolts against the kingdom of the house of David is liable to death.  Ulla ben Kishar was sought by the empire. He rose and fled to Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi to Lod. They sent a messenger after him. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi approached [Ulla ben Kishar] and appeased him. He said to him: ‘It is preferable that this man [i.e. you] be killed, and let the entire community not be punished on his account.’ He appeased him and he delivered him to [the messenger]. Elijah was accustomed to speak with [Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi]. Once he did this, [Elijah] did not come to him any longer. He fasted over him for thirty days, and he appeared to him. [Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi] said to him: ‘What is the reason that my master absented himself?’ He said to him: ‘Do I associate with informers?’ He said to him: ‘Is it not a baraita: A group of people…’ He said to him: ‘Is that a mishna of the pious? That act should have been performed by others and not by you.’  It is taught: When Nebuchadnezzar ascended to conquer Yehoyakim, he ascended and encamped at Daphne at Antioch. The Great Sanhedrin descended to greet him. They said to him: ‘Has the time arrived for this house to be destroyed?’ He said to them: ‘No, but Yehoyakim king of Judah has revolted against me. Give him to me and I will go.’ They went and said to Yehoyakim: ‘Nebuchadnezzar wants you.’ He said to them: ‘Is this how one acts? Does one disregard one life in favor of another life? Is it not so written: “You shall not hand over a slave to his master”?’ (Deuteronomy 23:16). They said to him: ‘Is this not what your ancestor did to Sheva son of Bikhri? That is what is written: “Behold, his head is cast to you over the wall”’ (II Samuel 20:21). When [Yehoyakim] did not heed them, they rose, took him, and lowered him [to Nebuchadnezzar], who dismembered him.

=== 95 | 95 ===
“He sent Judah before him to Joseph, to guide him to Goshen, and they came to the land of Goshen” (Genesis 46:28). “He sent Judah before him to Joseph.” It is written: “Wolf and lamb will graze as one, and a lion, like cattle, will eat straw” (Isaiah 65:25). Come and see that everything that the Holy One blessed be He has struck in this world, He will heal in the future. The blind will be healed, as it is stated: “Then the eyes of the blind will be opened” (Isaiah 35:5). The lame will be healed, as it is stated: “Then the lame will leap like a deer and the tongue of the dumb will sing” (Isaiah 35:6). Just as a person departs, so he returns.1A person will return to life at the resurrection of the dead, as he was when he died.  If he departs blind he returns blind; [if he was] deaf, he returns deaf; [if he was] mute, he returns mute. Just as he goes [to the grave] clothed, so he returns clothed. From whom do you derive it? It is from Samuel, who was seen by Saul.2This is not meant literally, as it was the woman conjurer who saw Samuel, while Saul himself did not see him (see I Samuel 28:11–14; Vayikra Rabba 26:7). The meaning is that Saul initiated the incident in which Samuel was seen by the conjurer.  What did [Saul] say to the woman? “What is his appearance? She said: An old man…and he is clad in a robe” (I Samuel 28:14), as so he was clad, as it is stated: “His mother made him a small robe” (I Samuel 2:19).  Why is it that just as a person departs, so he returns? It is so [people] do not say: ‘When they were alive He did not heal them; did the Holy One blessed be He heal them when they were dead and then bring them back? It seems that these are not they, but others.’ The Holy One blessed be He says: ‘If so, let these stand as they departed, and then I will heal them.’ Why? “[So that you may know and believe Me and understand that I am He;] before Me no god was formed” (Isaiah 43:10), so I will heal them. The beasts will also be cured, as it is stated: “Wolf and lamb will graze as one” (Isaiah 65:25). All will be healed, but the one who brought harm upon all will not be healed, but rather, “and a serpent, dust will be its food” (Isaiah 65:25). Why? Because he took the creations down to the dust. Another matter, “wolf and lamb.” “Wolf” – this is Benjamin.3See Genesis 49:27. “And lamb” – these are the tribes, as it is stated: “Israel are scattered sheep” (Jeremiah 50:17). “Will graze as one” – when? It was when Benjamin descended with them, and Jacob was saying to them: “My son will not descend with you” (Genesis 42:38). When the time arrived and he descended with them, they placed him between them and were guarding him. Likewise, regarding Joseph, it says: “He lifted his eyes, and saw Benjamin” (Genesis 43:29).4He was able to see him only after lifting his eyes because the brothers surrounded him. “A lion” – this is Judah; “Judah is a lion cub” (Genesis 49:9). “Like cattle” – this is Joseph; “A firstborn bull is his majesty” (Deuteronomy 33:17). They were found eating together – “they sat before him…he gave gifts” (Genesis 43:33–34). That is, “and a lion, like cattle, will eat straw” (Isaiah 65:25). That is why “he sent Judah before him.”5This was a demonstration that Judah and Joseph were now at peace. 
The verse states: “The jealousy of Ephraim will cease” (Isaiah 11:13) – because Jacob our patriarch believed that Judah had killed Joseph when he brought him the tunic, as it is stated: “He recognized it, and said: My son's tunic, an evil beast devoured him” (Genesis 37:33), and an evil beast is none other than a lion.
Another matter, “he sent Judah before him.” Rabbi Ḥanina son of Rabbi Aḥa, and Rabbi Ḥanina, one said: To arrange a residence for him. And one said: To arrange an academy in which he would teach Torah matters and in which the tribes would study. Know that it is so; when Joseph departed from him, he knew at which chapter that he was teaching him he left him. When Joseph’s brothers came to him and said to him: “Joseph is still alive… his heart was faint [because he did not believe them]” (Genesis 45:26). He remembered at which chapter he left him, and said to himself: I know that it was at the chapter of the beheaded calf [egla arufa] that Joseph left me. He said to them: ‘If you know at what chapter Joseph left me, I will believe you.’ Joseph, too, knew at what chapter he left him. What did Joseph do? He gave them wagons [agalot], as it is stated: “Joseph gave them wagons by Pharaoh’s order” (Genesis 45:21). This is to teach you that everywhere Jacob would settle he would study Torah, just as his fathers would. At this point, the Torah had not been given, but it is written of Abraham: “[Because Abraham heeded My voice,] and he kept My charge, [My commands, My decrees, and My Torahs]” (Genesis 26:5) – from where did Abraham learn the Torah? Rabban Shimon says: His two kidneys became like two jugs of water and they would gush Torah. From where is it derived that it is so? As it is stated: “Even on nights [my kidneys] instruct me” (Psalms 16:7). Rabbi Levi said: He studied Torah on his own, as it is stated: “The dissembler in his heart shall have his fill from his own ways, and a good man shall be satisfied from himself” (Proverbs 14:14). Rabbi Yonatan Sar HaBira said: Abraham knew even the joining of cooked foods, as it is stated: “Because Abraham heeded…” (Genesis 26:5).6The end of the verse mentions “My Torahs,” in plural, implying both the written and oral Torahs. The oral Torah includes even rabbinic laws, like the joining of cooked foods [eruv tavshilin]. The rabbis forbade cooking on a festival day for Shabbat unless one prepares two cooked items for Shabbat before the festival day (see Beitza 15b). How old was Abraham when he recognized his Creator? He recognized his Creator at the age of forty-eight years old. Reish Lakish said: At the age of three years old, as “ekev” is written, the numerical value of ekev, and Abraham lived one hundred and seventy-five years.7The verse states “because [ekev] Abraham heeded My voice…” The numerical value of the word ekev is one hundred and seventy-two, implying that Abraham heeded God’s voice for one hundred and seventy-two years.  You learn from this that at age three, he recognized his Creator. He would observe the details of the Torah and would teach his children, as it is stated: “For I have loved him, [so that he will command his children and his household after him and they will observe the way of the Lord]” (Genesis 18:19). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You taught your children in this world, but in the World to Come, I, in My glory, will teach all of you the Torah,’ as it is stated: “All your children will be students of the Lord” (Isaiah 54:13).
“From among his brothers he took five men, and he presented them before Pharaoh” (Genesis 47:2). “From among [miktze] his brothers he took five men” – why did the verse state “from among [miktze] his brothers”? It is to teach you that they were not mighty.8The term katze indicates those on the periphery; those who are relatively weak. Who were these five men? They were Reuben, Levi, Benjamin, Simeon, and Issachar. Why did Joseph the righteous select these five men from his brothers? It is because he knew each and every mighty one among his brothers, and he acted wisely. He said: ‘If I present the mighty ones before pharaoh, he will see them and make them his warriors.’ Anyone whose name was repeated in Moses’s blessing was mighty, and anyone whose name was not repeated, was not mighty. Judah, who was mighty, his name was repeated, as it is stated: “This is for Judah, and he said: Hear, Lord, the voice of Judah” (Deuteronomy 33:7). Therefore, he did not present him before Pharaoh. Likewise Naphtali, as it is stated: “Of Naphtali he said: Naphtali” (Deuteronomy 33:23). Likewise Asher, as it is stated: “Of Asher he said: Blessed of sons is Asher” (Deuteronomy 33:24). Likewise Dan, as it is stated: “Of Dan he said: Dan” (Deuteronomy 33:22). Likewise Zebulun, as it is stated: “Of Zebulun he said: Rejoice, Zebulun” (Deuteronomy 33:18). And likewise Gad – “Of Gad he said: Blessed is He who expands Gad” (Deuteronomy 33:20). That is why he did not present these before Pharaoh. The rest, whose names were not repeated, were not mighty. Therefore, he presented them before Pharaoh. That is why it is written: “From among his brothers he took.” It does not mention their names here because they were not mighty. “Joseph said: Give your livestock, and I will give you for your livestock, if silver has run out” (Genesis 47:16). “Joseph said: Give your livestock…” – your horse is before me. You are exposed as a peeled onion.9You can claim that you have no money, but not that you have nothing. I see your horses. 10This is not part of the midrash but a later addition that suggests an explanation of the preceding sentence, on the basis of Genesis 47:18. 

=== 96 | 96 ===
“Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years; the days of Jacob, the years of his life, were one hundred and forty-seven years” (Genesis 47:28). “Jacob lived in the land of Egypt” – why is this portion more closed than any of the Torah portions?1Typically between Torah portions there is a nine-letter long space in the Torah scroll. Leading into the Torah portion of Vayḥi, which begins with this verse, there is merely a one letter space. It is because once our patriarch Jacob died, the enslavement in Egypt began.2As a result, the children of Israel were trapped in a state of suffering. Another matter, why is it closed [setuma]? It is because Jacob our patriarch sought to reveal the End of Days, and it was prevented [nistam] from him. Another matter, why is it closed? Because [God] shielded him from all the troubles of the world.3Jacob had suffered greatly over the course of his life, but during these seventeen years, he was shielded from troubles. 
“The time for Israel to die approached and he called his son, Joseph, and he said to him: Please, if I have found favor in your eyes, please place your hand under my thigh and perform kindness and truth with me; please do not bury me in Egypt” (Genesis 47:29). “The time for Israel to die approached.” It is written: “For I am a stranger with You, a resident, [as were all my fathers]” (Psalms 39:13). “For we are strangers before You…our days on earth are like a shadow, and there is no hope” (I Chronicles 29:15) – if only it would be like the shadow of a wall, or the shadow of a tree,4If our life is compared to a shadow, if only it could be like the shadow of a wall or tree, which stays in place and has stability. but instead it is like the shadow of a bird when it is flying, as it is written: “Like a passing shadow” (Psalms 144:4). “And there is no hope” – there is no one who can hope not to die. Everyone knows and says with his mouth that he will die. Abraham said: “I am going5“Going” here is in the sense of dying. childless” (Genesis 15:2). Isaac said: “I will bless you before the Lord before my death” (Genesis 27:7). Jacob, too, said: “I will lie with my fathers” (Genesis 47:30). When [did he say this]? When he was about to die.
“The time for Israel…approached.” It is written: “There is no person who rules the spirit to retain the spirit, and there is no dominion on the day of death” (Ecclesiastes 8:8). Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin in the name of Rabbi Levi: The trumpets that Moses crafted in the wilderness, when he was tending toward death, the Holy One blessed be He sequestered them so that another would not sound it, and they would come to him, as it is written: “Assemble to me all the elders of your tribes” (Deuteronomy 31:28).6Moses asked that the elders be assembled; he did not merely have someone blow the trumpets, as he would have done in the past, because they had been sequestered.  This was to realize what is written: “There is no dominion on the day of death.” Another matter, “there is no dominion on the day of death” – when Zimri performed that action,7He brought a Midyanite woman into his tent.  what is written there? “He went after the man of Israel into the tent” (Numbers 25:8).8This is stated about Pinḥas.  Where was Moses? And would Pinḥas speak before Moses? Rather, it is to realize: “There is no dominion on the day of death.” Death is nothing other than an expression of lowering. Salvation was given to Pinḥas, and Moses was lowered.9Moses’s death was drawing near, and so others began to assert authority.  Of David, too, it is written: “King David was old” (I Kings 1:1). When he was about to die, what is written in his regard? “The time for King David [to die] approached” is not written here, but, rather, “the time for David [to die] approached” (I Kings 2:1). Jacob, too, when he was about to die, he began lowering himself before Joseph, and he said to him: “Please, if I have found favor in your eyes.” When? It was when he approached death, as it is stated: “The time for Israel to die approached.”
Reish Lakish said: [God said:] ‘As you live, you will lie down, but you will not die,’ as it is stated: “The time for Israel to die approached.”10Although Jacob’s body would cease to function, he would not die. The verse cited can be more literally translated: “The days of Israel drew near to death,” implying that Jacob’s days would die, meaning he would no longer function in the physical world, but he himself would not die (Maharzu).  What is “approached [vayikrevu]”? The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘The day complains against you, saying that it would stand still.’11Since Jacob was supposed to die on that day, the day would not be able to end without him dying.  It is like a person who says: ‘So-and-so has attacked [karav] another.’ That is “vayikrevu.”12The midrash portrays the day, as it were, submitting a claim against Jacob, that he must die on that day.   Everyone in whose regard it is written that the time for him [to die] approached, did not reach the days of his ancestors. “Approach” is written with regard to David – “the time for David to die approached” (I Kings 2:1). He did not reach the days of his ancestors. Of Boaz, Oved, and Yishai, the Sages said that they lived more than four hundred years, but David lived only seventy years. He did not reach the days of his ancestors; therefore “approach” is written in his regard. Amram lived one hundred and thirty-seven years, but Moses lived only one hundred and twenty years; therefore, “approach” is written in his regard: “Behold, your days are approaching to die” (Deuteronomy 31:14). And Jacob, approach is written in his regard, as he did not reach the days of his ancestors. Abraham lived one hundred and seventy-five years, Isaac, one hundred and eighty, and Jacob, one hundred and forty-seven. That is why “approach” is written in his regard – “the time for Israel to die approached.”
“He called his son, Joseph” – why did he not call Reuben or Judah? Reuben was the firstborn and Judah was the king, but he disregarded them and called Joseph. Why did he do so? Because [Joseph] had the capability to carry out [his request]. That is why “he called his son, Joseph” – because the hour was given to him.13He was in power at the time.  “Please do not bury me in Egypt” – it is for your sake I descended to Egypt; it is for your sake that I said: “Now I can die” (Genesis 46:30).  “Perform kindness and truth with me” – is there kindness of falsehood, that he says “kindness and truth”? Why [did he say] so? The folk saying says: If the son of your friend dies, bear with him.14This is because he can repay the kindness. If your friend dies, cast off.15Cast off sorrow, because he cannot repay the kindness. He said to him: ‘If you perform kindness for me after my death, it is a true kindness.’  “Please do not bury me in Egypt” – why? Because the ultimate fate of the land of Egypt is to be stricken with lice, and they will swarm in my body. That is why “please do not bury me in Egypt.” Another matter, for what reason did Jacob request not to be buried in Egypt? It was so they would not make him the subject of idolatrous worship, for just as punishment is exacted from one who worships, so is punishment exacted from the one who is worshipped, as it is written: “Against all the gods of Egypt I will administer punishments: I am the Lord” (Exodus 12:12). Likewise you find regarding Daniel, once he interpreted Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, what is written? “Then King Nebuchadnezzar fell on his face, and he prostrated himself to Daniel, and said to pour out to him a meal offering and fragrances” (Daniel 2:46). But Daniel did not accept it. Why? Because just as punishment is exacted from those who worship idols, so is punishment exacted from it.16From the subject of such worship.  Likewise you find regarding Ḥiram. Once he made himself into a god, what was his ultimate fate? It is written in his regard: “Because your heart became haughty, and you said: I am a god” (Ezekiel 28:2) – the Holy One blessed be He said to him: “Behold, you are wiser than Daniel” (Ezekiel 28:3). Nebuchadnezzar sought to sacrifice to him, but he did not want it, and you make yourself a god? What was his ultimate fate? “I cast you upon the ground, I placed you before kings that they may gaze upon you” (Ezekiel 28:17). Another matter, Jacob said: ‘So that the Egyptians will not merit redemption because of me. They prostrate themselves to a lamb, and I was likened to a lamb, as it is stated: “Israel is a scattered lamb” (Jeremiah 50:17), and regarding Egypt it is written: “Whose flesh is the flesh of donkeys” (Ezekiel 23:20), and it is written: “The firstborn of a donkey you shall redeem with a lamb”’ (Exodus 34:20). That is, “please do not bury me in Egypt.” Why did all the patriarchs demand and have fondness for burial in the Land of Israel? Rabbi Elazar said: These are cryptic matters. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: What are these “cryptic matters”? “I walk before the Lord in the land of the living” (Psalms 116:9).17The Land of Israel is the “land of the living.” Our Rabbis said two matters in the name of Rabbi Ḥelbo: Why did the patriarchs have fondness for burial in the Land of Israel? Because the dead of the Land of Israel come to life first in the messianic era, and enjoy the messianic years. Rabbi Ḥanina said: One who dies outside of the Land of Israel and is buried there, has undergone two deaths,18Death and burial. as so it is written: “And you, Pashḥur, and all the dwellers in your house, will go into captivity, and to Babylon you will come, and there you will die, and there you will be buried” (Jeremiah 20:6). That is, he has undergone two deaths. That is why Jacob says to Joseph: “Please do not bury me in Egypt.” Rabbi Simon said: If so, the righteous who are buried outside of the Land of Israel suffer a loss. What, then, does the Holy One blessed be He do? He makes tunnels in the ground for them and makes them like channels, and they roll along until they reach the Land of Israel. The Holy One blessed be He then places in them a spirit of life and they arise. From where is this derived? It is written: “Behold, I am opening your graves, and I will take you up from your graves, My people, and I will bring you to the soil of Israel” (Ezekiel 37:12), and then: “I will place My spirit into you and you will live” (Ezekiel 37:14). Reish Lakish said: It is an explicit verse, that once they reach the Land of Israel, the Holy One blessed be He will place a soul in them, as it is stated: “Who places a soul in the people upon it” (Isaiah 42:5). There was an incident involving Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi] and Rabbi Eliezer, who were walking near the gates outside Tiberias. They saw the coffin of a dead person who came from outside of the Land of Israel to be buried in the Land of Israel. Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi] said to Rabbi Eliezer: ‘What has this one, whose soul departed outside of the Land of Israel and came to be buried in the Land of Israel, accomplished? I read in his regard: “My inheritance you rendered an abomination” (Jeremiah 2:7) during your lifetime, “and you came, and you defiled My land” (Jeremiah 2:7) after your death.’ [Rabbi Eliezer] said to him: ‘Once he is buried in the Land of Israel, the Holy One blessed be He grants him atonement, as it is written: “His earth will atone for his people”’ (Deuteronomy 32:43). Rabbi Yoḥanan, when he was departing from the world, said to those who needed to tend to him: ‘Bury me in garments dyed green, not white and not black, so if I stand among the righteous we will not be shamed, and if I stand among the wicked we will not be disgraced.’19Rabbi Yoḥanan was not sure if he would be summoned with the righteous, who appear in white, or the wicked, who appear in black. He therefore asked to be buried in a different color so as to avoid a situation in which he was dressed in white but summoned with the wicked, which would be embarrassing, or a situation in which he was dressed in black but summoned with the righteous, which might appear as a distortion of Divine justice. Rabbi Yoshiya, when he was departing from the world, said to those who were standing over him: ‘Summon my disciples.’ He said to them: ‘Bury me in white garments. Why? Because I am not ashamed to greet my Creator because of my actions.’  Rabbenu,20Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi. when he was departing from the world, commanded three matters: ‘Do not move my widow from my house. Do not eulogize me in the towns in the Land of Israel. And do not allow a gentile to touch my bier; rather, let he who tended to me during my lifetime tend to me after my death.’  During his lifetime, he resided in Tzippori seventeen years, and he would read in his regard: “Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years,” and Yehuda lived in Tzippori seventeen years. Rabbenu suffered from pain in his teeth for thirteen years, and all those thirteen years, no woman died in childbirth in the Land of Israel and no woman miscarried in the Land of Israel. After thirteen years, Rabbenu became angry at Rabbi Ḥiyya HaGadol. Elijah, of blessed memory, came to Rabbenu in the guise of Rabbi Ḥiyya, placed his hand on his tooth, and he was immediately healed. On the next day, Rabbi Ḥiyya came to him. He said to him: ‘Rabbi, that tooth of yours, what is its condition?’ He said: ‘From the moment you came to me yesterday, it was healed.’ At that moment, Rabbi Ḥiyya said: ‘Woe unto you, birthing mothers in the Land of Israel. Woe unto you, pregnant women in the Land of Israel.’ Nevertheless, he said to him: ‘It was not I who placed a hand on your tooth.’ Rabbenu knew that it had been Elijah of blessed memory. From that moment, Rabbi began treating Rabbi Ḥiyya with honor.

=== 97 | 97 ===
“He blessed Joseph and said: The God before whom my fathers, Abraham and Isaac, walked, the God who has shepherded me from my beginnings until this day” (Genesis 48:15). “Fear the Lord, His holy ones” (Psalms 34:10) – Rabbi Azarya said: When Jacob our patriarch blessed Joseph, [Joseph] went out and his face was glowing. The tribes were saying: ‘Everyone associates with the one who is successful. Because he is king – one stands with the one who is successful.’1They said that Jacob called Joseph to him and blessed him because he was showing special favor due to Joseph’s success and prestige.  Jacob our patriarch said to them: “Fear the Lord, His holy ones [for there is no lack in those who fear Him].”
“He blessed Joseph and said” – Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish: Rabbi Yoḥanan said: [This is analogous] to a shepherd who was standing and looking at his flock.2When the verse states: “The God before whom my fathers, Abraham and Isaac, walked,” the image is of a flock that walks before a shepherd so that the shepherd can watch out for it.  Reish Lakish said: [It is analogous] to a king walking, with the elders before him. According to the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan, we need His glory. According to the opinion of Reish Lakish, He needs our glory.3The elders walk before the king as a sign of honor for the king. So too, the patriarchs walked before God in the sense that they spread knowledge of God in the world. 
“May the angel who redeems me from all evil bless the lads, and let my name and the name of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac, be called upon them, and may they proliferate like fish in the midst of the land” (Genesis 48:16). “May the angel who redeems me from all evil…” – Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta said: Sustenance is twice as difficult as childbirth. Regarding childbirth it is written: “In pain [be’etzev] you will bear children” (Genesis 3:16). Regarding sustenance it is written: “With pain [be’itzavon]4The midrash interprets be’itzavon as the plural of be’etzev. you will eat of it all the days of your life” (Genesis 3:17). Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: Rabbi Elazar said: Redemption is juxtaposed to sustenance,5“The God who has shepherded me.… May the angel who redeems me.” and sustenance is juxtaposed to redemption.6“He delivered us from our foes.… He gives food to all flesh” (Psalms 136:24–25). Just as redemption is double,7God performed multiple miracles in redeeming Israel. so too, sustenance is double. Just as sustenance is [provided] every day, so too, redemption [occurs] every day. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said: It is greater than redemption, as redemption is by means of an angel and sustenance is by means of the Holy One blessed be He. Redemption is by means of an angel – “may the angel who redeems me”; and sustenance is by means of the Holy One blessed be He – “You open Your hand and satisfy everything living” (Psalms 145:16). Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: A person’s sustenance is as difficult as the splitting of the Res Sea, as it is stated: “Who split apart the Red Sea” (Psalms 136:13), and it is written there: “He gives food to all flesh” (Psalms 136:25).  “May…bless the lads” – this is Joshua and Gideon.8They were descendants of Ephraim and Manasseh, and angels appeared to them (Joshua 5:14; Judges 6:12). That is what is written: “It was when Joshua was by Jericho, he lifted his eyes and saw, and behold, a man was standing opposite him.… He said: No, for I am commander of the host of the Lord; now I have come” (Joshua 5:13–14). Rabbi Yehoshua in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina bar Yitzḥak: He cried out from his toenails.9The angel prostrated himself before Joshua, imploring him to accept his help (see Matnot Kehuna; Etz Yosef). “He said…I am commander of the host of the Lord” – everywhere that I am seen, the Holy One blessed be He is seen. This is a sign: Everywhere that Rabbi Yosei Arokh10Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi’s attendant.  was seen, Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi] would be seen. “Now I have come” – ‘I came to Moses your master; however, he prayed: “If Your presence does not go, [do not take us up from here]” (Exodus 33:15).11God sent an angel to lead the Israelites into the Land of Israel, but Moses prayed that God’s Presence itself would accompany them, and not the angel.  I cannot ascend on High, because I have not yet carried out my mission. I cannot remain below, as he was still praying and saying: “If Your presence does not go [do not take us up from here].” Just make certain that you do not do what Moses your master did to me and rejected me.’  “May they proliferate like fish in the midst of the land” – just as the eye does not have dominion over the fish,12The fish are covered by water and are therefore hidden from human sight. so, the [evil] eye will have no dominion over your descendants. That is what is written: “The children of Joseph spoke to Joshua, [saying: Why did you give me an inheritance of one lot and one portion; and I am a numerous people, as the Lord has blessed me up to now?]” (Joshua 17:14). He said to them: ‘Are you not concerned about the [evil] eye?’ They said to him: ‘This is the blessing that our ancestor blessed us: “May they proliferate like fish in the midst of the land.”’ Just as fish are caught only by their throat, so, your descendants will be caught only by their throat – “They would say to him: Now say: Shibolet, and he would say: Sibolet” (Judges 12:6).13Forty-two thousand men of Ephraim were identified and killed in that manner. Just as fish grow in water, but when a single drop falls from above they receive it thirstily like one who never tasted the taste of water in all their days, so it is with Israel, they grow in water, in Torah, but when they hear a novel matter of Torah, they receive it thirstily like one who has never heard a matter of Torah in all their days. Rabbi Levi said: The Israelite women conceived six hundred thousand babies in one night, and they were all cast into the Nile; but they ascended by Moses’s merit. That is what Moses says: “Six hundred thousand men on foot [ragli] is the people that I am in their midst” (Numbers 11:21) – all of them ascended by my merit [leragli]. Rabbi Zakkai Rabba cited it from here: “May they proliferate like fish in the midst of the land” – just as in the midst of the land they were six hundred thousand, so, in the milieu of the fish they were six hundred thousand.14Thus, six hundred thousand babies were cast in the Nile, the “milieu of the fish.”  Just as in the midst of the land they did not die, so in the milieu of the fish they did not die. One whose name is like the name of fish,15Nun means fish in Aramaic, and Joshua the son of Nun led the Israelites into the Land of Israel. his son will take them into the Land of Israel: “Nun his son, Joshua his son” (I Chronicles 7:27).
“Joseph saw that his father was placing his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, and it displeased him; he supported his father’s hand, to remove it from the head of Ephraim to the head of Manasseh” (Genesis 48:17). “Joseph saw that his father was placing…” – Rabbi Berekhya said: The hand that overcame one-third of the world,16See Bereshit Rabba 68:12. you are seeking to move it? “Joseph said to his father: Not so, my father, as this is the firstborn; place your right hand upon his head. His father refused, and said: I know, my son, I know; he too will become a people, and he too will be great; however, his younger brother will be greater than he, and his descendants will be the plenitude of nations” (Genesis 48:18–19). “Joseph said to his father: Not so, my father.… His father refused, and said: I know, my son, I know” – I know the incident of Reuben and Bilha and the incident of Judah and Tamar;17I know that they all acted with pure intentions (Yefe To’ar). if matters that were not revealed to you were revealed to me, matters that were revealed to you, all the more so.  “He too will become a people, and he too will be great” – is it possible that it will be so?18The continuation of the verse states that Ephraim would be “the plenitude of nations.” The midrash asks: Is it possible that one tribe would be so numerous? Rather, this is Joshua, who stopped the orb of the sun and the moon, which have dominion from one end of the world to the other end. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Bad slave, are you not the purchase of my father…19Joshua said to the sun: ‘You prostrated yourself to my father Joseph in his dream; therefore you must obey me’ (see Bereshit Rabba 84:11). 
“He blessed them that day, saying: By you shall Israel bless, saying: May God make you like Ephraim and like Manasseh; and he placed Ephraim before Manasseh” (Genesis 48:20). “He blessed them that day” – just as he placed him first here,20Just as Jacob mentioned Ephraim before Manasseh in this verse.  so he placed him first everywhere. He placed him first regarding generations: These are the generations of the sons of Ephraim and then these are the generations of the sons of Manasseh.21Commentaries debate what this sentence refers to, and some suggest that it be emended or removed from the text of the midrash (see Etz Yosef; Maharzu).  Regarding lineage: “For the children of Ephraim, their descendants, by their families” (Numbers 1:32).22Only after the tribe of Ephraim is mentioned is the tribe of Manasseh mentioned (see Numbers 1:32–35).  He placed him first regarding inheritance: “This is the inheritance of the sons of Ephraim” (see Joshua 16:8) and then, this is the inheritance of the sons of Manasseh.23This is not a direct citation of a verse, but a reference to the discussion of the inheritance of the tribe of Manasseh, in Joshua 17:1–12.  He placed him first in the banners: “The banner of the camp of Ephraim” (Numbers 2:18) and then, “with it is the tribe of Manasseh” (Numbers 2:20). He placed him first regarding the princes: “On the seventh day, the prince for the sons of Ephraim” (Numbers 7:48) and then, “on the eighth day, the prince for the sons of Manasseh” (Numbers 2:54). He placed him first regarding judges: Joshua from Ephraim and Gideon from Manasseh. He placed him first regarding kings: Yerovam from Ephraim and Yehu from Manasseh. He placed him first regarding blessing: “May God make you like Ephraim and like Manasseh.” He placed him first regarding blessing: “He placed Ephraim before Manasseh.”
“Israel said to Joseph: Behold, I am dying, and God will be with you, and He will restore you to the land of your fathers” (Genesis 48:21). “Israel said to Joseph: Behold, I [anokhi] am dying, and God will be with you, and He will restore…” – the son of Rabbi Yosei’s brother [said]: The elder gave them three signs: One who comes [to redeem] with the term anokhi, who will appoint elders from among you, and will say to you pakod, he is the redeemer.24These were Jacob’s signs as to the identity of the future redeemer of the Israelites. Moses fulfilled all three signs; see, e.g., Exodus 3:11, 3:16, 4:29.  Rabbi Ḥunya removes anokhi, and inserts the ineffable Name in its place.25See Exodus 3:13–14.  “And I have given to you one portion [shekhem] beyond your brothers, which I took from the hand of the Emorite with my sword and with my bow” (Genesis 48:22). “And I have given to you” a son who was vigilant [shehishkim], and you did not act in accordance with their actions; therefore, the portion will be in your territory.26The midrash interprets the additional portion promised here to Joseph to be the city of Shekhem. This was granted to Joseph, because he did not act as his brothers did in Shekhem, where they sold Joseph into slavery (see Genesis 37:14; Sanhedrin 102a). Alternatively, he did not act as did Shekhem, who raped Dina (Genesis 34:2). Joseph refrained from acting on his desires even when approached by the wife of Potifar (Matnot Kehuna).  Rabbi Pinḥas said: In Shekhem there was breach in the area of licentiousness, and you repaired it; therefore, it will be in your portion. Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya: Rabbi Yehuda said: “I have given to you [one] shekhem” – this is the birthright and the garment of Adam the first man. “Which I took from the hand of the Emorite” – this is Esau. Was Esau, in fact, an Emorite? It is, rather, that he performed the actions of the Emorite. “With my sword and with my bow” – with mitzvot and good deeds. Rabbi Neḥemya said: “I have given to you one shekhem” – this is literally [the city of] Shekhem. “Which I took from the hand of the Emorite” – this is Ḥamor father of Shekhem. Was he, in fact, an Emorite? It is that the Hivite are included in the Emorite.27The Emorites were a larger group surrounding the Hivites, and therefore the Hivites were sometimes called Emorites (see Etz Yosef).  “With my sword and with my bow” – Jacob did not want his sons to perform that act.28But when his sons performed that act, he said: What, will I allow my sons to fall at the hand of the nations of the world? What did he do? He took his sword and his bow, stood at the entrance of Shekhem, and said: If the nations of the world come to confront my sons, I will battle against them. See Bereshit Rabba 80:10. But when…

=== 98 | 98 ===
“I cry out to God on High” (Psalms 57:3). “I cry out to God on High” – on Rosh HaShana. “To the Almighty who completes for me” (Psalms 57:3) – on Yom Kippur, to determine which will be for God and which will go to an uninhabitable land.1As part of the Temple service on Yom Kippur, two goats were brought, and lots were drawn to determine which would be sacrificed as an offering to God and which would be brought to a barren land and pushed off a cliff, symbolically carrying off the people’s sins. If the lot that said “to God” would be drawn by the High Priest in his right hand, that was a sign that God was inclined to respond positively to the prayers of the people and to grant atonement (Matnot Kehuna).  Another matter: “I cry out to God on High” (Psalms 57:3) – this is Jacob our patriarch. “To the Almighty who completes for me” (Psalms 57:3) – that the Holy One blessed be He agreed with him to give to each and every one as befitting him.2God agreed to implement the blessings Jacob gave to his sons. 
“Jacob called to his sons, and he said: Gather, and I will tell you what will befall you at the end of days. Assemble and hear, sons of Jacob, and listen to Israel your father” (Genesis 49:1–2). “Jacob called to his sons.” “The lot is cast in the bosom” (Proverbs 16:33) – this is the lottery of Yom Kippur. “And all of one’s judgment is from the Lord” (Proverbs 16:33) – to determine which will be for God and which will go to an uninhabitable land. Another matter: “The lot is cast in the bosom” – this is the lot of the tribes.3Their destiny as expressed in the blessings they received from Jacob.  “And all of one’s judgment is from the Lord” – that the Holy One blessed be He agreed with him to give each and every one as befitting him. “Jacob called to his sons” – Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Pinḥas: Rabbi Yudan said: Jacob called the Almighty to be with his sons. Rabbi Pinḥas said: He invited Him to his sons.4He invited Him [zimno] to share in his joy over the fact that all his sons had remained righteous (Matnot Kehuna). Alternatively, he asked God to be always available [mezuman] to come to his sons’ aid (Etz Yosef).  Rabbi Avun said: He appointed Him steward for his sons. “He said: Gather ….” – gather from the land of Egypt and assemble in Rameses. Gather from the ten tribes and assemble to the tribe of Judah and Benjamin. He commanded them to act with deference to the tribe of Judah and Benjamin. Rabbi Aḥa said: Purify yourselves, just as it says: “They gathered themselves together…” (Nehemiah 12:28), “and they purified the chambers” (Nehemiah 13:9). The Rabbis say: He commanded them regarding dissension. He said to them: ‘You shall all be one assembly.’ That is what is written: “You, Son of man, take for you one piece of wood, and write on it: [For Judah] and for the children of Israel [his companions]” (Ezekiel 37:16) – it is written “his companion”5The term “his companions [ḥaverav]” is written without a vav, which would ordinarily be read “his companion [ḥavero],” even though in this instance it is traditionally pronounced in the plural, ḥaverav.  – the children of Israel became a single group. Prepare yourselves for redemption. What is written thereafter? “I will render you one nation…” (see Ezekiel 37:22). “[I will tell you] what will befall you at the end of days” – Rabbi Simon said: He showed them the downfall of Gog, just as it says: “It will be at the end of days” (Ezekiel 38:16). Rabbi Yehuda said: He showed them the building of the Temple, just as it says: “It will be at the end of days that the mountain of the House of the Lord will be established” (Micah 4:1). The Rabbis said: He came to reveal the End, but it was concealed from him. Rabbi Yehuda in the name of Rabbi Elazar bar Avina: Two people, the End was revealed to them and was then concealed from them. They are Jacob and Daniel. Daniel – “But you, Daniel, obscure the matters and seal” (Daniel 12:4). Jacob – “what will befall you at the end of days.” “Reuben, you are my firstborn, my strength, and the first of my potency; greater honor and greater power” (Genesis 49:3). “Reuben, you are my firstborn” – this teaches that he came to reveal the End, but it was concealed from him.6He began with, “I will tell you what will befall you at the end of days,” and continued with, “Reuben you are my firstborn,” which does not pertain to the end of days. This shows that the events of the end of days were concealed from Jacob so that he would not reveal them.  This is analogous to a king’s confidant who was passing from the world, and his sons were surrounding his bed. He said to them: ‘Come and I will reveal to you the secrets of the king.’ He lifted his eyes and gazed at the king.7He saw from the king’s expression that he did not want him to reveal the secrets.  He said to them: ‘Be vigilant regarding the honor of the king.’ So, Jacob our patriarch lifted his eyes and saw the Divine Presence standing over him. He said to them: ‘Be vigilant regarding the honor of the Holy One blessed be He.’ The Rabbis said: So, the congregation of Koraḥ was sinking and descending, sinking and descending, until Hannah stood and prayed on their behalf: “The Lord puts to death and brings to life; He lowers to the netherworld and elevates” (I Samuel 2:6).8Just as the congregation of Koraḥ was ostracized until Hannah prayed on their behalf, so too, Reuben was ostracized until Moses restored him. Some commentaries write that this passage should not appear here, and belongs instead at the end of section 4 (see, e.g., Matnot Kehuna). 
“Assemble and hear, sons of Jacob” (Genesis 49:2) – Rabbi Berekhya, sometimes he said it in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya and sometimes he said it in the name of the Rabbis from there:9From Babylon (Rashash; cf. Matnot Kehuna).  From here [it may be derived] that they were scattered and an angel came and assembled them.10This is derived from the fact that after Jacob said “gather” (49:1), the next verse is framed entirely in the third person: “Assemble and hear, sons of Jacob, and listen to Israel your father” (49:2). This is because it was stated by an angel. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: From here, that they were scattered and he assembled them with the Divine Spirit. “And listen to [el] Israel your father” (Genesis 49:2) – Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Pinḥas: Rabbi Yudan said: Listen to the God [El] of Israel your father. Rabbi Pinḥas said: Your father Israel is like a god [el]. Just as the Holy One blessed be He creates worlds, so, your father creates worlds.11The world was created due to the merit of Jacob (Vayikra Rabba 36:4).  Just as the Holy One blessed be He distributes worlds, so, your father distributes worlds.12Jacob’s blessings to his sons influenced the portions they would receive in the Land of Israel, or the spiritual blessings they would receive (see Maharzu; Etz Yosef).  Elazar ben Aḥui said: From here Israel merited the recitation of Shema. When Jacob our patriarch was passing from the world, he called his twelve sons. He said to them: ‘Listen to the God [El] of Israel your father who is in Heaven. Do you, perhaps, have in your heart dissension over the Holy One blessed be He?’13Do you have any doubts about God?  They said: ‘“Hear, Israel” (Deuteronomy 6:4) our father, just as you do not have in your heart dissension over the Holy One blessed be He, so, there is no dissension in our heart. Rather, “the Lord is our God, the Lord is one” (Deuteronomy 6:4).’ He too expressed with his lips and said: ‘Blessed be the name of His glorious kingdom for ever and ever.’ Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Ḥelbo in the name of Rabbi Shmuel: That is why Israel recites early in the morning and late in the evening each day: Hear Israel, our patriarch, from the Cave of Makhpela: The same matter that you commanded us, we still practice it: “The Lord is our God, the Lord is one.”
“Reuben, you are my firstborn” – Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi] would say [an interpretation] of this as praise and [an interpretation] as criticism. You are firstborn, and Esau is firstborn. “Esau went to the field to hunt game [to bring]” (Genesis 27:5) – if he found, fine; if not, “to bring” from what he stole or took by force. But you, “Reuben went during the days of wheat harvest [and found mandrakes in the field and brought them to his mother Leah]” (Genesis 30:14).14Reuven took mandrakes that were ownerless and not from what belonged to others (see Bereshit Rabba 72:2), unlike Esau. “My strength, and the first of my potency” – these are the vanguard in the battle. “Greater honor and greater power” – “their faces were like the faces of lions” (I Chronicles 12:9).15This is written regarding the Gadites, but since the Gadites and Reubenites both formed the vanguard in the conquest of Canaan, it is true of the Reubenites as well (Matnot Kehuna).  He would say [an interpretation] about this as criticism – “Reuben, you are my firstborn” – you are firstborn and I am firstborn.16Jacob bought the birthright from Esau. I, at the age of eighty-four years old, had never seen a drop of seminal emission,17That is, until Jacob married Leah and fathered Reuben. The midrash assumes that Reuben was conceived the first time Jacob had relations with Leah.  but you: “[Reuben] went and lay with Bilha” (Genesis 35:22). “My strength, and the first of my potency” – the first of my toil and the first of my travail.18He was the one with whom Jacob first experienced the travail of raising children. “Greater honor and greater power” – the birthright was yours, the priesthood was yours, the kingship was yours, but now that you sinned, the birthright was given to Joseph, the priesthood to Levi, and the kingship to Judah.  Rabbi Aḥa said: The birthright was not yours. Is it not so that Jacob went to Laban only for Rachel? All the furrows that I plowed in your mother; was it not in Rachel that they should have been plowed?19This is a euphemism for marital relations. Reuben was conceived the first time Jacob had relations with Leah, when he thought she was Rachel, and therefore by right the firstborn should have been from Rachel (Nezer HaKodesh).  Now, the birthright has returned to its owner.  "Impetuous as water, you shall not excel; because you mounted your father's bed; then you desecrated, he who ascended my couch” (Genesis 49:4).  “Impetuous as water, you shall not excel” – Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua: Rabbi Eliezer said: You were impetuous [paḥazta], you sinned [ḥatata], you engaged in harlotry [zanita].20The Hebrew term for impetuous, paḥaz, is an acronym for paḥazta, ḥatata, zanita. Rabbi Yehoshua said: You rebelled [parakta ol], you desecrated [ḥilalta] my couch, your evil inclination stirred [za] within you. Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov said: You trampled [pasata] the law, you forfeited [ḥavta] your birthright, you became a stranger [zar] vis-à-vis your gifts. They said: Even now, we still need the Moda’i. Rabbi Eliezer HaModa’i came and explained: You shuddered [zata], you trembled [ḥaradta], the sin flew [paraḥ] from upon your head.21Reuben shuddered and trembled with remorse for his sin, and therefore was forgiven (Matnot Kehuna).  Rabbi Pinḥas said: You acted like those impetuous ones who break their shins in the water.22They leap before they look. “As water” – the Rabbis say: You sinned through water,23Water in the sense of liquid, a reference to semen. let the one who was drawn from water come and draw you near: “May Reuben live and not die” (Deuteronomy 33:6).24This verse was stated by Moses, who was so called because he was drawn from the water (see Exodus 2:10).  “As water” – just as water is released from place to place, so, you have been released.25Just as water flows, your sin has flowed away from you, i.e., you have been relieved of liability. Alternatively, the implication is: Your privileges have been taken from you (Matnot Kehuna).  Rabbi Eliezer HaModa’i says: One does not make a ritual bath of wine or of oil, but rather of water; so, you made yourself a ritual bath of water and you purified yourself in it.26Rabbi Eliezer HaModa’i is of the opinion that Reuben sinned only in thought but not in deed, as he did not carry out his sinful thoughts. Therefore, his thoughts of sincere repentance restored him to a state of purity, as though he had immersed in a ritual bath (Etz Yosef).  “You shall not excel [totar]” – Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua, both of them said this: Nothing was relinquished [vitarta] for you.27You have not been absolved from punishment. This is derived from the fact that totar and vitarta are derived from the same root in Hebrew.  Rabbi Eliezer HaModa’i says: There will be nothing remaining [vitaron] for you from your sin. “Because you mounted [alita]” – Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua, both of them said: Because you mounted in its plain sense.28They interpret the phrase “because you mounted your father’s bed” in the plain sense as indicating that Reuben literally sinned with Bilha.  Rabbi Elazar said: Because you mounted [alita]29He interprets alita to mean “you elevated [he’eleita],” meaning that Reuben brought about benefit regarding his father’s bed. This occurred in the incident of the mandrakes, which led to the birth of Issachar. – where? In the case of the mandrakes. “Your father’s bed [mishkevei avikha]” – Rabbi Berekhya said: It is not written here: Your father’s bed [mishkav] , but rather, “your father’s beds [mishkevei]”30The term mishkevei, generally translated “bed,” is actually a plural term, such that a literal translation would be “beds.”  – the bed of Bilha and the bed of Zilpa.31Accordingly, not only did Reuben literally sin, but he did so with Zilpa as well as with Bilha.  Rabbi Abbahu, and some say Rabbi Yaakov, in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya Rabba, and Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: We learned: One who is suspect in some matter neither judges in its regard nor testifies in its regard.32Mishna Bekhorot 4:10.  Is it possible that he is destined to be one of the six tribes that were standing on Mount Eval and saying: “Cursed is one who lies with his father’s wife” (Deuteronomy 27:20), and he performed this very act? Rather, he was defending his mother’s honor. All the days that Rachel was alive, her bed was situated alongside the bed of Jacob our patriarch. When Rachel died, Jacob our patriarch took Bilha’s bed and placed it alongside his bed. [Reuben] said: Is it not enough that my mother was jealous during her sister’s lifetime, that she must be so even after her death? He rose and rearranged the beds. Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon disagrees with this and [says that] Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi [said] in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: This is analogous to one who was suspected of selling teruma as non-sacred produce.33Teruma, which could be eaten only by priests and the members of their households, and only in a state of ritual purity, would command a much cheaper price than non-sacred produce.  They investigated him and inspected, but did not find any substance to these claims, and they appointed him in charge of setting prices in the marketplace. “Then you desecrated” – Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua, both of them said: “Then you desecrated” – in its plain sense. “Ascended” – Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua, both of them said: You ascended from your sin. Rabbi Eliezer HaModa’i said: You ascended from your gifts.34Numerous commentaries suggest that the text should read that according to Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua, “you ascended from your gifts,” meaning that due to his sin, Reuben lost out on the priestly gifts, and Rabbi Eliezer HaModa’i says, “you ascended from your sin,” meaning that Reuben repented and achieved atonement for his sin.  The Rabbis say: I am neither distancing you nor drawing you near. Instead I am leaving you in loose abeyance until Moses, in whose regard it is written: “And Moses ascended to God” (Exodus 19:3), comes, and does with you what he perceives to be correct. When Moses came, he began to draw him near: “May Reuben live” (Deuteronomy 33:6). The Rabbis say: The same was true of the congregation of Koraḥ, .35See the end of section 2. 
“Simeon and Levi are brothers; weapons of villainy are their heritage” (Genesis 49:5) “Simeon and Levi are brothers” – brothers of Dina but not brothers of Joseph. “Weapons of villainy are their heritage [mekheroteihem]” – he said to them: These weapons in your possession have been stolen by you. For whom are they fitting? It is for mekheroteihem – for Esau, who sold [makhar] the birthright. “Let my soul not come in their company; with their assembly let my glory not be associated; for in their anger they killed men, and with their will they hamstrung oxen” (Genesis 49:6). “Let my soul not come in their company” – when they come to take counsel in Shitim.36When the Israelite men engaged in harlotry with the Midianite women, in Shitim, one of their leaders, who encouraged this practice, was the prince of the tribe of Simeon, Zimri son of Salu. “With their assembly let my glory not be associated” – when they assemble against Moses in the congregation of Koraḥ.37In these instances, when the Torah identifies the perpetrators of these crimes, who descended from the tribes of Simeon and Levi, the verses do not mention that they are sons of Jacob.  “With their assembly let my glory not be associated” – but for the platform, let my name be associated, when his descendants stand on the platform,38When the Levites stand on the platform to sing as part of the Temple service.  as it is stated: “These are those who stood, and their sons, [from the sons of the Kehatites:] Heiman [the singer, son of Yoel, son of Samuel]” (I Chronicles 6:18). Rabbi Huna, Rabbi Ḥanina, and Rabbi Pinḥas: The three of them said: “Son of Yitzhar, son of Kehat, son of Levi, son of Israel” (I Chronicles 6:23).39In the verse regarding the congregation of Koraḥ, his lineage is traced only as far as Levi, but here the lineage is traced back to Jacob. “For in their anger they killed men [ish]”40The Hebrew ish is in the singular. – this is Ḥamor father of Shekhem. “Hamstrung [ikeru] oxen [shor]” – they undermined [akartun] the security wall [shuran] of proselytes.41As a result of the massacre following the circumcision of the residents of Shekhem, all proselytes will fear that perhaps the same will befall them after their circumcision. Rabbi Ḥunya and Rabbi Yirmeya in the name of Rabbi Aḥiya bar Abba: As it is written: “And with their will they hamstrung [ikeru] oxen” – in order to fulfill the will of your inclination, you undermined [akartem] the security wall of proselytes. “Undermined a trough” – this is one of the matters that they emended for King Ptolemy.42The seventy-two elders assembled by King Ptolemy introduced several emendations into the translation of the Torah into Greek (see Megilla 9a). One of them was that instead of writing, “killed men…and hamstrung oxen,” they wrote, “killed oxen…and undermined troughs,” so Ptolemy would not deem them murderers. “Cursed be their anger, as it is fierce, and their wrath, as it is harsh; I will divide them in Jacob, and I will disperse them in Israel” (Genesis 49:7). “Cursed be their anger, as it is fierce” – Rabbi Ḥunya and Rabbi Azarya in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: [Jacob] increased the number of hot-tempered bohaknin43These were individuals afflicted with bohak, a skin condition characterized by white blotches on the skin. When the blotches appeared on the face, this was considered a sign that the individual was hot-tempered.  among them. That is what is said regarding one who is afflicted with bohak patches, that he is hot-tempered. Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: [This is analogous] to a king who had a son, and the king foresaw that a serpent was destined to bite his son. He said: May the serpent that seeks to bite my son be cursed. So, [Jacob] came to curse them, but he cursed their anger. “Cursed be their anger, as it is fierce, and their wrath [ve’evratam], as it is harsh” – and their transgression [vaaveratam], as it is harsh.44He did not curse them; rather, he cursed the anger and the transgression that was caused by that anger. “I will divide them [aḥalkem] in Jacob” – this is the tribe of Levi: “I am your portion [ḥelkekha] and your inheritance” (Numbers 18:20). “And I will disperse them in Israel” – this is the tribe of Simeon. That is what is said: Most of the poor were from the tribe of Simeon. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: Although we explain and say: “And the cities that you shall give from the holding of the children of Israel, [from the greater you shall increase and from the lesser you shall decrease]” (Numbers 35:8), six cities, they and their open land, all of them were from Simeon.45The Torah states that forty-eight cities were to be given to the Levites (Numbers 35:7–8). Of these, nine were from the tribes of Judah and Simeon (Joshua 21:9-16). The midrash states that six of them were from Simeon and only three from Judah, despite the fact that Simeon was a small tribe and had only seventeen cities.  When they saw that he was rebuking them,46When the rest of Jacob’s sons saw that he had rebuked Reuben, Simeon, and Levi. they began departing to the corners. When he saw that they were departing to the corners, he began calling each and every one.
“Judah, you shall your brothers acknowledge; your hand will be at the nape of your enemies; your father’s sons will prostrate themselves to you” (Genesis 49:8). “Judah, you shall your brothers acknowledge” – your brothers acknowledge you; your mother acknowledges you; I, myself, acknowledge you.47All acknowledge you as worthy of honor and kingship.  Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: All your brothers will be called by your name. A person does not say: I am a Reubenite, I am a Simeonite, but rather: I am a Jew [Yehudi].48Judah is called Yehuda in Hebrew. Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: This is analogous to a king who had twelve sons, and there was one who was more beloved to him than all of them, and he gave him a portion of his own and a portion with his brothers.49Similarly, Judah was its own tribe, and additionally the entire nation became known as Jews.  “Your hand will be at the nape of your enemies” – how many times did Joshua prostrate himself so that the nape would be shown him, but it was not granted to him, as it is stated: “Please, my Lord, what can I say after [Israel] has turned [its nape before their enemies?]” (Joshua 7:8). To whom did He grant it? To David: “My enemies, you had them turn their napes to me” (II Samuel 22:41). Why? Because it was his ancestral endowment, as it is written in his regard: “Your hand will be at the nape of your enemies.” “Your father’s sons will prostrate themselves to you” – here it says: “Your father’s sons will prostrate themselves to you,” but elsewhere, it says: “Your mother’s sons will prostrate themselves to you” (Genesis 27:29). It is that Isaac, because he took only one wife, said: “Your mother’s sons will prostrate themselves to you.” But [when] Jacob [gave blessings], because he took four wives, it is written: “Your father’s sons will prostrate themselves to you.”
“Judah is a lion cub; from prey, my son, you ascended. He crouches, lies like a lion, and like a great cat, who shall rouse him” (Genesis 49:9)? “Judah is a lion cub” – this teaches that he gave him the strength of a lion and the boldness of its cubs. “From prey, my son, you ascended” – from the prey of Joseph you rose and became elevated. From the prey of Tamar, you rose and became elevated.50Judah prevented the killings of both Joseph and Tamar.  “He crouches, lies [ravatz]” – from Peretz until David; “he crouches, lies [shakhav]” (Numbers 24:9) – from David until Zedekiah.51Although both ravatz and shakhav are translated “lies,” shakhav connotes a more secure position, consistent with the time period from King David until Zedekiah (Etz Yosef).  Some say: “He crouches, lies [ravatz]” – from Peretz until Zedekiah; “he crouches, lies [shakhav]” – from Zedekiah until the messianic king.52This view interprets ravatz to be the more secure and relaxed position (Etz Yosef).  “He crouches, lies [ravatz]” – in this world; “he crouches, lies [shakhav]” – in the World to Come. “He crouches, lies [ravatz]” – at a time when there are no enemies; “he crouches, lies [shakhav]” – at a time when there are enemies. He stood against all the enemies.
“The scepter shall not depart from Judah, or the ruler’s staff from between his feet, until Shilo arrives; and to him nations will assemble” (Genesis 49:10). “The scepter shall not depart from Judah” – this is Makhir…53He was the ruler of Gilad, but his descendants mentioned in the verse: “From Makhir rulers descended” (Judges 5:14) were descendants of his daughter, who was married to a man from the tribe of Judah.  “Or the ruler’s staff from between his feet” – as he came and prostrated himself before his feet.54Makhir prostrated himself before Ḥetzron, Judah’s grandson. “Until Shilo arrives” – this is the messianic king. “And to him nations will assemble [yik’hat]” – he will come and blunt [yak’heh] the teeth of the idolaters. Another matter: “The scepter [shevet] shall not depart from Judah” – this is the Sanhedrin, which flogs and subjugates.55The term shevet can also mean a rod with which one flogs (see, e.g., Proverbs 13:24).  “Or the ruler’s staff from between his feet” – these are the two scribes of the judges who would stand before them, one to the right and one to the left. “Until Shilo arrives”56This is understood to mean that the prominent leaders of the Jewish people will always be from Judah.  – they convened and said: Hillel, from whom did he descend? Rabbi Levi said: A genealogical scroll was found in Jerusalem in which it was written: Hillel is from David. Rabbi Ḥiyya Rabba is from Shefatya son of Avital.57Avital was David’s wife. The house of Kalba Savua is from Caleb. The house of Tzitzit HaKeset is from Avner. The house of Koveshin is from Ahab. The house of Yatza is from Asaf. The house of Yehu is from Tzippori. The house of Yanai is from Eli. Rabbi Yosei ben Ḥalafta is from Yonadav son of Rekhav. Rabbi Neḥemya is from Nehemiah the Tirshatite.58Although not all of these families are from the tribe of Judah, the midrash cites the entire report of the genealogical scroll because it demonstrates that prominent leaders in various generations descended from Judah. 
“He will bind his foal to the vine, and to the branch of the vine his donkey’s foal; he launders his garments in wine, and in the blood of grapes, his clothes” (Genesis 49:11). “He will bind his foal to the vine” – Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Neḥemya, and the Rabbis: Rabbi Yehuda said: A vine with a poor yield, one binds a donkey to it;59The vineyards of Judah would be so productive that even a vine with a poor yield would require a donkey to carry its produce.  “and to the branch of the vine [velasoreka],” two of “his donkey’s foal.”60The midrash interprets soreka to refer to a better-producing vine.  “He launders his garments in wine” – this is the milk;61This is a reference to white wine. “and in the blood of grapes, his clothes” – this is the red. Rabbi Neḥemya said: “He will bind his foal [iro] to the vine” – from when He brings the vine62The children of Israel are called a vine (see Psalms 80:9). into His city [iro] – “the city that I have chosen” (I Kings 11:32). “And to the branch of the vine his donkey’s [atono] foal” – steadfast [ha’etanim] children are worthy to be produced from him. The Rabbis say: I am bound to the vine and the vine branch.63God is bound to Israel. “His foal” and “his donkey” – upon the arrival of the one in whose regard it is written: “A humble man riding on a donkey…” (Zechariah 9:9).64Upon the arrival of the Messiah, it will be demonstrated how God is bound to Israel.  “He launders his garments in wine” – as [the Messiah] clarifies matters of Torah for them; “and in the blood of grapes, his clothes” – as he clarifies their errors for them. Rabbi Ḥanin said: Israel does not need the teaching of the messianic king in the future, as it is stated: “Nations will seek him” (Isaiah 11:10) – not Israel. If so, why does the messianic king come, and what does he come to do? To gather the exiles of Israel and to give them thirty mitzvot. That is what is written: “I said to them: If it is proper in your eye, [give Me My fee…So they weighed out My fee: thirty silver coins]” (Zechariah 11:12) – Rav said: These are the thirty mighty men.65They are the righteous individuals in every generation. They are known as silver based on Proverbs 10:20. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: These are thirty mitzvot. They said to Rabbi Yoḥanan: Rav does not accept that the verse is speaking only regarding the nations of the world.66According to Rabbi Yoḥanan the verse is directed at the nations of the world, which is why the Messiah is to introduce new mitzvot to them. Rav did not accept that point and therefore interpreted the thirty coins differently.  According to the opinion of Rav, when Israel merit, their majority will be in the Land of Israel and their minority in Babylon.67The majority of the thirty righteous individuals will be in the Land of Israel, where their spiritual level and influence will be even greater than when they are outside of the land. 
“His eyes shall be red from wine, and his teeth white from milk” (Genesis 49:12) “His eyes shall be red” – Rabbi Azarya, Rabbi Yonatan ben Ḥagai, and Rabbi Yitzḥak ben Rabbi Maryon, and some say in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina: Most of the Sanhedrin were from Judah. What is his source? “His eyes shall be red [and his teeth white from milk]” – as they sit and arrange matters of Torah with their teeth until they express them clearly like milk.68They would constantly review their studies aloud until they understood them with absolute clarity.  Another matter: “His eyes shall be red [ḥakhlili] from wine” – these are the residents of the south, whose eyes are bright [keḥulot] and who possess great strength for Torah study. “And his teeth white [ulven shinayim] from milk” – wine is better for a person of years [leven shanim]69Above the age of forty. than milk is for a baby.  One stood with another in the South. He said to him: ‘If you drank red wine, it is [good] wine. But if you drank white wine, you have drunk lower-quality wine.’
“Zebulun will dwell at the shore of seas, and he will be a shore for ships, and his border will be upon Sidon” (Genesis 49:13). “Zebulun will dwell at the shore of seas” – Rabbi Yehuda bar Naḥman and Rabbi Levi would receive two sela each Shabbat to gather Rabbi Yoḥanan’s congregation.70They would deliver Torah discourses before them until Rabbi Yoḥanan arrived. Rabbi Levi entered and said: That Jonah was from Zebulun; that is what is written: “The third lot arose [for the children of Zebulun].… from there it passed eastward [to Gat Ḥefer]” (Joshua 19:10, 13). And it is written: “In accordance with the word of the Lord, God of Israel, that He spoke by means of His servant Jonah son of Amitai [the prophet, who was from Gat Ḥefer]” (II Kings 14:25) – this [Gat Ḥefer] is the plateaus of Tzippori. Rabbi Yoḥanan entered and expounded: That Jonah was from Asher. That is what is written: “Asher did not dispossess the inhabitants of Akko, or the inhabitants of Sidon […but the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land]” (Judges 1:31–32). And it is written: “Rise, go to Tzarefat that is of Sidon, [and dwell there; behold, I have commanded a widow there to sustain you]” (I Kings 17:9).71There is a tradition that the widow was the mother of the prophet. [The following week,] Rabbi Levi said to Rabbi Yehuda: ‘Although it is your Shabbat, take two sela and allow me to enter.’ Rabbi Levi entered and said: Rabbi Yoḥanan taught us well this past Shabbat. That Jonah was from Asher; however, his father was from Zebulun and his mother was from Asher. “And his border [veyarkhato] will be upon Sidon” – the thigh [yarekh] from which he emerged was from Sidon. They said to him: ‘You have spoken words of consolation standing; you will come to say them while sitting.’72You will succeed Rabbi Yoḥanan as the one who delivers the main Torah discourse. He served as the deliverer of the Torah discourse for twenty-two years. Another matter: “And his border will be upon Sidon” – Rabbi Elazar said: Zevud of the Galilee.73Rabbi Elazar identified Sidon in the verse as the location known in his time as Zevud of the Galilee.  Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Migdal Deyo.
“Issachar is a strong-boned donkey, lying between the sheepfolds. He saw rest, that it was good, and the land, that it was pleasant; and he bowed his shoulder to bear, and he became subject to a tribute of labor” (Genesis 49:14–15). “Issachar is a strong-boned donkey” – just as this donkey, its bones are conspicuous, so, Issachar’s learning is conspicuous upon him. “Lying between the sheepfolds” – these are the three rows of Torah scholars who would sit before them.74There would be three rows of students seated before the members of the Sanhedrin when they engaged in deliberations.  “He saw rest, that it was good” – this is the Torah, as it is stated: “For a good lesson I have given you; [My Torah]” (Proverbs 4:2). “And the land, that it was pleasant” – this is the Torah: “]Its measure is] longer than the earth…” (Job 11:9).75This verse is referring to the Torah. “He bent his shoulder to bear” – the yoke of Torah. “And he became subject to a tribute of labor” – these are the two hundred heads of Sanhedrin who came from the tribe of Issachar… Another matter: “Issachar is a strong-boned donkey” – it is speaking of its land. Just as the donkey is low on this end and low on that end and high in the middle, so [the land of Issachar has] a valley from this side, a valley from that side, and a mountain in the middle.76Mount Tavor “Lying between the sheepfolds” – these are two valleys, the Valley of Pislan and the Valley of Yizre’el. “He saw rest, that it was good” – this is Tinam. “And the land, that it was pleasant [na’ema]” – this is Na’im.77Tinam and Na’im are towns on the border of Issachar. “He bent his shoulder to bear” – the yoke of the Land of Israel.78The yoke of fulfilling the mitzva of settling the land, and of fulfilling the land-based mitzvot. “He became subject to a tribute [mas] of labor” – Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: Rabbi Elazar says: All the tribes left remnants,79They left remnants of the Canaanite nations in their territory. but the tribe of Issachar did not leave any remnants. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: The tribe of Issachar, too, left remnants, but they were payers of taxes [misim]. Rav Asi said: Because they paid taxes, it was as though they were subjugated. Another matter: “Issachar is a strong-boned donkey” – the cows  of Issachar were fat. The tribe of Issachar would take of them, and set out to sea. The nations of the world would see them and would be astounded about their [size]. Israel would say to them: ‘You are astounded about these? Had you seen the owners of these engaging in Torah study, you would be astounded about them.’ Many proselytes would come and convert. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rav Aḥa: “Issachar is a strong-boned [garem] donkey” – Issachar, a donkey caused his existence [legarmeih].80After giving her mandrakes to Rachel, Leah went out to greet Jacob. How did she know when he was coming? She heard his donkey bray. That night, Leah conceived Issachar (see Bereshit Rabba 99:10).
“Dan will avenge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel” (Genesis 49:16). “Dan will avenge his people, as one [ke’aḥad] of the tribes of Israel” – like the most outstanding [kamyuḥad] of the tribes.81Like Judah.¬ Samson, from the tribe of Dan, was a leader who battled against Israel’s enemies like David, who was from the tribe of Judah. Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya said: Had it not cleaved to the most outstanding of the tribes, it would not have produced even the one judge that it produced. Who is that? It is Samson son of Manoaḥ. Like the unique One [kiḥido] of the world – just as the unique One of the world needs no assistance, so, Samson son of Manoaḥ needed no assistance. Rather, “he found a fresh jawbone of a donkey, [and he extended his hand and took it, and he smote one thousand men with it]” (Judges 15:15). What is “fresh [teriya]”? It was [from a donkey that was] three days old.82Thus, it was small and soft relative to other jawbones of donkeys.  Rabbi Avun said: Two [terein] in its womb.83The mother of this donkey had given birth to twins. Therefore, the jawbone was underdeveloped even in comparison to other jawbones from donkeys that had been three days old.  This is the opinion of Rabbi Avun, as Rabbi Avun said: “With the jawbone of a donkey, heaps upon heaps [ḥamor ḥamoratayim]…” (Judges 15:16).84Samson was boasting that he smote one thousand men with a soft jawbone that came from one donkey [ḥamor] of two donkeys [ḥamoratayim], i.e. twins . “He became very thirsty” (Judges 15:18) – one who prattles becomes thirsty. Rabbi Ḥunya and Rabbi Azarya in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Even if there had been a jug of water, he would not have been able to extend his hand and take it.85This was due to his extreme exhaustion as a result of his thirst.  Instead, “He called to the Lord, and he said: You have delivered [this great salvation] at the hand of Your servant; [shall I now die of thirst and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised?]” (Judges 15:18). He said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, if the only difference between them and me is this circumcision, it is sufficient for me not to fall into their hands.’ Immediately, “God split the hollow [hamakhtesh] that was in Leḥi, [and water emerged from it]” (Judges 15:19). Rabbi Levi and the Rabbis: Rabbi Levi said: Leḥi was the name of that place. The Rabbis said: Makhtesh was the name of that place. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana and Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Eliezer: It teaches that the Holy One blessed be He brought him a spring between his teeth. By what merit? It was from the blessing of Moses, who said: “Leaps from [min] the Bashan” (Deuteronomy 33:22) – from between his teeth [mibein shinav],
“Dan will be a serpent on the road, a viper on the path, that bites a horse’s heels, and his rider falls backward” (Genesis 49:17). “Dan will be a serpent on the road” – just as the serpent is found among women,86The serpent approached Eve to entice her to eat from the tree of knowledge, and did not approach Adam.  so, Samson son of Manoaḥ was found among women. Just as the serpent is restrained by oath,87This is a reference to the incantations of snake charmers, which they would utter in order to render the snake harmless.  so, Samson was restrained by oath: “Samson said to them: Take an oath to me” (Judges 15:12).88He let the people of Judah bind him and turn him over to the Philistines after they took an oath that they would not kill him. Thus, he was restrained as a result of an oath that the people of Judah took.  Just as this serpent, all its strength is only in its head, so, Samson: “He told her his whole heart and said to her: If I were shaved, my strength would leave me” (Judges 16:17). Just as this serpent, its venom permeates even after its death, so, “the dead whom he put to death in his death [were more than those he put to death during his life]” (Judges 16:30). “That bites a horse’s heels” – “Summon Samson and let him amuse us” (Judges 16:25). Rabbi Levi said: It is written: “On the roof there were some three thousand” (Judges 16:27). These were the ones who were at the edge of the roof, but those who were behind them, and behind those behind them, no one knows, and you say: “His brothers and the entire household of his father went down, bore him, and went up; they buried him…in the grave of Manoaḥ his father” (Judges 16:31)?89How were they able to locate his corpse among all the rubble and all the corpses? It is because Jacob our patriarch requested mercy regarding this matter: “And his rider falls backward” – let all these items90Let the stones, the chairs, and the corpses fall backward so that Samson’s family could find his body.  fall backward. “For your salvation I hope, Lord” (Genesis 49:18).  Because Jacob our patriarch envisioned him [Samson] and believed that he was the messianic king, when he envisioned that he would die, he said: Will this one, too, die? “For your salvation, I hope, Lord.”  Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Everything is through hope; [relief from] suffering is through hope, sanctification of the Name is through hope, the merit of the patriarchs is through hope, the desire for the World to Come is through hope. Suffering – that is what is written: “Even in the path of Your judgments, Lord, we hoped for You” (Isaiah 26:8) – this is suffering. “For Your name” (Isaiah 26:8) – this is sanctification of the Name. “And Your memory” (Isaiah 26:8) – this is the merit of the patriarchs. “The desire of the soul” (Isaiah 26:8) – this is the desire for the World to Come. Grace is through hope: “Lord, be gracious to us, we have hoped for You” (Isaiah 33:2). Forgiveness is through hope: “For forgiveness is with You” (Psalms 130:4). What is written thereafter? “I have hoped, Lord” (Psalms 130:5). Because Jacob our patriarch envisioned him and believed that salvation would arrive in his days, when he envisioned that he would die, he said: Will this one, too, die? “For your salvation, I hope, Lord.”
“Gad, a troop will slash his enemies, and he will slash their heel” (Genesis 49:19). “Gad, a troop will slash his enemies” – when Israel was conquering and distributing the land, the tribes of Reuben and Gad were with them, and they had left their children when they were young.91These tribes asked for portions of land on the eastern side of the Jordan. Moses agreed, on the condition that they would cross the Jordan and aid the rest of the tribes in conquering the land from the Canaanite nations (see Numbers 32:20–27). The men of these tribes settled their families on the eastern side of the Jordan, aided the rest of the tribes during the fourteen years of conquest and distribution of the land, and only then returned to their families, at the behest of Joshua (see Joshua 22:1–9).  One whom they left at the age of ten, they found him twenty-four years old. One whom they left at the age of twenty they found him thirty-four years old. Three wicked families confronted them: Yetur, Nafish, and Kedma; that is what is written: “In the days of Saul, they waged war with the Hagrites, [who fell into their hand, and they dwelled in their tents across all the east of the Gilad]” (I Chronicles 5:10).92The families of Yetur, Nafish, and Kedma descended from Ishmael (see Genesis 25:13–15). They are called Hagrites after Hagar, Ishmael’s mother.  Rabbi Yehoshua bar Neḥemya said: “In the days of Saul” – this is Joshua. Why does it call him Saul [Sha’ul]? Because the kingship was borrowed [she’ula] in his hand.93Joshua, the Judges, and King Saul were caretakers of the kingdom until the true king, a descendant of the tribe of Judah, would assume the throne. These would grow their hair, and those would grow their hair; these would grow their hair until they would see their children, and these would grow their hair until they would see their fathers.94The men and children of Reuben and Gad would grow their hair as a sign of anguish until they could be reunited.  And the Ishmaelites would grow their hair.95Consequently, when they returned, the fathers had difficulty distinguishing between their children and the Ishmaelites. The Holy One blessed be He placed into the heart of the children, and they would say: ‘Answer us, Lord, answer us, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Israel, answer us.’ That is what is written: “They were aided against them, and the Hagrites…were delivered into their hand, [for they cried out to God in the battle, and He acceded to their entreaty]” (I Chronicles 5:20).  Due to what merit? Rabbi Levi and the Rabbis: The Rabbis said: Due to the blessing of Jacob, who said: “Gad, a troop will slash his enemies,” a troop will come to slash them and they will slash the troop. Rabbi Levi said: Due to the blessing of Joshua. That is what is written: “He said to them, stating: [Return to your tents] with much wealth…[divide the spoils of your enemies with your brethren]” (Joshua 22:8).
“From Asher, his bread is rich, and he will provide royal delicacies” (Genesis 49:20). “From Asher, his bread is rich [shemena laḥmo]” – his land is rich, and his bread is rich,96This is expounded based on the fact that shemena is a feminine adjective while leḥem is a masculine noun. The midrash associates shemena with the land, which is a feminine noun, as it is the land that produces the bread. and he will produce [wearers] of eight [shemona] garments.97Women from the tribe of Asher would marry priests, and their children, who would be priests, would become High Priests, who don eight priestly vestments. “And he will provide royal delicacies” – fine pastries, and oil from unripe olives.98This was a special type of oil used by women as an ointment to remove hair and soften the skin. 
“Naphtali is a doe let loose, who provides pleasant sayings” (Genesis 49:21). “Naphtali is a doe let loose [sheluḥa]” – it is speaking of his land, which is entirely irrigated fields [beit hashelaḥin]. That is what is written: “From Kineret99Kineret is the Hebrew name for the Sea of Galilee. until the sea of the Arava, [the Dead Sea]” (Deuteronomy 3:17). “Kineret” – Rabbi Elazar said: Yeraḥ. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Beit Yeraḥ. Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: Sennaberis and Beit Yeraḥ. Rabbi Levi said: The environs of Beit She’an, whose name is Kineret. Rabbi Berekhya said: The entire coast of the Sea of Tiberias is called Kineret. Why does it call it Ginosar? The Rabbis say: The gardens of princes [ganei sarim]. Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: It is based on: “From Naphtali one thousand captains [sarim]” (I Chronicles 12:35). That is what is written: “She sent and called Barak…[from Kedesh Naftali].… I will draw toward you, to the Kishon Stream” (Judges 4:6–7).100The midrash interprets the phrase “Naphtali is a doe let loose [sheluḥa]” to allude to the fact that its fighters, led by Barak, were sent [nishleḥu] by Deborah to fight against the invading Canaanites.  The school of Rabbi Natan said: “Pleasant [sayings]” – this is song that they sang: “Deborah sang” (Judges 5:1). Rabbi Yosei son of Rav Yaakov bar Idi in the name of Rav Aḥa: “Who provides pleasant [shafer] sayings” – sayings of the shofar, as they would beautify [meshaprin] sayings that were given with the shofar and its blasts.101They would beautifully analyze and present the words of the Torah, which was given amidst a shofar blast (see Exodus 20:15).  You find that when they ascended to bury our patriarch Jacob, the Hittites came to contend with them over the burial. Naphtali ran like a doe, brought the deed from Egypt, and overcame [veshiper] them.
“Joseph is a fruitful tree, a fruitful tree alongside a spring; branches run over the wall” (Genesis 49:22). “Joseph is a fruitful [porat] tree ” – a son who broke faith [shehefer] with his brothers; a son whose brothers broke faith with him;102Joseph brought his father evil reports about his brothers (Genesis 37:2); they later sold him into slavery (Genesis 37:28).  a son who defied [shehefer] his master’s wife; a son whose master’s wife turned against [shehefera] him.  Rabbi Avin said: The son who achieved greatness through cows [parot].103Joseph rose to prominence after interpreting Pharaoh’s dream, which featured cows. Joseph is the son who achieved greatness through produce [perot]. “Joseph is a fruitful tree” – Joseph achieved greatness. Regarding them all it is written: “The maidservants approached…” (Genesis 33:6)104See Bereshit Rabba 90:4. – this is what he said to him: I must repay you for that eye.105Jacob wanted to compensate Joseph for having obscured Rachel from Esau’s eye. “Branches [banot] run [tzaada] over the wall…” – you find that when Joseph emerged to rule over Egypt, the daughters [banot] of kings would peer through the slits and would cast upon him bracelets, pendants, nose rings, and rings so he would lift his eyes and look at them. Nevertheless, he did not look at them. The Holy One blessed be He said: You did not lift your eyes and look at them; as you live, you will cause your daughters106The daughters of Tzelofḥad. to have a foothold [tze’ida] in the Torah. What is a foothold? A Torah portion.107A passage regarding the laws of inheritance (Numbers 27:1–11) was stated as a response to the request of the daughters of Tzelofḥad. 
“They embittered him and shot him [varobu], and archers hated him” (Genesis 49:23). “They embittered him” – a son who embittered his brothers; a son whose brothers embittered him; a son who embittered his master’s wife. But I do not know who did the most. The verse states: “And shot him.”108By emphasizing that they shot him, the verse indicates that they embittered him more than he embittered them. “Archers [baalei ḥitzim] hated him” – these are people who were in his company,109Joseph’s brothers (Matnot Kehuna); alternatively, Potifar’s wife and the other members of the household (Etz Yosef).  who cast upon him items as hard as an arrow. “Sharp arrows of the warrior, [burning coals of the broom bush]” (Psalms 120:4) – why did it see fit to liken them to an arrow more than any other weapon? It is because all weapons strike from nearby, and this strikes from afar. So it is that evil speech spoken in Rome kills in Syria. And it is not all coals, but like the coals of the broom bush, as all coals extinguish from within, but the coals of the broom bush, even though it is extinguished from without it continues to burn from within. So, anyone who receives [believes] evil speech; even if you go and placate [the victim] and he is placated, it still burns from within. There was an incident involving a certain broom bush in which they ignited a fire and it burned twelve months: winter, summer, and winter.
“His bow [kashto] sat firm [be’eitan], and the arms of his hands were golden, by the hands of the mighty One of Jacob, from there, from the Shepherd of the stone of Israel” (Genesis 49:24). “His bow sat firm” – this is Aksilo, which produces during the sign of Sagittarius.110Aksilo – until [ad] Kislev Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Who caused you to be rejected from the mighty ones [ha’eitanim]?111That you are not included as one of the patriarchs (Maharzu; cf. Matnot Kehuna, Etz Yosef).  It is the passion [kashyut] that you experienced with your master’s wife.112This is according to the opinion that initially Joseph wished to consort with her. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: The bow was drawn until taut and was then loosened.113Joseph experienced arousal for Potifar’s wife but then subdued his passion and became relaxed once again.  That is what is written: “His bow [kashto] sat firm” – his passion [kashyuto]. “And the arms [zero’ei] of his hands were golden [vayafozu]” –Yitzḥak said: His seed [zaro] scattered [nitpazeru[ and emerged through his fingernails. “From the God of your father, and He shall help you, and the Almighty, and He shall bless you; blessings of the heavens above, blessings of the depths lying beneath, blessings of breasts and of womb” (Genesis 49:25). “By the hands of the mighty One of Jacob” (Genesis 49:24) – Rav Huna in the name of Rav Matana: He saw the image of his father’s face, and it cooled his blood. Rabbi Menaḥama said in the name of Rabbi Ami: He saw the image of his mother’s face, and it cooled his blood. “From there, from the Shepherd of the stone of Israel” (Genesis 49:24) – he saw the stone of Israel,114A reference to his mother, Rachel, who was the cornerstone of the home of Jacob, i.e. Israel (Matnot Kehuna).  and it cooled his blood. Who caused this? “From the God of your father.” “Above [me’al]” – this is Azkarot that is in Baal.115The reference is to a location of high altitude at the edge of the border of the territory of Joseph in the Land of Israel (Etz Yosef).  “Lying beneath” – this is Beit She’an, in Beit HaSherai.116A low-lying area in the territory of Joseph. Both Azkarot and Beit She’an had excellent produce (Etz Yosef; cf. Rabbi David Luria).   “Blessings of breasts and of womb” – Rabbi Luleyani ben Turin in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: He blessed him with the offspring of animals. You [must] say [so]: Go out and see, whose udder is in the place of its womb? You find it only in an animal. Rabbi Abba bar Zutera said: Come and see to what extent our patriarch Jacob was fond of Rachel. Even when he came to bless her son, he made him secondary to her: “Blessings of breasts and of womb” – may the breasts that nursed this one and the womb that produced this one be blessed. “The blessings of your father surpass the blessings of my parents until the edge of the eternal hills; they shall be on the head of Joseph, on the head of the elect among his brothers” (Genesis 49:26). “The blessings of your father” – those who taught me and those who conceived me. “Until the edge [taavat] of the eternal hills [givot olam]” – what the hills of the world [givot olam]117The patriarchs. desired [nitavu]. “They shall be on the head of Joseph” – here it says “they shall be,” but elsewhere it says: “It shall come [tavota] [upon the head of Joseph]” (Deuteronomy 33:16). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: You will eat its produce [tevuata] in this world, and the principal is intact for the World to Come. “On the head of the elect [nezir] among his brothers” – as his brothers distanced him and caused him to be isolated [nazir].118The term nazir can mean separating, or something that is separated (see, e.g., Leviticus 22:2; Isaiah 1:4), and so too, Joseph was separated from his brothers.  Rabbi Yitzḥak of Migdal said: You are the crown of your brothers. Rabbi Levi said: He was an actual nazirite, as Rabbi Levi said: All twenty-two years that he did not see his brothers, he did not taste the taste of wine. They, too, did not taste wine until they saw him. That is what is written: “They drank and became intoxicated with him” (Genesis 43:34) – with him they drank; without him they did not drink.

=== 99 | 99 ===
“Why are you agitated [teratzedum], ridged [gavnunim] mountains?” (Psalms 68:17) – Rabbi Yosei HaGelili and Rabbi Akiva: Rabbi Yosei HaGelili interpreted the verse regarding mountains. When the Holy One blessed be He came to give the Torah at Sinai, the mountains were running and contending with one another. This one was saying: ‘The Torah will be given upon me,’ and that one was saying: ‘The Torah will be given upon me.’ Tavor came from Beit Elim, Carmel from Aspamya.1Some say this is Spain.  That is what is written: “As I live, the utterance of [the King,] the Lord…for it is like Tavor among the mountains, [and like Carmel that reaches the sea]” (Jeremiah 46:18). This one says: ‘I was summoned,’ and that one says: ‘I was summoned.’ The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘Why are you agitated…mountains…”? All of you are mountains, but all of you are gavnunim, just as it says: “Or a hunchback [giben] or a dwarf” (Leviticus 21:20).2These are mentioned among the list of blemishes that disqualify a priest from performing service in the Temple. The midrash links the word gavnunim to giben, such that God is understood to have told the mountains that they were blemished and unfit for the giving of the Torah.  Idol worship has been performed on all of your peaks.’ But Sinai, upon which no idol worship was performed, was “the mountain that God desired for His abode” (Psalms 68:17). [Consequently,] “the Lord descended upon Mount Sinai” (Exodus 19:20). Nevertheless, “the Lord will surely dwell forever” (Psalms 68:17) in the eternal Temple.3Although Sinai was chosen for the giving of the Torah, the Temple was built on a different mountain, Mount Moriah.  Rabbi Akiva interpreted the verse regarding the tribes. When Solomon said that he would build the Temple, the tribes were running and contending with one another. This one was saying: ‘It will be built within my boundaries,’ and that one was saying: ‘It will be built within my boundaries.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to them: ‘“Why are you agitated” (Psalms 68:17)? All of you are tribes, all of you are righteous, but you are gavnunim. What is gavnunim? It is thieves. All of you were party to the sale of Joseph. But in Benjamin, who did not participate in the sale of Joseph, is “the mountain that God desired for His abode” (Psalms 68:17). Likewise, you find that four hundred and seventy years earlier, the sons of Koraḥ were prophesying that it was destined to be within the portion of Benjamin. That is what is written: “My soul longs, indeed it yearns, [for the courtyards of the Lord]” (Psalms 84:3).4The continuation of the psalm states: “They will be seen before God in Zion” (84:8), which is located in the territory of the tribe of Benjamin.  Likewise it says: “Indeed, we heard it in Efrata…” (Psalms 132:6).5The previous verse states: “Until I find a place for the Lord, a dwelling place for the Mighty One of Jacob,” a reference to the Temple.  Rabbi Yehuda says: The Temple was built in the portion of Judah, as it is written: “[That] nobleman [efrati] from Bethlehem of Judah” (I Samuel 17:12). Rabbi Shimon says: In [the portion] of the one who died in Efrata. Who died in Efrata? Rachel. Could it have been in the portion of Joseph who was one of her sons? The verse states: “We found it in the fields of the forest” (Psalms 132:6) – in the portion of one who was likened to a beast of the forest. Who was likened to a beast of the forest? Benjamin, as it is written: “Benjamin is a wolf that mauls” (Genesis 49:27).
“For the Lord God will not do anything, [unless He has revealed His secret to His servants the prophets]” (Amos 3:7) – Jacob paired two with two, and Moses paired two with two.6They paired two of the tribes against two of the kingdoms that will conquer Israel. Judah opposite the kingdom of Babylon – this one was likened to a lion and that one was likened to a lion. This one was likened to a lion: “Judah is a lion cub” (Genesis 49:9); and that one was likened to a lion: “The first was like a lion” (Daniel 7:4). Into the hands of whom would the kingdom of Babylon fall? Into the hands of Daniel, who descended from Judah.  Benjamin opposite the kingdom of Media – this one was likened to a wolf, and that one was likened to a wolf. This one was likened to a wolf: “Benjamin is a wolf that mauls” (Genesis 49:27); and that one was likened to a wolf: “Behold another, a second beast, resembling a bear [ledov]” (Daniel 7:5) – Rabbi Ḥanina said: Ledov is written, but it was called dev.7The word dov, bear, is sometimes written with a vav. In this instance it is written without a vav, such that it can be read dev, which is Aramaic for ze’ev, wolf. Thus, the midrash is saying that Media is compared to a wolf.  This is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan, as Rabbi Yoḥanan said: “Therefore, a lion from the forest smote them” (Jeremiah 5:6) – this is Babylon; “a wolf of the deserts will plunder them” (Jeremiah 5:6) – this is Media. Into the hands of whom did the kingdom of Media fall? Into the hands of Mordekhai, who descended from Benjamin. Levi opposite the kingdom of Greece – this one is the third tribe, and that one is the third kingdom.8The third of the four kingdoms in the vision of Daniel (Daniel, ch. 7).  This one has three letters, and that one has three letters.9Levi and Greece [Yavan] are each spelled with three letters in Hebrew.  These sound horns,10The priests, from the tribe of Levi, would sound the shofar when sacrificing offerings. and those sound trumpets.11The Greeks would sound trumpets when going out to war. These wear hats,12The reference is to the headdresses that were part of the priestly vestments. and those wear helmets. These wear trousers, and those wear knee breeches. Those13The Greeks are many in number, and these are few in number. The many came and fell into the hand of the few. By what merit? It was due to the blessing of Moses, who said: “Crush the loins of those who rise against him” (Deuteronomy 33:11). Into whose hands did the kingdom of Greece fall? Into the hands of the Hasmoneans, who were from Levi. Joseph opposite the kingdom of Edom – this one has horns, and that one has horns. This one has horns – “the firstborn bull is his majesty” (Deuteronomy 33:17); and that one has horns – “and concerning the ten horns that were on its head” (Daniel 7:20). This one forsook licentiousness, and that one cleaves to licentiousness. This one was scrupulous regarding his father’s honor, and that one demeaned his father’s honor.14Joseph heeded his father and went to check on his brothers even though he knew they hated him (Genesis 37:13–14). The nation of Edom descends from Esau, who said: “The days of mourning for my father will approach, and I will kill my brother Jacob” (Genesis 27:41). Thus, Esau was looking forward to his father dying so that he could kill Jacob.  Of this one it is stated: “I fear God” (Genesis 42:18); of that one it is stated: “And he did not fear God” (Deuteronomy 25:18).15This is stated in reference to Amalek, who descended from Esau. Into whose hands will the kingdom [of Edom] fall? Into the hands of the one anointed for war, who comes from Joseph.16The messiah, son of Joseph.  Rabbi Pinḥas in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: There is a tradition that Esau will fall only into the hands of Rachel’s descendants. That is what is written: “[Therefore, hear the schemes of the Lord that He has devised against Edom…] will the young of the flock not drag them?” (Jeremiah 49:20). Why does he call them the young of the flock? Because they are the youngest of the tribes.
“Benjamin is a wolf that mauls; in the morning he devours prey, and in the evening he divides spoils” (Genesis 49:27). “Benjamin is a wolf that mauls” – this is referring to his judges. Just as the wolf snatches, so Ehud snatched Eglon’s heart. That is what is written: “Ehud came to him, and he was sitting [alone] in his cool upper chamber” (see Judges 3:20). “He said: [I have] a secret matter…” (Judges 3:19). He said to him: ‘So did the Master of the world say to me: Take a sword and plunge it into your innards.’ “The parshedona emerged” (Judges 3:22) – his excrement. “Ehud emerged into the vestibule [hamisderona]” (Judges 3:23) – Rabbi Yudan said: A portico that obscures the light. Rabbi Berekhya said: There the ministering angels sat in order [mesudarin]. Another matter: It is referring to his kingdom.17Jacob was referring to King Saul, who descended from Benjamin. Just as the wolf snatches, so Saul snatched the kingdom, as it is stated: “Saul secured [lakhad] the kingdom over Israel” (I Samuel 14:47).18Lakhad has the connotation of capturing something that belonged to another, and the tribe of Judah had been granted the right to the kingship (see Etz Yosef). “In the morning19At the beginning of his reign. he devours prey” – “he waged war against all his enemies all around” (I Samuel 14:47). “In the evening he divides spoils” – “Saul died for his trespass that he trespassed [against the Lord]” (I Chronicles 10:13).20Toward the end of his reign, signified by evening, Saul became spoils for his enemies. It is referring to his kingdom. Just as the wolf snatches, so Esther snatched the kingdom. That is what is written: “Esther was taken [to the king’s palace” (Esther 2:8). “In the morning it devours its prey” – “On that day, King Aḥashverosh gave the house of Haman to Queen Esther” (Esther 8:1). “In the evening he divides spoils” – “Esther appointed Mordekhai over the house of Haman” (Esther 8:2). It is referring to his land. Just as the wolf snatches, so Benjamin’s land snatches its produce.21The produce grows very quickly there. “In the morning it devours its prey” – this is Jericho, whose produce would ripen first. “In the evening he divides spoils” – this is Beit El, whose produce would ripen last. Rabbi Pinḥas interprets the verse regarding the altar. Just as the wolf snatches, so the altar snatches the offerings. “In the morning it devours its prey” – “the one lamb you shall offer in the morning” (Numbers 28:4). “In the evening he divides spoils” – “and the second lamb you shall offer in the afternoon” (Numbers 28:4).
“All these are the tribes of Israel, twelve, and this is what their father spoke to them, and he blessed them; each man in accordance with his blessing he blessed them” (Genesis 49:28). “All these are the tribes of Israel, twelve…” – it is already written: “And he blessed them”; why, then, does the verse state: “Each man in accordance with his blessing he blessed them”? It is because he blessed them [by comparing] Judah to a lion, Dan to a serpent, Naphtali to a doe, Benjamin to a wolf, and he then included them all and rendered them lions and rendered them serpents. Know that it is so: “Dan will be a serpent” (Genesis 49:17), and he is then called a lion. That is what is written: “Dan is a lion cub” (Deuteronomy 33:22). This is to realize what is stated: “All of you is fair, my love, and there is no blemish in you” (Song of Songs 4:7).
“Jacob called to his sons, and he said: Gather, and I will tell you what will befall you at the end of days. Assemble and hear, sons of Jacob, and listen to Israel your father” (Genesis 49:1–2).  Why did he call them? He sought to reveal to them the End. It is written: “He removes speech from the trusted, and takes the sense of elders” (Job 12:20). Who are the “trusted” and the “elders”? They are Isaac, Jacob, Aaron, and Moses. In Moses’s regard it is written: “In all My house he is trusted” (Numbers 12:7). Likewise, in Aaron’s regard: “The Torah of truth was in his mouth” (Malachi 2:6). But because they said: “Hear now, defiant ones” (Numbers 20:10), they were sentenced because of their speech – “therefore, you will not bring this assembly [into the land that I have given them]” (Numbers 20:12). That is, “He removes speech from the trusted.”22Here the midrash interprets the verse to mean: “He removes the trusted due to speech,” meaning that God removed Moses and Aaron from their projected positions of leading Israel into the land due to their sin involving speech.  “And takes the sense of elders” – this is Isaac and Jacob. Isaac was fond of Esau, whom the Holy One blessed be He hated, and he said to him: “Prepare delicacies for me” (Genesis 27:4), and sought to bless him and reveal the End to him. What did the Holy One blessed be He do? He stripped him of his sense, and he did not know,23God removed the divine spirit from Isaac.  but he began trembling, as it is stated: “Isaac was overcome [with very great trembling]” (Genesis 27:33). When he was unable to find what to say, he said: “Indeed he shall be blessed” (Genesis 27:33). Jacob, too, sought to reveal the End to his sons, as it is stated: “Gather, and I will tell you what will befall [you at the end of days]”; and the Holy One blessed be He concealed it from him, and he began saying: “Reuben, you are my firstborn” (Genesis 49:3). That is, “and takes the sense of elders.”
“Gather, and I will tell you” – he appointed them as elders, just as it is stated: “Gather to Me seventy men of the elders of Israel” (Numbers 11:16). “Gather” is stated, and “assemble and hear” is stated – he informed them that they would be exiled twice. “Reuben, you are my firstborn, my strength, and the first of my potency; greater honor and greater power. Impetuous as water, you shall not excel [totar]; because you mounted your father’s bed; then you desecrated, he who ascended my couch” (Genesis 49:3–4). “Reuben, you are my firstborn” – you are my firstborn, you are similar to me. I lived eighty years and did not see even one drop of semen. “My strength and the first of my potency” – you were my first drop. “Greater honor and greater power” – three crowns were in your possession: priesthood, kingship, and the birthright. Priesthood, as it is written: “Greater honor [se’et],” and se’et is nothing other than priesthood, as it is written: “Aaron lifted [vayisa] his hands” (Leviticus 9:22). Kingship, as it is written: “And greater power,” and power is nothing other than kingship, as it is written: “He will give strength to His king” (I Samuel 2:10). The birthright, as it is written: “Reuben, you are my firstborn.” And you lost them. What caused you [to lose them]? “Impetuous [paḥaz] as water, you shall not excel.” For what is it an acronym? Rabbi Eliezer says: You were impetuous [paḥazta], you cast [hishlakhta]24Although hishlakhta begins with a heh whereas paḥazta has a ḥet, since these sounds are produced in a similar way and sound similar, they are considered interchangeable for homiletical purposes (Etz Yosef; see Rabbi David Luria).  the yoke from upon your neck, your evil inclination moved [za] against you. Rabbi Yehoshua says: You were impetuous [paḥazta], you sinned [ḥatata], you engaged in licentiousness [zanita]. Rabbi Levi said: Transpose paḥaz – you trembled [zata], you became anxious [ḥaradta], and the sin departed [paraḥ] from you.25He did not actually engage in relations with Bilha, and he repented even for the thought of doing so. Alternatively, paḥaz – you trampled [pasata] the law, you profaned [ḥilalta] your birthright, you became a stranger [zar].26The term stranger is used as a contrast to priesthood; a non-priest is known as a stranger [zar].  “As water” – what is “as water”? If a person pours a flask of water and it spills, nothing at all remains [mishtayer] in it, but if it was of oil or of honey, something would remain in it. That is why it says: “As water you shall not totar. “Because you mounted [alita] your father’s bed” – when you brought mandrakes and your mother was saying to her sister: “Was the taking of my husband insignificant” (Genesis 30:15), you caused my bed to be elevated [alita] and my couch to be desecrated.27This view interprets the term “mounted [alita]” to mean elevated, in a positive sense. When Reuben brought mandrakes to his mother (Genesis 30:14), Rachel asked for some of them. Leah responded: “Was the taking of my husband insignificant that you would take also of my son’s mandrakes?” and Rachel responded: “Therefore he will lie with you tonight in exchange for your son’s mandrakes” (Genesis 30:15). In this exchange, Leah was considered to have respected and elevated Jacob’s bed and Rachel was considered to have denigrated it (Etz Yosef; see Bereshit Rabba 98:4).  Because you caused it to be desecrated, you will be a pariah until Moses, in whose regard it is written: “Moses ascended” (Exodus 19:3), will come and release you and draw you near. That is what is written: “May Reuben live” (Deuteronomy 33:6).28This was stated by Moses. 
“Simeon and Levi are brothers; weapons of villainy are their heritage” (Genesis 49:5).  Reuben went out and his ears were slumped. [Jacob] began calling: “Simeon and Levi are brothers” – brothers for degradation. He said to them: ‘You were brothers for Dina, as it is written: “Two sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dina’s brothers, each took his sword” (Genesis 34:25), but not brothers for Joseph, as you sold him.’ Rabbi Simlai said: In Reuben’s regard it is written: “In order to deliver him from their hand, to restore him to his father” (Genesis 37:22). Reuben was not involved in Joseph’s sale. Judah, too, said to them: “What profit [is there if we kill our brother]?” (Genesis 37:26). These were the eldest; consequently, the two of them sold him.29Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah were the oldest sons of Jacob. If Reuben and Judah were not involved in the sale, it must have been Simeon and Levi who organized it.  Know that it is so, for when they descended to Egypt, [Joseph] took from them none other than Simeon, as it is stated: “He took Simeon from them [and incarcerated him before their eyes]” (Genesis 42:24). That is why [Jacob] called the two of them as one. “Weapons of villainy” – what are weapons of villainy? He said to them: ‘They have been stolen by you; they are not yours. They belong to Esau, in whose regard it is written: “By your sword you shall live”’ (Genesis 27:40). Those are weapons of villainy, and villainy is none other than Esau, as it is stated: “For the villainy to your brother Jacob” (Obadiah 1:10).30Thus, Jacob was saying that the weapons of Simeon and Levi belong to Esau, who is the subject of the verse in Obadiah.  “Their heritage [mekheroteihem]” – Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It is a Greek expression, makhirin, makhirin>. Some say: “Mekhuroteihen” – their residences [meguroteihem], just as it says: “Your origins [mekhorotayikh] and your birthplace” (Ezekiel 16:3). “Let my soul not come in their company; with their assembly let my glory not be associated; for in their anger they killed men, and with their will they hamstrung oxen” (Genesis 49:6). “Let my soul not come in their company” – when Zimri will arise and perform that act with Kozbi, let my name not be mentioned there, as it is stated: “The name of the man of Israel who was slain…[Zimri, son of Salu, a prince of a patrilineal house of the Simeonites]” (Numbers 25:14).31The name of Jacob is not mentioned.  “With their assembly let my glory not be associated” – when Koraḥ will assemble his congregation to dispute, let my name not be associated with them, but rather, “Koraḥ, son of Yitzhar, son of Kehat, son of Levi” (Numbers 16:1), but it did not say: “Son of Jacob.” “For in their anger they killed men [ish]” – did they kill one man [ish]; is it not written: “They killed all the males” (Genesis 34:25)? It is that they were all considered before the Holy One blessed be He like one man. Likewise it says: “Behold [hen], nations may be regarded like a drop from a bucket…” (Isaiah 40:16). What is hen? In the Greek language, hen is one. Likewise it says: “You will smite Midian as one man” (Judges 6:16). Similarly, “the horse and its rider He cast into the sea” (Exodus 15:1) – like one horse and its rider.32The singular terms are used in order to indicate that God cast all the many horses and riders of the Egyptian army into the sea as though they were just one.  “Cursed is their anger, as it is fierce, and their wrath, as it is harsh; I will divide them in Jacob, and I will disperse them in Israel” (Genesis 49:7). “Cursed is their anger” – he cursed only their anger. Likewise, the wicked Bilam says: “How will I curse, where God has not cursed” (Numbers 23:8)? If at a time of anger he cursed only their anger, can I come to curse them?33If Jacob was angry at Simeon and Levi and yet, with divine spirit, Jacob cursed only their anger and not them, can I, Bilam, curse the Israelites?  “I will divide them in Jacob” – how so? Twenty-four thousand fell from the tribe of Simeon in [the incident of] Zimri, and its widows were twenty-four thousand. They were divided into two thousand for each and every tribe, as it is stated: “I will divide them in Jacob.” Everyone who circulates among the doorways [to beg] is from the tribe of Simeon. The Holy One blessed be He said: Levi too will circulate. What did the Holy One blessed be He do? He provided him with his sustenance cleanly, and yet Jacob’s edict was fulfilled. The Holy One blessed be He elevated [Levi] and gave him one-tenth,34The first tithe of produce.  and he circulates and says: ‘Give me my portion.’ That is why it is stated: “I will divide them in Jacob.”
“Judah, you shall your brothers acknowledge; your hand will be at the nape of your enemies; your father’s sons will prostrate themselves to you” (Genesis 49:8). Simeon and Levi, too, emerged with their faces crestfallen, and Judah feared that [Jacob] would mention the incident of Tamar to him. He began calling him: “Judah, you shall your brothers acknowledge [yodukha].” The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You confessed [hodeita]35Hodeita has the same root in Hebrew as the term yodukha.  in the incident of Tamar; your brothers will acknowledge you to be king over them.’ “Your hand will be at the nape [beoref] of your enemies” – this is David, who descended from him, and in whose regard it is written: “My enemies, You had them turn their backs [oref] to me” (II Samuel 22:41). “Your father’s sons will prostrate themselves to you” – Isaac said to Jacob: “Your mother’s sons” (Genesis 27:29), as he had only one wife, Rebecca. But Jacob, who had four wives, said to Judah: “Your father’s sons.” “Judah is a lion cub; from prey, my son, you ascended. He crouches, lies like a lion; and like a great cat, who shall rouse him” (Genesis 49:9). “Judah is a lion cub; from prey, my son, you ascended” – from the prey of Joseph, as you said: “What profit [is there if we kill our brother and conceal his blood?]” (Genesis 37:26). Alternatively, “from prey” – from the prey of Tamar, as you saved four lives – you, Tamar, and her two sons.36When Tamar’s pregnancy became known, Judah sentenced her to death, thinking she had committed sexual immorality. When she proved to him that he was the father, he conceded that she was innocent and ordered her life spared, after which she gave birth to twins. See Genesis, chapter 38.  The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You saved four; I will save four of your descendants – Daniel, Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya.’ He called him four names: “Judah is a lion cub”; “he crouched and lay like a lion, and like a great cat, [who shall rouse him?]” (Numbers 24:9).37Thus, Judah is referred to as a lion, a cub, again a lion, and a great cat.  “The scepter shall not depart from Judah, or the ruler’s staff from between his feet, until Shilo arrives; and to him nations will assemble” (Genesis 49:10). “The scepter shall not depart from Judah” – this is the royal throne: “Your throne is of God forever; the staff of righteousness” (Psalms 45:7) – when? “The ruler’s staff from between his feet” – with the arrival of the one to whom kingship belongs, of whom it is written: “With feet will the crown [of pride of the drunkards of Ephraim] be trampled” (Isaiah 28:3). “Until Shilo arrives” – the one to whom kingdom belongs [shelo]. “And to him nations will assemble [yik’hat]” – the one who dulls [mak’heh] the teeth of all the nations, as it is stated: “They will place hand over mouth; their ears will be deafened” (Micah 7:16). Alternatively, “and to him nations will assemble” – the one for whom the nations of the world will assemble, as it is stated: “The root of Yishai, that stands as a banner of the peoples, nations will seek him” (Isaiah 11:10).38In other words, the verse here is a reference to the Messiah, as is the verse in Isaiah.   “He will bind his foal to the vine, and to the branch of the vine his donkey’s foal; he launders his garments in wine, and in the blood of grapes, his clothes” (Genesis 49:11). “He will bind his foal to the vine” – when He will gather all of Israel, which is called “vine,” as it is stated: “You transported a vine from Egypt” (Psalms 80:9). “And to the branch of the vine his donkey’s foal” – this is the one in whose regard it is written: “He is humble, and riding upon a donkey…” (Zechariah 9:9). Another matter: “And to the branch of the vine his donkey’s foal” – it is the one who plants all of Israel like a vine branch. How does he do so? “I will sprinkle pure water upon you” (Ezekiel 36:25). “He launders his garments in wine” – as wine is abundant within his borders. And in the blood of grapes, his clothes [suto]” – suto is nothing other than error, as it is written: “If your brother…will entice you [yesitekha]…” (Deuteronomy 13:7).39This is referring to one who incites another to engage in idol worship. If they err in halakha, it will be laundered within his domain.40It will be clarified before the Great Sanhedrin, in the Temple, which is located in the tribal portion of Judah. “His eyes shall be red from wine, and his teeth white from milk” (Genesis 49:12). “His eyes shall be red [ḥakhlili] from wine” – from here you learn that wine is abundant in his domain, like a person who says to another: ‘Pour for me, and again, as my palate is sweet to me, a sweet palate for me, for me [ḥeikh li li].’ “And his teeth white from milk” – due to the merit of the Torah, “if your sins will be like scarlet, they will be whitened as snow” (Isaiah 1:18).
“Zebulun will dwell at the shore of seas, and he will be a shore for ships, and his border will be upon Sidon” (Genesis 49:13). “Zebulun will dwell at the shore of seas” – Zebulun preceded Issachar, although the birth of Issachar is recorded before Zebulun. Why so? It is because Zebulun would engage in commerce, and Issachar would engage in Torah, and Zebulun would come to feed him. Therefore, [Zebulun] was granted precedence. The verse said in his regard: “It is a tree of life for those who uphold it” (Proverbs 3:18). Issachar would gather [merchandise], and Zebulun would transport it on ships, sell it, and bring him all his needs. Likewise, Moses says: “Rejoice, Zebulun, in your departure” (Deuteronomy 33:18) – why? It is because “Issachar, in your tents” (Deuteronomy 33:18) – [the tents] are yours, as you assist him to reside in them.
“Issachar is a strong-boned donkey, lying between the sheepfolds” (Genesis 49:14). “Issachar is a strong-boned donkey” – Issachar brings by donkey and Zebulun by ships,41Issachar brings merchandise by donkey, and Zebulun takes it and transports it by ship to foreign markets.  as it is stated: “He will be a shore for ships” (Genesis 49:13). Another matter: “Issachar is a strong-boned [garem] donkey” – a donkey caused [garam] him: How did Leah know that Jacob was coming?42See Genesis 30:16–18.  The donkey brayed, she heard its voice, and went out to greet him. Another matter: “Issachar is a strong-boned donkey” – just as a donkey bears the burden, so, Issachar bears the Torah. “Lying between the sheepfolds” – these are the students who sit on the ground before the Sages, as it is stated: “If you lie between the sheepfolds” (Psalms 68:14).43This is understood to represent rows of students sitting on the ground. Alternatively, the reference is to the continuation of the verse, which states: “The wings of the dove are covered with silver, and its pinions with the shimmer of gold,” and the silver and gold are understood to refer to Torah. Some commentaries assert that the text is corrupted and should reference Judges 5:16.  “He saw rest, that it was good, and the land, that it was pleasant; and he bowed his shoulder to bear, and he became subject to a tribute of labor” (Genesis 49:15). “He saw rest, that it was good” – this is Torah, as it is written: “For a good lesson I have given you” (Proverbs 4:2). “He became a subject to a tribute of labor ” – what is the tribute? This is a halakha regarding which they erred and they would seek it from them.44When scholars would be unsure about a halakha, they would consult the sages of Issachar.  Likewise it says: “Sent into the valley [ba’emek] on foot” (Judges 5:15) – in the depths [beomka] of halakha.
“Dan will avenge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel” (Genesis 49:16). “Dan will avenge his people, [as one [ke’aḥad] of the tribes of Israel]” – like the most special [kamyuḥad] of the tribes, which is Judah.  Another matter: “As one” – like the single One of the world, who needs no assistance in war, as it is stated: “I have trodden the winepress alone” (Isaiah 63:3), so, Samson, who descended from Dan, did not need others to assist him – without a sword, with but the jawbone of a donkey. “Dan will be a serpent on the road, a viper on the path, that bites a horse’s heels, and his rider falls backward” (Genesis 49:17). “Dan will be a serpent on the road, a viper” – all the beasts go in pairs, but the serpent goes on the road only alone. Another matter: “Dan will be a serpent on the road” – just as a serpent is vindictive, so was Samson, as it is stated: “Let me take vengeance once” (Judges 16:28). When Jacob saw him, he said: “For your salvation, I await, Lord” (Genesis 49:18). This one will not bring salvation, which will come only from Gad, as it is stated: “Gad, a troop will slash his enemies, and he will slash their heel [akev]” (Genesis 49:19), [alluding] to the one who will come at the End [be’akev]: “Behold, I am sending Elijah the prophet to you” (Malachi 3:23), who was from the tribe of Gad. That is why it says: “And he will slash their heel [akev].”
“From Asher, his bread is rich, and he will provide royal delicacies” (Genesis 49:20). “From Asher, his bread is rich” – as his daughters are fair, as it is stated: “As women will deem me fortunate” (Genesis 30:13).45The verse is interpreted here to mean, “I will be deemed fortunate because of my daughters,” an allusion to their great beauty.  Likewise it says: “He will be the favorite of his brothers” (Deuteronomy 33:24) – because of his daughters. “And he will provide royal delicacies [maadanei]” – as his daughters are worthy of royalty, as it is stated: “Who clothed you in scarlet with finery [adanim]” (II Samuel 1:24).46This verse is written regarding King Saul. “Naphtali is a doe let loose, who provides pleasant sayings” (Genesis 49:21). “Naphtali is a doe let loose” – this is the Ginosar valley, which is as quick as a doe, in ripening produce. “Who provides pleasant sayings” – as his land is blessed, as it is stated: “Naphtali, his desire is satisfied, [and he is full with the blessing of the Lord]” (Deuteronomy 33:23). They produce first fruits for kings and speak fair words to them, and if [the kings] were displeased with them, they would become reconciled to them. “Joseph is a fruitful tree, a fruitful tree alongside a spring; branches run over the wall” (Genesis 49:22). “Joseph is a fruitful tree [ben porat]” – but is Porat not Joseph?47The literal connotation of the verse is that Joseph is the son of Porat. What is ben porat? It is that he was elevated because of cows [parot].48The reference is to the cows in Pharaoh’s dream.

=== 100 | 100 ===
“Know that the Lord is God” (Psalms 100:3) – Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon and Rabbi Aḥa, Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: “Know that the Lord is God, He made us, and we did not [velo]” (Psalms 100:3) create ourselves, unlike Pharaoh, who said: “My river is mine and I made myself” (Ezekiel 29:3). Rabbi Aḥa said: “Know that the Lord is God, He made us and to Him [velo]” we devote ourselves.1The word velo can be written with an alef, in which case it means “and not,” or it can be written with a vav, in which case it means “and to Him.” Traditionally, the word velo in this verse is written with an alef but read as though it is written with a vav. Rabbi Yehuda’s interpretation is based on the spelling with an alef and Rabbi Aḥa’s interpretation is based on the spelling with a vav.   “Jacob concluded commanding his sons, he drew his feet to the bed, and he expired, and he was gathered to his people” (Genesis 49:33). “Jacob concluded commanding his sons” – three commands were stated regarding the matter:2This phrase means that there are three verses (Genesis 49:29, 33, 50:12) that describe Jacob’s commands to his sons. The midrash will interpret this to mean that he issued three distinct commands, as explained in the next paragraph. Some commentaries assert that this phrase should not appear here in the text but rather at the beginning of the next paragraph, where the midrash explains what the three commands were (Matnot Kehuna; Yefeh To’ar).  “He commanded them and said to them: I am to be gathered to my people” (Genesis 49:29) – if you merit for yourselves, you will merit me.3If you fulfill what I command, I will always be with you. If not, when I depart from the world, I will go to my fathers, as it is stated: “I am to be gathered to my people” (Genesis 49:29). When he departed, immediately: “His sons did to him just as he commanded them” (Genesis 50:12) – they embalmed him and took him up [to Canaan] in his bier.
“Jacob concluded commanding his sons.” “His sons did to him just as he commanded them” (Genesis 50:12).4These, in addition to Genesis 49:29, cited above, are the verses which mention Jacob’s commands to his sons.  The first was regarding idol worship, just as it says: “Because he willingly followed an order” (Hosea 5:11).5The verse refers to following the orders of false prophets to engage in idolatry.  The second was regarding blessing the Name,6This is a euphemism for blaspheming the name of God. just as it says: “When he blasphemes the name he shall be put to death” (Leviticus 24:16). The third was regarding bearing the bier. He said to them: ‘Pay attention that no uncircumcised one will touch my bier, so as not to cause the Divine Presence to depart from upon me. Instead, act according to the following arrangement: Bear me, three from the north, three from the south, three from the east, three from the west. Just as you do for me, so you are destined to be arranged into four banners in the wilderness, with the Divine Presence in the center.’  Rabbeinu [Yehuda HaNasi] commanded three matters before his death. He said to them: ‘Do not eulogize me in the small towns, do not move my widow from my house, and those who tended to me during my lifetime shall tend to me in my death.’ Do not eulogize me in the small towns – because of dispute.7The towns would quarrel over which would eulogize him, and which villagers and townspeople would have to travel to the neighboring town. Alternatively, the towns would become crowded with the residents of the surrounding countryside. Rather, he wanted them to eulogize him only in the big cities.  Do not move my widow from my house – is it not a baraita: A widow who said: ‘I do not wish to move from my husband’s house,’ the heirs cannot say to her: ‘Go to your father’s house and we will sustain you,’ but rather, they sustain her and provide her with residence in accordance with her standing. It is, rather, because it is typical for the Nasi to have all his belongings from the public, but this one, because he did not benefit from the public at all, that is why he said: ‘Do not move my widow from my house.’8If Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi’s home had been provided by the public due to his position, his wife would not have been able to continue living there after his death. But since he lived in a private home, his wife had the right to remain there.  Rabbi Dostai said: So they will not say to her that the house of the Nasi is dedicated to the office of the Nasi.9He commanded that his wife not be moved in order to demonstrate to the masses that his home had not been provided by the public. It was his private home and not a publicly-funded residence that would then belong to the next Nasi.  ‘Those who tended to me during my lifetime shall tend to me in my death’ – Rabbi Ḥanina of Tzippori said: Like Yosei HaPinos and Yosei HaParti. Rabbi Ḥizkiya added two more:10He added two more commands that Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi issued before his death.  ‘Do not put on me many shrouds’ and ‘Have my coffin be perforated to [be open to] the ground.’ Do not put on me many shrouds – because they attract maggots. Have my coffin be perforated to [be open to] the ground – due to decomposition.11This will cause the body to decompose faster, which is better for the soul. The statement of Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi] indicates: Not in the way that a person goes does he come.12When a person is resurrected, he does not arise dressed as he is when buried. If he would, Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi would have requested to be well dressed even if that would attract maggots.  The statement of the Rabbis is that they say: As a person goes, so he comes. Rabbi Yoḥanan commanded and said: ‘Do not clothe me not in white and not in black, but in colored garments. If I am summoned to be with the righteous, the wicked will not know me. If I am summoned to be with the wicked, the righteous will not know me.’13Rabbi Yoḥanan was not sure if he would be summoned with the righteous, who appear in white, or the wicked, who appear in black. He therefore asked to be buried in a different color so as to avoid a situation in which he was dressed in white but summoned with the wicked, which would be embarrassing, or a situation in which he was dressed in black but summoned with the righteous, which might appear as a distortion of Divine justice.  Rabbi Yoshiya would command and say: ‘Clothe me in fine white garments.’ They said to him: ‘Your master said this, and you said that?’14Rabbi Yoshiya was a disciple of Rabbi Yoḥanan.  He said to them: ‘Need I be ashamed of my actions?’  Rabbi Yirmeya would command and say: ‘Clothe me in fine white garments, clothe me in socks. Place my staff in my hand and my sandals on my feet and place me adjacent to the road, so if I am summoned, I will arise prepared.’  That is what Rabbi Yona said in the name of Rabbi Ḥama: A man’s feet are his guarantors to bring him wherever he is summoned.15Some commentaries suggest that the words “that is what” should not appear in the text, as this is an independent statement, not connected to what preceded it. The meaning is that a person is destined to die in a particular location, and his feet will carry him there whether he likes it or not. See Sukka 53a. Thus, Jacob did not return to Canaan after the famine, as he was destined to die in Egypt (Etz Yosef). 
“Joseph fell upon his father’s face, wept upon him, and kissed him” (Genesis 50:1).  “Joseph commanded his servants, the physicians, to embalm his father. The physicians embalmed Israel” (Genesis 50:2). “Joseph fell…Joseph commanded his servants” – why did Joseph die before his brothers? Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi] and the Rabbis, Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi] said: Because he embalmed his father. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Was I not able to preserve My righteous one? Did I not say to him: “Do not fear [ti’re’i], worm of Jacob” (Isaiah 41:14) – worm, do not see [tiri] Jacob?’16God had decided to ensure that Jacob’s body would not decay, so it was unnecessary for Joseph to embalm him.  The Rabbis say: It was he [Jacob] who commanded them to embalm him. That is what is written: “His sons did to him [just as he commanded them]” (Genesis 50:12). According to the opinion of Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi], it works out well.17It is understood why Joseph died before his brothers.  According to the opinion of the Rabbis, [it is because] almost five times, Judah said: “Your servant, my father, your servant, my father” and Joseph heard and remained silent.18On four occasions, Judah referred to Jacob as Joseph’s servant, and Joseph remained silent: Genesis 44:24, 27, 30, 31. Additionally, on one occasion (Genesis 43:28) it is stated that the brothers referred to Jacob in this way in speaking to Joseph, although it is not explicitly stated that it was Judah who said it. 
“Forty days were completed for him, as so are the days of embalming completed. Egypt wept for him for seventy days” (Genesis 50:3).  “The days of his weeping passed, and Joseph spoke to Pharaoh’s household, saying: Please, if I have found favor in your eyes, please, speak in the ears of Pharaoh, saying” (Genesis 50:4). “Forty days were completed for him…the days of his weeping passed” – here it says: “The days of his weeping passed,” but elsewhere it says: “The days of weeping of the mourning of Moses concluded” (Deuteronomy 34:8). It is, rather, that Moses, because he did not have others weeping, it is written in his regard “concluded.” But Jacob, because he had others weeping,19When Jacob was carried to Canaan for burial, the residents of Canaan joined in mourning him.  it is written in his regard: “The days of his weeping passed.” “Joseph spoke [to Pharaoh’s household]” – to whom did he say it? It was to the nursemaid, to appease the queen, and the queen would appease the king. Why did he himself not enter? Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin in the name of Rabbi Shmuel: Because a mourner may not enter the king’s palace.
“My father administered an oath to me, saying: Behold, I am dying; in my grave that I dug [kariti] for myself in the land of Canaan, bury me there. I will go up now and bury my father, and I will return” (Genesis 50:5). “My father administered an oath to me, saying…that I dug for myself” – when Jacob stood with Esau,20When they divided Isaac’s estate. he said to him: ‘What do you want, money or a burial plot?’ He said to him: ‘What would this man do with a burial plot? Give me money and take the burial plot for yourself, but you must heap up much money in exchange for it.’ That is what is written: “In my grave that I acquired [lakaḥti] for myself” is not written here, but rather, “that I dug [kariti]” – I heaped up [hikarti] [money] in exchange for it. “Pharaoh said: Go up and bury your father, in accordance with the oath he administered to you” (Genesis 50:6). “Joseph went up to bury his father, and all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt, went up with him” (Genesis 50:7). “And all of Joseph’s household, and his brothers, and his father’s household. They left only their children, their flocks, and their cattle in the land of Goshen” (Genesis 50:8). “He took up with him both chariots and horsemen, and the camp was very substantial” (Genesis 50:9). “Pharaoh said: Go up…Joseph went up…” – until this point it was for lament, from this point on it was for battle21He was prepared for potential battle with Esau.  –“he took up with him both [gam] chariots and [gam]22The term gam comes to include something that is not explicitly written in the verse. horsemen…” Rabbi Yitzḥak said: The great One of the world was there, and some say: The glory of the One who lives forever.23Clearly God accompanied them as He had promised Jacob: “I will go down with you to Egypt and I will take you up again” (Genesis 46:4). The point is that the Divine Presence was visible.
“They came to the threshing floor of Atad that is beyond the Jordan, and they lamented a very great and substantial lament there and observed mourning for his father for seven days” (Genesis 50:10). “The inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the mourning at the threshing floor of Atad, and they said: This is a substantial mourning for Egypt. Therefore, he called it Avel Mitzrayim, which is beyond the Jordan” (Genesis 50:11). “They came to the threshing floor…” – Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: We have reviewed the entire Bible and did not find a place whose name is Atad. Is there a threshing floor for a thorn bush [atad]? Rather, these were the Canaanites. It teaches that they were fit to be trampled like a thorn bush. By what merit were they spared? It is due to the kindness that they performed with Jacob our patriarch. What kindness did they perform? Rabbi Elazar said: They untied the belt of their loins.24They allowed their garments to hang down, which is inappropriate for labor or battle, as a sign of mourning. Reish Lakish said: They untied the ties of their packs. Rabbi Yehuda bar Shalom said: They pointed with their finger and said: “This is a substantial mourning for Egypt.” The Rabbis said: They straightened their postures.25This was a sign of respect (Matnot Kehuna). Alternatively, they stretched themselves in order to see Jacob’s bier (Maharzu).  The matters can be inferred a fortiori: If these, who did not move, neither with their hands nor with their feet, but merely because they pointed with their finger, were delivered from punishment, Israel, who perform kindness with their prominent ones and their common ones, with their hands and with their feet, all the more so. Rabbi Abahu said: Those seventy days between missive and missive26The first missive called for the utter destruction of the Jewish people (Esther 3:12), and the second missive allowed the Jews to assemble and defend themselves (Esther 8:9). correspond to the seventy days that the Egyptians performed kindness with Jacob our patriarch.27Jacob’s merit saved the Jews from destruction, but this merit was suspended for seventy days, corresponding to the days on which the Egyptians mourned Jacob. 
“They lamented…there…” – from where is it derived that mourning is seven days? Rabbi Abba cites it from here: “He…observed mourning for his father for seven days” (Genesis 50:10), and we derive a matter [of halakha] from before the giving of the Torah. Reish Lakish in the name of bar Kappara cites it from here: “From the entrance of the Tent of Meeting you shall not emerge seven days…” (Leviticus 8:33)28Some suggest that the correct reading of the text references a different verse: “And from the entrance of the Tent of Meeting you shall not emerge, that you not die, as the anointing oil of the Lord is upon you” (Leviticus 10:7). This verse, stated to Aaron and his remaining sons after the death of Nadav and Avihu, is interpreted to mean that just as they were anointed with the anointing oil for seven days, they were to observe seven days of mourning for Nadav and Avihu (Etz Yosef).  – just as you were anointed with the anointing oil for seven days, you, too, observe for your brothers seven days. Rabbi Hoshaya cites it from here: “At the entrance of the Tent of Meeting you shall remain day and night, seven days…” (Leviticus 8:35) – just as the Holy One blessed be He observed seven days [of mourning] for His world, you, too, observe seven days [of mourning] for your brothers, as Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: The Holy One blessed be He mourned for His world for seven days.29Before God destroyed the world with the flood, He observed seven days of mourning, alluded to in Genesis 7:10. Similarly, He commanded Aaron and his sons Elazar and Itamar to observe seven days of mourning in advance of the deaths of Aaron’s other two sons, Nadav and Avihu (see Jerusalem Talmud Moed Katan 3:5).  Rabbi Yoḥanan cites it from here: “Please let her not be like a corpse” (Numbers 12:12); rather, “she shall be quarantined for seven days” (Numbers 12:14). Just as the days of quarantine are seven, so the days of mourning are seven. One of the Sages said this [statement] of Rabbi Yoḥanan before Reish Lakish, but he did not accept it. Why did he not accept it? He said: ‘There he treats it as quarantine and here he treats it as confirmed leprosy, as Rabbi Abahu came in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan and said: “Please let her not be like a corpse” – just as the days of a corpse are seven, so the days of a confirmed leper are seven.’30Upon the appearance of certain types of leprous spots, a priest will command that the individual go into quarantine for seven days. If the symptoms worsen, the individual will then be declared to be a confirmed leper (see, e.g., Leviticus 13:1–8). Reish Lakish did not accept the teaching reported in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan that treated Miriam’s leprosy as worthy of quarantine, which the Torah says is seven days, because he heard a different statement in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan that treated her leprosy as a case of confirmed leprosy, about which the Torah does not explicitly say that the term is seven days. It should be noted that halakha does not actually limit the term of a confirmed leper to seven days, and commentaries here interpret the statement of Rabbi Yoḥanan, based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Moed Katan 3:5), to mean that just as the days one is impure from a corpse do not count toward the days of a nazirite vow, the same is true of the days one spends as a confirmed leper (see Yefei To’ar; Etz Yosef; Maharzu).  Rabbi Yirmeya and Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba in the name of Reish Lakish: “I will transform your festivals into mourning” (Amos 8:10) – just as the days of the festival are seven, so the days of mourning are seven. Rabbi Ḥiyya said: The eighth31Shemini Atzeret. is a festival in and of itself. If so, just as [Shemini] Atzeret is one day, so, mourning is so. They said to him: From here it is derived regarding distant tidings.32One who receives tidings that an immediate relative died a long time ago (the midrash will define how much time that is), observes mourning for only one day. So it is taught, near tidings have seven and thirty,33One observes a seven day period of intense mourning, followed by a less intense period of mourning for an additional twenty-three days, for a total of thirty days of mourning.  a distant one does not have thirty and seven. There are some who teach: Distant tidings are after twelve months, near ones are within thirty. Rabbi Abahu said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: The halakha is in accordance with the one who says: Near tidings are within thirty days and distant ones after thirty days. Rabbi Berekhya and Rabbi Yona in the name of Reish Lakish in the name of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi: It is written: “The days of weeping of the mourning of Moses concluded” – days – two, weeping – seven, mourning – thirty. There are those who transpose – days – seven, weeping – two, mourning – thirty. From this, [the mourning periods of] seven and thirty [days are derived], but what is two? It is that if he [the mourner] is extremely poor, on the first and second [days] he does not perform labor, but on the third, he performs [labor] privately, but they said: May a curse come upon his neighbors, who required him to do so.34His neighbors should have supported him so that he could observe all seven days of mourning without performing labor.  Bar Kappara said: Even on the third [day] he shall not perform [labor] at all, because it is the intense period of mourning. Bar Kappara taught: The most intense time of mourning is only on the third day. For three days, the soul is hovering over its grave, believing that it will return [to the body]. When it sees that the radiance of the face has changed, it goes and leaves it. That is what is written: “But his flesh on him is painful, [and his soul mourns over him]” (Job 14:22). In the future, the mouth and the stomach will contend with one another. The mouth says to the stomach: ‘Everything that I stole and robbed, I placed in you.’ After three days [the stomach] bursts and says to it: ‘Here is everything that you stole and robbed,’ as it is stated: “The pitcher is broken at the spring” (Ecclesiastes 12:6). What about donning tefillin? Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua, Rabbi Eliezer says: On the first [day of mourning] one does not don, and on the second one dons, but if a new face comes,35A visitor the mourner has not yet seen since the beginning of the mourning period.  he removes them. Rabbi Yehoshua says: On the first and the second he does not don and on the third he dons, and if a new face comes, he does not remove them. If on the second day he does not don, is it necessary to say: One whose deceased is laid out before him is exempt…from prayer and from tefillin?36Mishna Berakhot 3:1.  It is since it taught this it taught that.37Since the Mishna taught that he is exempt from prayer, it mentioned that he is also exempt from the mitzva of tefillin. The ruling of Rabbi Ze’eira: Rabi Yirmeya in the name of Rabbi Ze’eira and Mar Ukva in the name of Shmuel:38Some commentaries assert that the text should read: Rabbi Ze’ira said in the name of Rabbi Yirmeya in the name of Rav, and Rabbi Ze’ira said in the name of Mar Ukva in the name of Shmuel (see Etz Yosef).  The halakha is in accordance with Rabbi Eliezer regarding donning, and in accordance with Rabbi Yehoshua regarding removing. Rabbi Ze’eira raised a dilemma: What is the ruling for one to don on the second day in accordance with Rabbi Eliezer and what is the ruling to have Rabbi Eliezer like Rabbi Yehoshua not to remove?39Can one combine the leniencies of the two opinions and don tefillin on the second day and not remove them if a new person arrives? The midrash does not cite a resolution to this dilemma.  From where is it derived that there is no mourning on Shabbat? Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin in the name of Rabbi Levi cites it from here: “The blessing of the Lord, it will enrich, without adding sadness with it” (Proverbs 10:22). “The blessing of the Lord, it will enrich” – “God blessed the seventh day” (Genesis 2:3). “Without adding sadness [etzev] with it” – this is mourning, just as it says: “The king is grieving [ne’etzav] over his son” (II Samuel 19:3). Rav said: [On Shabbat,] turning around and righting are compulsory, uncovering and putting on are voluntary. Turning the rip around, and righting the bed are compulsory; uncovering the head and putting on shoes are voluntary.40During the seven day mourning period, the mourner wears a torn garment and does not wear leather shoes. In Talmudic times, a mourner would also turn over his bed and cover his head as signs of mourning. Rav states that on Shabbat, one must turn the garment around so that the tear is not visible, and one must turn the bed right side up. However, although one may uncover the head and wear leather shoes on Shabbat, it is not obligatory to do so.  Shmuel said: Uncovering, turning around, and righting are compulsory; putting on, conjugal relations, and washing are voluntary. Uncovering the head, turning the rip around, and righting the bed are compulsory; putting on shoes, having conjugal relations, and washing are voluntary. One student of Shmuel engaged in conjugal relations and went and washed. [Shmuel] said to him: ‘I said it to you as the halakha, did I, perhaps, say [it should be put] into practice?’41Although Shmuel held it was permitted for a mourner to engage in conjugal relations and to wash himself on Shabbat, he felt it was nonetheless inappropriate.  He became angry at [the student] and [the student] died. Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta would relate the praise of Rabbi Meir before the residents of Tzippori. He said to them: ‘[He is a] great man, a holy man.’ One time he [Rabbi Meir] found them standing in a line on Shabbat.42To comfort mourners.  He said to [the mourners]: ‘Greetings to you.’ They said to him [Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta]: ‘Is this the one whom you praise?’43One is ordinarily forbidden to extend greetings to mourners, so after Rabbi Meir did so, the residents of Tzippori asked Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥalafta how he could have praised Rabbi Meir.  He said to them: ‘Know how praiseworthy that man is, as he came to inform us that there is no mourning on Shabbat.’  Rabbi Hoshaya went to a certain place. He found them standing in a line on Shabbat. He said to them: ‘I do not know what your custom is; nevertheless, greetings to you, in accordance with the custom of our place.’  The two sons of Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi], one of them went out with his head covered and wearing shoes, and the other went out barefoot with his head uncovered.44Rabbi Guryon's brother was in mourning for one of his relatives. This occurred on Shabbat during the seven days of mourning. During the week, a mourner would ordinarily have his head covered and would not be wearing shoes.  Rabbi Yona went to pay a visit to Rabbi Guryon’s brother.45He went to comfort the mourner on Shabbat. He came out to him wearing shoes. He said to him:46Rabbi Yona said to Rabbi Guryon’s brother, who had come out to greet him.  ‘Tell Rabbi Guryon your brother that we do not learn actions from a small man.’47The fact that Rabbi Guryon’s brother wore shoes on Shabbat was not sufficient to establish that as the halakha, even if he did so on Rabbi Guryon’s instruction.  Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa went to pay a visit to Rabbi Tanḥum bar Ḥiyya of Kefar Agin.48This occurred on Shabbat, while Rabbi Tanḥum was in his seven days of mourning (see Etz Yosef).  He came out to him dressed in santroi. What is santroi? It is a garment that is not rent. [Rabbi Ḥanina] said to him: ‘Is this the way to act? Can this be?’ [Rabbi Tanḥum] said to him: ‘This is what Rabbi Yoḥanan would do.’ [Rabbi Tanḥum] said to him: ‘Pray for me.’ [Rabbi Ḥanina] said to him: ‘May this breach be broken.’ [Rabbi Tanḥum] said to him: ‘Do not say that,49That could be interpreted as having the breach broken into several breaches. but rather, may your breach be repaired.’ It is taught: A group and a family are comparable to a dome made of stones. If you remove one stone, all of it is destabilized. If you place one stone on, all of it is stabilized. So, all seven days, a sword is outstretched.50There is danger to the entire family during the seven days following the death of one member.  Until thirty days it hovers, and it does not return to its scabbard until twelve months. Rabbi Elazar said: If a son is born in the family, it immediately eases. If so, why does one visit on Shabbat? Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Due to enmity.51One visits the mourner to prevent enmity by ensuring that the mourner will not feel that he is being overlooked.
“Joseph returned to Egypt, he, and his brothers, and everyone who went up with him to bury his father, after he buried his father. Joseph's brothers saw that their father had died, and they said: Perhaps Joseph will hate us, and will repay us for all the evil that we did to him” (Genesis 50:14-15). “Joseph returned to Egypt…” Rabbi Levi and Rabbi Yitzḥak,  said: It is because he did not invite them to the meal.52Joseph did not invite his brothers to dine with him as he had before Jacob’s death. This led the brothers to think that he harbored enmity toward them and would want to take revenge against them.  Rabbi Tanḥuma said: His intention was only for the sake of Heaven. He said: ‘In the past, father would seat me above Judah, who is king, and above Reuben, who is firstborn. Now, it is improper for me to sit above them.’ But that is not what they said, but rather: “Perhaps Joseph will hate us.” Rabbi Yitzḥak said: He went and peered into that pit.53While in Canaan to bury Jacob, Joseph peered into the pit that his brothers had thrown him into and from which he was removed and sold into slavery.  Rabbi Tanḥuma said: His intention was only for the sake of Heaven.54He went to recite a blessing for having been saved from the snakes and scorpions that inhabited that pit (see Shabbat 22a; Bereshit Rabba 84:16).  But that is not what they said, but rather: “Perhaps Joseph will hate us.” “They instructed to tell Joseph, saying: Your father instructed before his death, saying, so say to Joseph: Please, forgive the transgression of your brothers and their sin as they did evil to you. And now, please forgive the transgression of the servants of the God of your father. Joseph wept as they spoke to him” (Genesis 50:16–17). “They instructed to tell Joseph, saying: Your father instructed…” It is taught: Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel says: Great is peace, as even the tribes spoke fabricated matters in order to impose peace between Joseph and the tribes. That is what is written: “They instructed to tell Joseph, saying…” Where did he instruct? We do not find that he instructed. “So say to Joseph…[Joseph wept as they spoke to him]” – he said: ‘This is how my brothers are suspicious of me?’ “His brothers too, went and fell before him and they said: Behold, we are your slaves” (Genesis 50:18). “His brothers too, went” – you wanted one of us as a slave, here all of us are your slaves.
“Joseph said to them: Fear not, for am I in place of God? You intended me harm; God intended it for good, in order to engender as it is today, to keep many people alive. And now, fear not; I will sustain you, and your children. He comforted them, and spoke to their heart” (Genesis 50:19–21). “Joseph said to them…You intended me harm…And now, fear not…and spoke to their heart” – is there any person who speaks to the heart? It is, rather, words that comfort the heart. He said to them: ‘You were likened to the dust of the earth. Just like the dust of the earth; can anyone eliminate the dust of the earth? You were likened to the beasts of the field; can anyone eliminate the beasts of the field? You were likened to the stars; can anyone eliminate the stars? Ten stars sought to eliminate one star and were unable to overcome it. Can I change the natural order of the world [and eliminate] twelve tribes? For they correspond to the twelve hours of the day and correspond to the twelve constellations in the firmament.’ Rabbi Simlai said: [Joseph said to them:] ‘You are the body and I am the head – “it will come upon the head of Joseph” (Deuteronomy 33:16). If the body is taken, what good is the head? Moreover, before you descended to here, they would call me a slave. After you descended to here, I informed them of my distinguished lineage. If this is so, would I kill you? Could that be? If I were to kill you, they would say: This one cannot be trusted. He did not keep faith with his brothers; with whom will he keep faith? [Or] they would say: They were not his brothers, but a group of lads whom he saw and called his brothers. Know that this is so, for ultimately he concocted a pretext and killed them.’  [Joseph] said: ‘Shall I become an antagonist to my father; my father begets and I bury? Shall I become an antagonist to the Holy One blessed be He; the Holy One blessed be He blesses and I diminish?’ That is what is written: “He comforted them.”  The matters may be inferred a fortiori: If Joseph, who spoke gentle words to the heart of the tribes, was able to comfort them so, when the Holy One blessed be He will come to comfort Jerusalem, all the more so. That is what is written: “Comfort, comfort My people…” (Isaiah 40:1).
“Joseph resided in Egypt, he, and his father's household; Joseph lived one hundred and ten years” (Genesis 50:22). “Joseph resided in Egypt…” – there are six pairs whose years were equal: Rebecca and Kehat, Levi and Amram, Joseph and Joshua, Samuel and Solomon, Moses and Hillel the elder, Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Zakkai and Rabbi Akiva. Moses spent forty years in Pharaoh’s palace, forty years in Midyan, and he served Israel for forty years. Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Zakkai engaged in commerce for forty years, studied Torah for forty years, and served Israel for forty years. Rabbi Akiva was an ignoramus for forty years, studied Torah for forty years, and served Israel for forty years.
“Joseph administered an oath to the children of Israel, saying: God will remember you, and you shall carry up my bones from here” (Genesis 50:25). “Joseph administered an oath to the children of Israel…” – I would think [he demanded they bring his bones to Canaan] immediately. The verse states: “[You shall bring my bones up from here] with you” (Exodus 13:19) – when you will ascend. From where is it derived that they took up the bones of all the tribes with them? As it is stated: “With you.” “Joseph died at the age of one hundred and ten years. They embalmed him, and he was placed in a coffin in Egypt” (Genesis 50:26). “Joseph died at the age of one hundred and ten years. They embalmed him” – who embalmed him? Rabbi Pinḥas and Rabbi Yehuda in the name of Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda said: The physicians embalmed him. Rabbi Pinḥas said: The tribes embalmed him. That is what is written: “They embalmed him, and he was placed in a coffin in Egypt.” Who are they? “These are the names of the children of Israel who came to Egypt” (Exodus 1:1).
Variant reading: “This is what their father Jacob spoke to them” (Genesis 49:28) is not written here, but rather, “their father.” Another man like me is destined to bless you and from the place that I concluded, he will begin, as it is stated: “This is what [their father] spoke.” When Moses stood, he began with “this,” as it is stated: “This is the blessing [that Moses, the man of God, blessed the children of Israel with before his death]” (Deuteronomy 33:1).  [Jacob] said to them: ‘I will say these blessings to you. When will they take effect? When you receive the Torah,’ as it is stated: “This is the Torah” (Deuteronomy 4:44). That is, “this is what their father spoke to them.” With that which their father Jacob concluded [in blessing] them, Moses began [blessing] them. Moses said: “I gain insight from the elders, [for I uphold Your edicts]” (Psalms 119:100). Isaac, when he blessed Jacob, and said to him: “And God Almighty [will bless you]” (Genesis 28:3), with what did he conclude? “Isaac summoned Jacob” (Genesis 28:1).55This is called the conclusion because it was the beginning of Isaac’s concluding blessing to Jacob, after he had already blessed him in Genesis ch. 27. See also a variant reading in Devarim Rabba 11:1.  Jacob began from where his father had concluded, as it is stated: “Jacob summoned his sons” (Genesis 49:1), and he concluded when he blessed them with “this” – “this is what [their father] spoke [to them]” (Genesis 49:28). Moses began from where Jacob had concluded: “This is the blessing” (Deuteronomy 33:1). With what did Moses conclude? “Happy are you Israel” (Deuteronomy 33:29). David, too, when he came to recite a psalm, began from where Moses had concluded: “Happy is the man” (Psalms 1:1). That is, “I gain insight from the elders.” “They came to the threshing floor of Atad, that is beyond the Jordan, and they lamented a very great and substantial lament there, and he observed mourning for his father seven days” (Genesis 50:10).
“And he observed mourning for his father seven days” – why are seven [days] observed? It is corresponding to the seven days of the wedding feast. The Holy One blessed be He said to them: ‘In this world, you were sorrowful with this righteous one and observed mourning for him for seven days. In the future world, I will transform that mourning into rejoicing, as it is stated: “I will transform their mourning into gladness, and I will console them and cheer them from their sorrow” (Jeremiah 31:13). Just as I comfort you, so I will comfort Zion and all its ruins, like the matter that is stated: “For the Lord will comfort Zion; He will comfort all her ruins; He will render its wilderness like Eden and its desert like a garden of the Lord. Gladness and joy will be found in it, thanksgiving and the sound of music”’ (Isaiah 51:3).
