=== 1 | The Travels of Pedro de Cieza de León, A.D. 1532-50 ===
iV


i*K«<«J<4*l»I*X'!'<''t


^  Ciezada*^  *    deT Travels,   a.d.

1532-50,  coiitamcu  •-«!*  the  First  part  of  his
Clironicle  of  Peru  ;  translated  and  edited,
with  n6tes  and  an  introduction  by  C.  R.
Markuam,  8vo.  mtip^cloth,  36»    ^  ,  1864_


m


m^ry.


REPORT     FOR      1864.


The  Council  have  great  pleasure  in  being  able  to  report
to  the  Members  of  the  Hakluyt  Society  that,  during  the
last  year,  a  considerable  increase  has  been  made  to  their
numbers.  At  the  same  time  the  list  of  subscribers  has
been  carefully  revised,  and  has  been  cleared  of  a  great  many
names  of  members  who  disregard  the  applications  made
to  them  for  the  payment  of  their  arrears.  The  number  of
Members  is  now  224,  and  the  balance  in  the  Banker^s  hands
is  £431  :  17  :  3.  The  arrears  due  to  the  Society  amount  to
£290 : 1 7 : 0,  while  there  are  no  outstanding  debts  of  any  kind.

Thus  the  funds  of  the  Society  are  in  a  prosperous  condition,
and  several  Editors  have,  since  the  issue  of  the  last  annual
Eeport,  undertaken  works  of  great  value  and  rarity.  The
Council,  therefore,  congratulate  the  Members  on  the
satisfactory  state  of  the  Society^s  affairs;  but  they  would
also  remind  them  that  a  large  addition  to  the  number
of  the  subscribers  is  very  desirable,  and  that  the  power
of  doing  full  justice  to  the  authors  whose  works  are
reproduced  in  the  Society^s  volumes,  depends  upon  the
support  which  is  received  from  those  who  are  interested  in
this  very  important  branch  of  literature.

Since  the  last  General  Meeting,  the  two  following  volumes
have  been  delivered  to  members  : —

1 .  "  Mirabilia  Descripta."  "  Or  the  wonders  of  the
East,  by  Friar  Jordanus  (circa  1330) .''  Translated
from  the  Latin  original,  with  the  addition  of  a  com-
mentary by  Colonel  Henry  Yule,  C.B.,  late  of  the
Eoyal  Engineers  (Bengal).


2,  "  The  Travels  of  Ludovico  di  Varthema  in  Egypt,
Syria,  Arabia  Deserta  and  Arabia  Felix,  in  Persia,
India,  and  Ethiopia  (a.d.  1503  to  1508)."  Translated
from  the  original  Italian  edition  of  1510,  with  a  preface,
by  John  Winter  Jones,  Esq.,  F.S.A. ;  and  edited  with
Notes  and  an  Introduction  by  the  Rev.  George  Percy
Badger.

The  following  work  is  in  the  hands  of  the  printer,  and
will  be  delivered  to  Members  in  the  course  of  the
autumn  ••—

"  The  Travels  of  Pedro  de  Cieza  de  Leon,  from  the
gulf  of  Darien  to  the  city  of  La  Plata,  contained  in  the
first  part  of  the  Chronicle  of  Peru,  which  treats  of  the
bovmdaries  and  description  of  provinces,  founding  of
new  cities,  rites  and  customs  of  the  Indians,  and  other
strange  things  worthy  to  be  known  (Antwerp  1554)."
Translated  and  edited,  with  Notes  and  an  Introduction,
by  Clements  R.  Markham,  Esq.

And  the  following  works  have  been  undertaken  by
Editors,  one  of  which  will  be  issued  as  the  second  volume
for  the  present  year  : —

1.  "The  Travels  of  Josafa  Barbaro  and  Ambrogio
Contarini  in  Tana  and  Persia."  Translated  from
Eamusio  by  E.  A.  Roy,  Esq.,  and  edited  by  Viscount
Strangford.

2.  "The  Narrative  of  Pascual  do  Andagoya,  con-
taining the  earliest  notice  of  Peru."  Translated  and
edited,  with  Notes,  by  Clements  R.  Markham,  Esq.

3.  "The  Discovery  and  Conquest  of  the  Canary
Islands  by  Bethencourt  in  1402-25."  Translated  and
edited  by  Captain  J,  G.  Goodenough,  R.N.

4.  "  The  Voyage  of  Vasco  de  Gama  round  the  Ca])e


3

of  Grood  Hope  m  1497/'  now  first  translated  from  a
contemporaneous  manuscript,  accompanied  by  other
documents,  forming  a  monograph  on  tlie  life  of  De
Gama.  To  be  translated  and  edited  by  Richard  Garnett,
Esq.,  of  the  British  Museum.

5.  ''  The  Three  Voyages  of  Sir  Martin  Frobisher,"
with  a  selection  of  his  letters  now  in  the  State  Paper
Office.  Edited  by  Rear-Admiral  R.  CoUinson,  R.N.,
C.B.

6.  ''  Cathay,  and  the  road  thither. '^  A  collection  of
all  minor  notices  of  China,  previous  to  the  sixteenth
century ;  to  be  translated  and  edited,  with  Notes  and
an  Introduction,  by  Colonel  Henry  Yule,  C.B.

7.  "  The  Fifth  Letter  of  Hernan  Cortes,  describing
his  Voyage  to  Honduras  in  1525-26,'^  to  be  translated
and  edited  by  WiUiam  Stirhng,  Esq.,  M.P.

8.  "The  Voyage  and  Travailes  of  John  Hughen  van
Linschoten  into  the  East  or  Portugales  Indies  from
A.D.  1576-92,"  to  be  reprinted  from  the  English
translation  of  1598,  and  edited  by  the  Rev.  G.  P.
Badger.

9.  "Description  of  Africa  and  of  the  notable  things
in  it,  by  John  Leo  Africanus.'^  To  be  translated
from  Ramusio,  and  edited,  with  Notes  and  an  Introduc-
tion, by  Dr.  Henry  Barth,  C.B.,  Hon.  Corr.  Mem.
F.R.G.S.

The  following  Six  Members  retire  from  the  Council  : —

Commodore  Ceacropt,  R.N.,  C.B.

John  Forster,  Esq.

Dr.  Hodgkin.

Sir  Erskine  Perry.

Major  General  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson,  K.C.B.

Lord  Broughton.


Of   this  number,   the   three    following    are  proposed    for
re-election,  viz  :

Sir  Erskine  Perry.

Major  General  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson,  K.C.B.

The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Broughton.

And  the  names  of  the  following  gentlemen  are  proposed
for  election  : —

Viscount  Strangford.

General  C.  Fox.

Rear-Admiral  R.  Collinson,  C.B.

Captain   Sherard  Osborn,   R.N.,  C.B.

Rev.  G.  p.  Badger.

John  W.  Kaye,  Esq.


STATEMENT    OF    THE    ACCOUNTS    OF    THE    SOCIETY    FOR
THE    YEAR    1863-64.


Bulance  at  Hunker's  at  last  Audit .  £357  10  0
Received   by    Banker   during  tlie

year 3H     6  3

Petty  Cast)  in  liaiid  at  last  Audit .         1   16  0

Petty  Cash  received  in  July  18G4  .      10    0  0


Mr.  ,1.  E.  Richard,  for  Paper  ....     £35    2  0

Mr.  Richards,  for  Printing 175  11  0

'i'ranscri|)tions 2117  0

Mr.  Stanford,  lor  a  Map    29    7  6

Charge  at  Hull,  on  f  2  :  2  (Bank  of

Kngland)  0     0  6

Gratuity  lo  Agent's  Foreman 5    0  0

Expended  in  Petty  Cash 5    0  7

£271  18  7

Present  Balance  at  Banker's 431  17  3

Present  Balance  in  Petty  Cash  ..         C  15  5

£710  11  3


F.xiiiiiiiHMl  aiifl  approved  July   15ib,  lH(i4.

CHARLES    BAGOr     PHILLTMORK.
WILLIAM    NEVIl-LE    STUKT.


THE


HAKLUYT    SOCIETY.


President.

SIR  RODERICK  IMPEY  MURCHISON,  K.C.B.,  G.C.St.S.  F.R.S.,  F.R.G.S  ,  D.C.L.
Mem.  Imp.  Acad.  Sc.  St.  Petersburg,  Corr.  Mem.  Inst.  Fr.,  &a.  &a.

Vice-Presidents.

Rear-admiral  C.  R.  DRINKWATER  BETHUXE,  C.B.
The  Right  Hon.  SIR  DAVID  DUXDAS,  M.P.


Council.


Rev.  G.  p.  BADGER,  F.R.G.S.

J.  BARROW,  Esq.,  F.R.S.

Rt.  Hon.  LORD  BROUGHTON.

Rear-admiral  R.  COLLINSON,  C.B.

Sir  henry  ELLIS,  K.H.,  F.R.S.

General  C.  FOX.

R.  W.  GREY,  Esq.

JOHN  WINTER  JONES,  Esq.,  F.S.A.

JOHN  W.  KAYE,  Esq.


His    Excellency     the    Count    de

LAVRADIO.
R.  H.  MAJOR,  Esq.,  F.S.A.
Sir  CHARLES  NICHOLSON,  Bart.
Captain  SHERARD  OSBORN,  R.N  ,  C
Sir  ERSKINE  PERRY.
Major-General    Sir    HENRY    C.    B

LINSON,  K.C.B.
WILLIAM  STIRLING,  Esq.,  M.P.
ViscooNT  STRANGFORD.


Honorary  Secretary-c  R.  markham,  Esq.
Bankers— Messrs.  RANSOM,  BOUVERIE,  and  Co.,  1,  Pall  Mall  East.


S^IX  i&aMupt  g^Oftet^,  which  is  eftabhfhed  for  the
i^^(£  purpofe  of  printing  rare  or  unpublifhed  Voyages
and  Travels,  aims  at  opening  by  this  means,  an  eafier  access
to  the  fources  of  a  branch  of  knowledge,  which  yields  to
none  in  importance,  and  is  fuperior  to  moft  in  agreeable
variety.  The  narratives  of  travellers  and  navigators  make
us  acquainted  with  the  earth,  its  inhabitants  and  pro-
du6lions  ;  they  exhibit  the  growth  of  intercourfe  among
mankind,  with  its  effefts  on  civilization,  and,  while  inftru6l-
ing,  they  at  the  fame  time  awaken  attention,  by  recounting
the  toils  and  adventures  of  thofe  who  firfb  explored  unknown
and  diftant  regions.

The  advantage  of  an  Affociation  of  this  kind,  confifbs  not

merely  in  its  syftem  of  literary  co-operation,  but  alfo  in  its

economy.     The  acquirements,  tafte,  and  difcrimination  of

a  number  of  individuals,  who  feel  an  intereft  in  the  fame

1864.


purfuit,  are  thus  brought  to  aft  in  voluntary  combination,
and  the  ordinary  charges  of  pubHcation  are  alfo  avoided,  fo
that  the  volumes  produced  are  diftributed  among  the
Members  (who  can  alone  obtain  them)  at  little  more  than
the  coft  of  printing  and  paper.  The  Society  expends  the
whole  of  its  funds  in  the  preparation  of  works  for  the
Members  ;  and  fmce  the  coft  of  each  copy  varies  inverfely
as  the  whole  number  of  copies  printed,  it  is  obvious  that
the  members  are  gainers  individually  by  the  profperity  of
the  Society,  and  the  confequent  vigour  of  its  operations.

Neiv  Members  have,  at  prefent,  tJie  privilege  of  purchafiug
the  complete  fet  of  tJie  publications  of  the  Society  for  previous
years  for  thirteen  guineas,  but  have  not  the  potver  offeleHing
any  particular  volume.

The  Members  are  requefted  to  bear  in  mind  that  the
power  of  the  Council  to  make  advantageous  arrangements,
will  depend,  in  a  great  meafure,  on  the  prompt  payment  of
the  subscriptions,  which  are  payable  in  advance  on  the
1st  of  January,  and  are  received  by  Mr.  Richards,  37,
Great  Queen  Street,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  who  is  the
Society's  agent  for  the  delivery  of  its  volumes.  Poft
Office  Orders  fhould  be  made  payable  to  Mr.  Thomas
Richards,  at  the   Weft  Central  Office,  High  Holborn.


WORKS     ALREADY     ISSUED.


1— The  Observations  of  Sir  Richard  Hawkins,  Knt.

In  his  Voynge  into  the  South  Sea  in   1593.      Reprinted  from  the  edition  of
1622,  and  edited  by  Capt.  C.  R.  Dkinkwater  Bethune,  R.N.,  C.B.

2— Select  Letters  of  Columhus.

\Vitli  Original  Documents  relating  to  the  Difcovery  of  the  New  World.    Tranf-

laled  and  Edited  by  R.  H.  Major,  Esq.,  of  the  Britifli  Mufeum.

3— The  Discoverie  of  the  Empire  of  Giiiana,

By  Sir  Walter  Ralcgli,  Knt.      Edited,  with  copious  Explanatory  Notes,  and  a
Biographical  Memoir,  by  SiR  Ruiiert  M.  Schomiiurgk,  Phil. D.,  etc.

4-Sir  Francis  Drake  his  Voyage,  1595,

By  Thomas  Maynarde,    together  with  the  Sjianifli  Account  of  Drake's  attack
on  I'uerto  Rico,  Edited  from  the  Original  MSS.,  by  W.  D.  CoOi.EV,  ]-:s(i.


5— Narratives  of  Early  Voyages

Undertaken  for  the  Difcovery  of  a  Paffage  to  Cathaia  and  India,  by  the  North-
wefl,  with  Seledtions  from  the  Records  of  the  worfliipful  Fellowfhip  of  the
Merchants  of  London,  trading  into  the  Eafl  Indies;  and  from  MSS.  in  the
Library  of  the  Britifli  Mufeum,  now  firfl  publiihed  by  Thomas  Rundall,  Esq.

6— The  Eistorie  of  Travaile  into  Virginia  Britannia,

Expreffing  the  Cofmographie  and  Commodities  of  the  Country,  together  with
the  manners  and  Cultoms  of  the  people,  gathered  and  obferved  as  well  by
thofe  who  went  firft  thither  as  collected  by  William  Strachey,  Gent,  the  firft
Secretary  of  the  Colony  ;  now  firft  Edited  from  the  original  manufcript  in  the
Britifli  INIufeum,  by  R.  H.  Major,  Esq.,  of  the  Britifh  Mufemn.

7— Divers  Voyages  touching  the  Discovery  of  America

And    the    Islands   adjacent,    coUedled    and    publifhed    by    Richard    Hakluyt,
Prebendary  of  Briftol  in  the  year   1582.      Edited,   with  Notes  and  an  intro-
duction, by  John  Winter  Jones,  Esq.,  of  the  Britifh  Mufeum.

8— A  Collection  of  Documents  on  Japan.

With  a  Commentary  by  Thomas  Rundall,  Esq.

9— The  Discovery  and  Conquest  of  Florida,

By   Don   Ferdinando    de    Soto.      Tranflated    out    of  Portuguefe   by   Richard

Hakluyt;  and  Edited,  with  notes  and  an  introducflion,  by  W.  B.  Rye,  Esq.,

of  the  Britifh  Mufeum.

10— Notes  upon   Russia,

Being  a  Tranflation  from  the  Earlieft  Account  of  that  Countiy,  entitled  Rerum
Muscoviticarum  Commentarii,  by  the  Baron  Sigdfmund  von  Herberftein,
Ambaffador  from  the  Court  of  Germany  to  the  Grand  Prince  Vafdey  Ivanovich,
in  the  years  1517  and  1526.  Two  Volumes.  Tranflated  and  Edited,  with
Notes  and  an  Introdudlion,  by  R.  H.  Major,  Esq.,  of  the  Britifh  Mufeum.
Vol.  I.

11— The  Geography  of  Hudson's  Bay.

Being  the  Remarks  of  Captain  W.  Coats,  in  many  Voyages  to  that  locality,
between  the  years  1727  and  1751.  With  an  Appendix,  containing  Extracts
from  the  Log  of  Captain  Middleton  on  his  Voyage  for  the  Difcovery  of  the
North-west  Passage,  in  H.M.S.  "Furnace,"  in  1741-2.  Edited  by  John
Barrow,    Esq.,    F.R.S.,    F.S.A.

12— Notes  upon  Russia.     Vol  2.

13— Three  Voyages  by  the  Northeast,

Towards  Cathay  and  China,  undertaken  by  the  Dutch  in  the  years  1594,  1595,

and  1596,  with  their  Difcoveiy  of  Spitzbergen,  their  refidence  often  months  in

Novaya  Zemlya,  and  their  safe  return  in  two  open  boats.     By  Gerrit  de  Veer.

Edited  by  C.  T.  Beke,  Esq.,  Ph.D.,  F.S.A.

14-15— The  History  of  the  Great  and  Mighty  Kingdom  of  China  and

the  Situation  1  hereof.

Compiled  by  the  Padre  Juan  Gonzalez   de   Mendoza.      And  now   Reprinted

from   the   Early   Tranflation   of    R.    Parke.       Edited    by    Sir   George  T.

Staunton,  Bart    With  an  Introdudtion  by  R.  H.  Major,  Esq.     2  vols.

16— The  "World  Encompassed  by  Sir  Francis  Drake.

Being  his  next  Voyage  to  that  to  Nombre   de   Dios.      Collated,    with   an

unpublifhed    Manufcript    of  Francis    Fletcher,    Chaplain    to   the  Expedition.

With  Appendices  illuftrative  of  the  fame  Voyage,  and  Introdudtion  by  W.  S.

W.  Vaux,  Esq.,  M.A.


17— The  History  of  the  Tartar  Conquerors  who  Subdued  China.

From  the  French  of  tlie  POre  D'Orleans,   1688.      Tranllated  and  Edited  by  the

Earl  ov  Ellesmere.     With  an  Introduction  by  R.  II.  Major,  Esq.

18— A  Collection  of  Early  Documents  on  Spitzhergen  and  Greenland,

Confiding  of :  a  Tranflation  from  the  German  of  F.  Martin's  important  work
on  Spitzbergen,  now  veiy  rare;  a  Tranflation  from  Isaac  de  la  Peyrere's
Relation  de  Greenland;  and  a  rare  piece  entitled  "God's  Power  and  Pro-
vidence fliowed  in  the  miraculous  prefervation  and  deliverance  of  eight
Engliflimen  left  by  mifchance  in  Greenland,  anno  1630,  nine  moneths  and
twelve  days,  faithfully  reported  by  Edward  Pelham."  Edited,  with  Notes,  by
Adam  AVhite,  Esq.,  of  the  Britifli  Mufeum.

19-  The  Voyage  of  Sir  Henry  Middleton  to  Bantam  and  the  Maluco  Islands.

From  the  rare  Edition  of  1606.      Edited  by  BoLTON  CORNEY,  Esq.

20-Kussia  at  the  Close  of  the  Sixteenth  Century.

Comprifmg   "The   Ruffe  Commonwealth"   by  Dr.    Giles    Fletcher,    and    Sir

Jerome  Ilorfey's  Travels,  now  firft  printed  entire  from  his  manufcript  in  the

Britifli  Mufeum.      Editeil  by  E.  A.  Bond,  Esq.,  of  the  Britifli  Mufeum.

21— The  Travels  of  Girolamo  Benzoni  in  America,  in  1542-56.

Tranflated  and  Edited  by  Admiral  W.  H.  Smith,  F.R.S.,  F.S.A.

22— India  in  the  Fifteenth  Century.

Being  a  Colle(ilion  of  Narratives  of  Voyages  to  India  in  the  century  preceding

the  Portuguefe  difcovery  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope;    from  Latin,  Perfian,

Ruffian,  and  Italian  Sources,  now  firfl  tranflated  into  EngliflL      Edited,  with

an  Introdudlion  by  R.  H.  Major,  Esq.,  F.S.A.

23— Narrative  of  a  Voyage  to  the  West  Indies  and  Mexico,

In  the  years  1599-1602,  with  Maps  and  Illuflrations.      By  Samuel  Champlain.

Tranflated  from  the  original  and  unpublifhed  Manufcript,  with  a  Biographical

Notice  and  Notes  by  Alice  Wilmere.     Edited  by  Norton  Shaw.

24— Expeditions  into  the  Valley  of  the  Amazons

During  the  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  Centuries  :  containing  the  Journey  of
Gonzalo  Pizarro,  from  the  Royal  Commentaries  of  Garcilaffo  Inca  de  la  Vega;
the  Voyage  of  Francifco  de  Orellana,  from  the  General  Hiflory  of  Herrera  ;
and  the  Voyage  of  Crifloval  de  Acuna,  from  an  exceedingly  fcarce  narrative
written  by  himfelf  in  164 1.  Edited  and  Tranflated  by  Clements  R.
Markham,  Esq.

25— Early  Indications  of  Australia.

A  Colledlion  of  Documents  fliewing  the  Early  Difcoveries  of  Auftralia  to  the

time  of  Captain  Cook.     Edited   by    R.    H.    Major,    Esq.,    of  the   Britifh

Mufeum,   F.S.A.

26-Thc  Embassy  of  Euy  Gonzalez  de  Clavijo  to  the  Court  of  Timour,  1403-6.

Tranflatetl,  for  the  firft  lime,  with  Notes,  a  Preface,  and  an  Introdudlory  Life
of  Timour  Beg.      By  CLEMENTS  R.  Markham,  Esq.

27— Henry  Hudson  the  Navigator

The  Original  Documents  in  wliicli  his  career  is  recorded.      Colleded,  partly
Tranflated,  and  .Viiiiulated,  with  an  InliuducUon  by  GEORGE  AsHEK,  LL.D.


28— The  Expedition  of  ITrsua  and  Aguirre,

In  search  of  El  Dorado  and  Omagua,    a.d.    1560-61,    Tranflated   from  the

"  Sexta  Noticia  Hiftorial"  of  Fray   Pedro  Simon,   by  W.    Bollaert,    Esq.;

with  an  Introdudlion  by  Clements  R.  Markham,  Esq.

29— The  Life  and  Acts  of  Don  Alonzo  Enriquez  de  Guzman.

Tranflated  from  a  Manufcript  in  the  National  Library  at  Madrid,  and  edited,
with  Notes  and  an  Introduction,  by  Clements  R.  Markham,  Esq.

30— Discoveries  of  the  World  by  Galvano .

From  their  firfl  original  unto  the  year  of  our  Lord  1555.     Reprinted,  with  the
original  Portuguefe  text,  and  edited  by  Vice- Admiral  Bethune,  C.B.

31— Marvels  described  by  Friar  Jordanus,

Of  the  Order  of  Preachers,  native  of  Severac,  and  Bifliop  of  Columbum  ;  from

a  parchment  manufcript  of  the  Fourteenth  Century,  in  Latin,  the  text  of  which

has   recently   been   Tranflated   and   Edited   by   Colonel   H.    Yule,   C.B.,

F.R.G.  S.,   late  of  H.M.   Bengal  Engineers.

32— The  Travels  of  ludovico  di  Varthema

In  Syria,  Arabia,  Perfia,  India,  etc.,  during  the  Sixteenth  Century.    Tranflated

by  J.  Winter  Jones,  Esq.,  F. S.A.,   and  edited,   with  Notes  and  an  Intro-

dudlion,  by  the  Rev.  George  Percy  Badger.

33-The  Travels  of  Cieza  de  Leon  in  1532-50

From  the  Gulf  of  Darien  to  the  City  of  La  Plata,  contained  in  the  firfl  part  of

his  Chronicle  of  Peru  (Antwerp  1554).     Tranflated  and  edited,  with  Notes

and  an  Introduction,  by  Clements  R.  Markham,  Esq.


OTHER    WORKS    UNDERTAKEN    BY    EDITORS.

The  Travels  of  Jofafa  Barbaro  and  Ambrogio  Contarini  in  Tana  and  Perfia.

Tranflated  from  Ramufio  by  E.   A.  RoY,    Esq.,   and  edited,  with  an

Introduction,  by  ViscouNT  Strangford.
The  Narrative  of  Pafcual  de  Andagoya,  containing  the  earlieft  notice  of  Peru.

Tranflated  and  edited,  with  Notes,  by  Clements  R.  Markham,  Esq.
The  Difcover}'  and  Conqueft  of  the  Canary  Iflands,  by  Bethencourt  in  1402-ic,.

Tranflated  and  edited  by  Captain  J.  G.  Goodenough,  R.N.,  F.R.G.S.
The  Voyage  of  Vafco  de  Gama  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  in  1497,  now

firfl   Tranflated  from   a  cotemporaneous   manufcript,    accompanied  by

other  documents,  forming  a  monograph  on  the  life  of  De  Gama.     To

be  tranflated  and  edited  by  RiCHARD  Garnett,  Esq.,  of  the  Britifli

Mufeum.
The  Three  Voyages  of  Sir  Martin  Frobifher,  with  a  seledlion  from  his  Letters

now    in    the    State    Paper   Office.      Edited    by    Rear-Admiral   R.

COLLINSON,  R.N.,  C.B.
Cathay  and  the  Road  Thither.     A  colledlion  of  all  minor  notices  of  China,

previous  to  the  Sixteenth  Century.     Tranflated  and  edited  by  Colonel

H.  Yule,  C.B.
The  Fifth  Letter  of  Heman  Cortes,  describing  his  Voyage  to  Honduras  in

1525-26.     Tranflated  and  edited  by  William  Stirling,  Esq.,  M.P.


John  Huigen  van  Linschoten.     Difcourfe  of  a  Voyage  unto  the  Eaft  Indies ;

to  be  reprinted  from  the  Englifli  tranflation  of  1598,  and  edited  by  the

Rev.  G.  P.  Badcer,  F.R.G.S.
Defcription  of  Africa  and  of  the  Notable  Things  in  it,  by  John  Leo  Africanus.

To  be  tranllated  from  Ramufio,  and  edited,  with  Notes  and  an  Intro-

dudlion,  by  Dr.  H.  Barth,  C.B.,  Hon.  Corr.  Mem.  F.R.G.S.


WORKS  SUGGESTED  TO  THE  COUNCIL  FOR  PUBLICATION.

Voyages  of  Alvaro  de  Mandana  and  Pedro  Fernandez  de  Quiros  in  the  South
Seas,  to  be  tranflated  from  Suarez  de  Figueroa's  "  Hechos  del  Marques
deCaiiete,"  and  Torquemada's  "  Monarquia  Indiana."

Inedited  Letters,  etc.,  of  Sir  Thomas  Roe  during  his  Embafly  to  India.

The  Travels  of  Duarte  Barbosa  in  the  Eafl,  to  be  tranflated  from  the  Portu-
guefe.

The  Voyage  of  John  Saris  to  India  and  Japan  in  161 1 -13,  from  a  manufcript
copy  of  his  Journal,  dated  161 7.

Pigafetta's  Narrative  of  the  Voyage  of  Magalhaens,  to  be  tranflated  from  the
Italian  text,  edited  by  Amoretti.

The  Topografia  Chrifl;iana  of  Cosmas  Indicopleuftes.

Bernhard  de  Breydenbach,  1483-84,  a.d.     Travels  in  the  Holy  Land.

Felix  Fabri,  1483.     Wanderings  in  the  Holy  Land,  Egypt,  etc.

Voyage  of  Du  Quefne  to  the  Eafl;  Indies  in  1692,  from  a  manufcript  Journal
by  M.  C.  *  *  *  *

El  Edrifi's  Geography.

Narrative  of  Giovanni  da  Verrazzano,  a  Florentine,  concerning  the  land  called
New  France,  difcovered  by  him  in  the  name  of  his  Majefty  :  written  at
Dieppe,  1524  a.d.

Voyage  made  by  Captain  Jaques  Cartier  in  1535  and  1536  to  the  ifles  of
Canada,  Hochlega,  and  Saguenay.

Nicolo  and  Antonio  Zeno.  Their  Voyages  to  Frifland,  Eflotiland,  Vinland,
Engroenland,  etc.

De  Morga.     Sucefos  en  las  Iflas  Filipinas.

Ca  da  Mofto.  Voyages  along  the  Wefliern  Coafl^  of  Africa  in  1454  :  tranflated
from  the  Italian  text  of  1507.

J.  dos  Santos.     The  Hiflory  of  Eafl;ern  Ethiopia.     1607.

Joam  de  Caftro.  Account  of  a  Voyage  made  by  the  Portuguefe  in  1541,
from  the  city  of  Goa  to  Suez.

Catcrino  Zeno.  A  Journey  to  the  empire  of  Perfia,  in  the  time  of  Uzun
Ilaffan.

John  and  Sebafl;ian  Cabot.     Their  Voyages  to  America.

Willoughby  and  Chancellor.     Their  Voyages  to  the  North-east.

Icelandic  Sagas  narrating  the  Difcovery  of  America.


LAWS    OP    THE    HAKLUYT    SOCIETY.

I.  The  obje(5l  of  this  Society  fhall  be  to  print,  for  diflribution  among  its
members,  rare  and  valuable  Voyages,  Travels,  Naval  Expeditions,  and  other
geographical  records,  from  an  early  period  to  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth
century.

II.  The  Annual  Subfcription  fhall  be  One  Guinea,  payable  in  advance  on
the  ist  January.

III.  Each  member  of  the  Society,  having  paid  his  Subfcription,  fhall  be
entitled  to  a  copy  of  every  work  produced  by  the  Society,  and  to  vote  at  the
general  meetings  within  the  period  fubfcribed  for;  and  if  he  do  not  fignify,
before  the  clofe  of  the  year,  his  wifli  to  refign,  he  fhall  be  confidered  as  a  mem-
ber for  the  fucceeding  year.

IV.  The  management  of  the  Society's  affairs  (hall  be  vefted  in  a  Council
confifling  of  twenty-one  members,  viz.,  a  Prefident,  two  Vice-Prefidents,  a
Secretary,  and  feventeen  ordinary  members,  to  be  eledled  annually ;  but
vacancies  occurring  between  the  general  meetings  fhall  be  filled  up  by  the
Council.

V.  A  General  Meeting  of  the  Subfcribers  fhall  be  held  annually.  The
Secretary's  Report  on  the  condition  and  proceedings  of  the  Society  fhall  be  then
read,  and  the  Meeting  fhall  proceed  to  eledl  the  Council  for  the  enfuing  year.

VI.  At  each  Annual  Eledlion,  fix  of  the  old  Council  fhall  retire,  of  whom
three  fhall  be  eligible  for  re-ele6lion.

VII.  The  Council  fhall  meet  every  month,  excepting  Augufl,  September,
0(5lober,  and  November,  for  the  difpatch  of  bufinefs,  three  forming  a  quonun,
including  the  Secretary,  and  the  Chairman  having  a  catling  vote.

VIII.  Gentlemen  preparing  and  editing  works  for  the  Society,  fhall  receive
twenty-five  copies  of  fuch  works  refpedtively,  and  an  additional  twenty-five
copies  if  the  work  is  alfo  tranflated.


RULES  FOR  TEE  DELIVERY  OF  THE  SOCIETY'S  VOLUMES.

I.  The  Society's  productions  will  be  delivered  without  any  charge,  within
three  miles  of  the  General  Poft  Office.

II.  They  will  be  forwarded  to  any  place  beyond  that  limit,  the  Society
paying  the  cofl  of  booking,  but  not  of  carriage ;  nor  will  it  be  anfwerable  in
this  cafe  for  any  lofs  or  damage.

III.  They  will  be  delivered  by  the  Society's  agent,  Mr.  Thos.  Richards,
37,  Great  Queen  Street,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  to  perfons  having  written
authority  of  fubfcribers  to  receive  them.

IV.  They  will  be  sent  to  the  Society's  correfpondents  or  agents  in  the  prin-
cipal towns  throughout  the  kingdom  ;  and  care  fliall  be  taken  that  the  charge
for  carriage  be  as  moderate  as  poffible.


LIST    OF    MEMBERS

OF

THE     HAKLUYT     SOCIETY.


Admiralty  (The),  2  copies.

All  Souls  College,  Oxford.

Allport,  Franklin,  Esq.,  156,  Leadenhall-street.

Alston,  Commander  A.  H.

Antiquaries,  the  Society  of.

Army  and  Navy  Club,  13,  St.  James's-square.

Arrowsmith,  John,  Esq.  35,  Hereford-square,  South  Kensington.

Asher,  A.,  Berlin.

Asiatic  Society  of  Calcutta.

Astor  Library,  New  York.

Athen^um  Club,  The,  Pall  Mall.

Athenaeum  Library,  Boston,  U.S.

Badger,  Rev.  George  Percy,  F.R.G.S.,  7,  Dawson-place,  Bayswater.

Baikie,  Dr.,  Glasgow.

Bank  of  England  Library  and  Literary  Association.

Baring,  Thomas  George,  Esq.,  M.P.,  21,  Lowndes-square.

Barlersque,  C,  Esq.,  Bordeaux.

Barrow,  J.,  Esq.,  F.R.S.,  F.S.A.,  17,  Hanover-terrace,  Regent's  Park.

Batho,  J.  A.,  Esq.,  49,  Upper  Charlotte-street,  Fitzroy-square.

Beke,  Charles  T.,  Esq.,  Phil.  D.,  F.S.A.,  Bekesbourne,  Canterbury.

Bell,  Reverend  Thomas,  Berbice.

Benzon,  E.  L.  S.,  Esq.,  Sheffield.

Berlin,  The  Royal  Library  of.

Bethune,  Rear-Admiral  C.  R.  Drinkwater,  C.B.,  4,  Cromwell-road.

Biblioth^ue  Imperiale,  Paris.

Birmingham  Library  (The)

Blackie,  Dr.  Walter  G.,  Villafield,  Glasgow.

Boston  Public  Library,  U.S.

Bowring,  Sir  John,  LL.D.,  Athenreum  Club

Brevoort,  J.  C,  Esq.,  New  York.

British  Museum  (copies  presented)

Brockhaus,  F.  A.,  Esq.,  Leipzig.

Brodhead,  J.  R.,  Esq.,  New  York.

Broome,  Major  A.

Broughton,  Lord,  42,  Berkeley-square.

Brown,  J.  A.,  Esq.,  Newcastle-place,  Clerkenwell.

Brown,  John  Carter,  Esq.,  Providence,  Rhode  Island.

Brown,  R.,  Esq.,  Sydney  Mines,  Cape  Breton.

Brown,  W.  H.,  Esq.,  Chester.

Bruce,  John,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  5,  Upper  Gloucester-street,  Dorset-square.

Bunbury,  E.  U.,  Esq.,  35,  St.  James's-street.


Cambridge  University  Library.

Campkin,  Henry,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  Reform  Club,  Pall  Mall.

Canada,  The  Parliament  Library.

Cannon,  Charles,  Esq.,  British  Museum,

Carlisle,  The  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of,  the  Castle,  Dublin.

Carlton  Club,  Pall  Mall.

Cartwright,  Henry,  Esq.,  Her  Majesty's  Gaol,  Gloucester.

Cautley,  Sir  Proby,  K.C.B.,  India  Office.

Chatfield,  Frederick,  Esq.,  12,  Pall  Mall.

Chauncey,  Henry  C,  Esq.,  New  York.

Christie,  Jonathan  Henry,  Esq.,  9,  Stanhope-street,  Hyde -park-gardens.

Churchill,  Lord  Alfred  S.,  M.P.,  F.R.G.S.,  16,  Rutland  Gate.

Churton,  The  Ven.  Archdeacon,  Creyke,  Easingwold,  Yorkshire,

Collinson,  Rear-Admiral,  C.B,,  The  Haven,  Ealing.

Colonial  Office  (The).

Congress,  Library  of  the,  United  States.

Cooper,  Lieut.-Colonel  E.  H.,  36,  Hertford-street.

Cotton,  R.  W.,  Esq.,  Barnstaple.

Cracroft,  Commodore,  R.N.,  C.B.,  H.M.S.  Aboukir,  West  Indies.

Crowninshield,  F.  B.,  Esq.,  New  York  (per  Mr.  Stevens)

Cunard,  Edward,  Esq.,  New  York.

Dalrjmple,  Arthur,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  Norwich.

Deane,  C,  Esq.,  Boston.

Deedes,  Henry,  Esq.,  India  Office,  S.W.

Dilke,  Sir  C.  Went  worth,  Bart,  76,  Sloane- street.

Dilke,  C.  W.,  Esq.,  76,  Sloane-street.

Dry,  Thos.,  Esq.,  25,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields.

Ducie,  Earl  of,  ],  Belgrave-square,  S.W.

Dundas,  Rt.  Hon.  Sir  David,  M.P.,  13,  King's  Bench  Walk,  Temple.

Dundas,  George,  Esq.,  9,  Charlotte-square,  Edinburgh.

Dundas,  John,  Esq.,  25,  St.  Andrew's-square,  Edinburgh.

Duprat,  M .  B.,  Paris.

Ellis,  Sir  Henry,  K.H.,  F.R.S.,  24,  Bedford-square.

Emmet,  Dr.  Addis,  New  York.

Fletcher,  Wm.  Younger,  Esq.,  British  Museum.

Foreign  Office  (The).

Forster,  John,  Esq.,  Palace  Gate  House,  Hyde  Park  Gate,  W.

Fox,  General,  8,  Grosvenor- square.

Francis,  Charles  John,  Esq.,  7,  St.  Paul's  Grove,  Canonbury.

Franklin,  Lady,  Upper  Grove  Lodge,  Kensington.

Freer,  W.  E.,  Esq.

Garnett,  Richard,  Esq.,  British  Museum.

Gayangos,  Don  Pascuel  de,  Madrid.

Gladdish,  William,  Esq.,  Gravesend.

Glasgow  College.

Goodenough  Capt.  J.  G.,  R.N.,  F.R.G.S.,  43,  St.  Gcorge's-squarc,  S.W.


lO

Grey,  R.  W.,  Esq.,  47,  Belgrave-square.

Griffith,  and  Farran,  JNIessrs.,  21,  Ludgate-street.

Grinnell,  Cornelius,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S.,  180,  Piccadilly.

Guise,  W.  v.,  Esq.,  Elmore-court,  Gloucester.

Hall,  Rear  Admiral,  C.B.,  48,  Phillimore-gardens,  Campden  Ilill.

Harcourt,  Egerton,  Esq.,  Whitwell  Park,  York.

Hardinge,  Captain  E.,  R.N.,  F.R.G.S.,  32,  Hyde  Park  Square.

Harker,  Turner  James,  Esq.,  10,  Northampton  Park,  Islington.

Harris,  Captain  H.,  35,  Gloucester-terrace,  Bayswater.

Hawkins,  Edward,  Esq.,  6,  Lower  Berkeley-street,  Portman- square.

Herold,  A.  L.,  Rue  Richelieu,  67,  Paris.

Hodgkin,  Thomas,  Esq.,  M.D.,  35,  Bedford-square.

HoUond,  R.,  Esq  ,  64,  Cumberland-street.

Holmes,  James,  Esq.,  4,  New  Ormond-street,  Foundling.

Home  Office  (The),  Whitehall.

Horner,  Rev.  J.  S.  H.,  Wells  Park,  Somersetshire.

Hull  Subscription  Library.

India  Office,  20  cojoies.

Johnson,  W.,  Esq.,  R.N.,  F.R.G.S.,  North  Grove  House,  Southsea.

Jones,  J.  Winter,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  British  Museum.

Jones,  W.  Bence,  Esq.,  Lisselan,  co.  Cork.

Kaye,  John  W.,  Esq.,  India  Office.

Kellett,  Rear-Admiral,  C.B.,  Clonacody,  Clonmel.

Kennedy,  Robert  Lenox,  Esq.,  New  York.

Lavradio,  His  Excellency  the  Count  de,  12,  Gloucester-pl.,  Portman -sq.

L'Ecole  Normale,  Montreal.

Lee,  George,  Esq.,  15,  Piccadilly.

Lenox,  J.,  Esq.,  New  York.

Lilford,  Lord,  Lilford  Hall,  Oundle,  Northamptonshire.

Liverpool  Free  Public  Library.

Logan,  A.  J.,  Esq.,  Singapore.

London  Institution,  Finsbury  Circus.

London  Library,  12,  St.  James's-square.

Lott,  Capt.  E.  G.,  159,  Parliament-street,  Liverpool.

Lowe,  Right  Hon.  Robert,  M.P.,  34,  Lowndes-square.

Loyes,  Edw.,  Esq.,  33,  Paternoster-row.

Lynch,  Thomas  Kerr,  Esq.,  31,  Cleveland-square,  W.

M'Calmont,  Robert,  Esq.,  87,  Eaton-square.

Mackenzie,  John  W.,  Esq.,  Edinburgh.

McClintock,  Capt.  Sir  Leopold,  R.N.,  F.R.G.S.,  Z/.J/.aS'.  xlurora.

IMacready,  W.  C,  Esq.,  Slierborne  House,  Dorset.

j\Iadras  Literary  Society.

Maguire,  Captain  Rochfort,  R.N.,  11. M.S.  Galatea.

Major,  II.  II.,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  British  Museum.

Malcolm,  W.  Elphinstone,  Esq.,  Burnfoot,  Langholm,  Carlisle.

Mantell,  Walter,  Esq.,  New  Zealand.


1 1

Markham,  Clements  R.,  Esq.,  2],  Eccleston-square,  S.W.

Massie,  Admiral  T.  L.,  R.N.,  Chester.

Melbourne,  Public  Library  of,  per  Mr.  Guillaume.

Murchison,  Sir  Roderick  Impey,  K.C.B.,  F.R.S.,&c.,  16,  Belgrave-square.

Murphy,  Hon.  C.  IL,  New  York.

Murray,  John,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S.,  Alberaarle-street.

Newcastle-upon-Tyne  Literary  and  Scientific  Institute.

New  York  State  Library.

Nicholson,  Sir  Charles,  Bart.,  F.R.G.S.,  19,  Portland-place,  W.

Norris,  Edwin,  Esq.,  Sec.  Asiatic  Society,  5,  New  Burlington-street.

Oriental  Club,  Hanover- square.

Osborn,  Captain  Sherard,  R.N.,  C.B.,  F.R.G.S.,  HJl.S.  Royal  ^:overe'vjn.

Ouvry,  F.,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  66,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields.

Paine,  W.  Dunkley,  Esq.,  Cockshutt  Hill,  Reigate.

Peabody  Institute,  Baltimore,  U.S.

Peacock,  George,  Esq.,  Starcross,  near  Exeter.

Peacock,  Septimus,  Esq.,  Alexandria.

Pennsylvania  Historical  Society.

Perry,  Sir  Erskiue,  36,  Eaton-place.

Petit,  Rev.  J.  Louis,  The  Uplands,  ShifFnal.

Petit,  Miss,  9,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn.

Phillimore,  Charles  B.,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S.,  25,  Upper  Berkeley-street.

Plowden,  W.  H.  Chicheley,  Esq.,  F.R.S.

Porcher,  Captain  Edwin,  R.N.,  F.R.G.S.,  50,  Montague-square.

Portland,  His  Grace  the  Duke  of.

Potts,  Captain  H.  H.,  1,  Somerfield- terrace,  Maidstone.

Powis,  Earl  of,  45,  Berkeley-square.

Prescott,  Admiral  Sir  Henry,  K.C.B.,  Senior  United  Service  Club.

Rawlinson,  Major- General  SirH.,  K.C.B.,  1,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square.

Reed,  F.  J.,  Esq.,  34,  Bedford-square.

Richard,  John  E.,  Esq.,  Wandsworth,  Surrey.

Richardson,  Sir  John,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Grasmere,  Westmoreland.

Richardson,  Ralph,  Esq.,  Cranford,  Exmouth.

Riggs,  G.  W.,  Esq.,  Washington,  U.S.

Royal  Geographical  Society,  15,  Whitehall-place  {copies  presented)

Royal  Naval  College,  Portsmouth.

Royal  Society,  Burlington  House

Rowsell,  E.  P.,  Esq.,  29,  Finsbury-circus.

Rushout,  The  Hon.  Miss,  26,  Onslow-square,  Brompton.

Ryder,  Commodore  Alfred,  R.N.,  Coast  Guard  Office,  Admiralty.

Rye,  W.  B.,  Esq.,  British  Museum.

Seymour,  George,  Esq.,  12,  Sussex-square.

Sheffield,  Earl  of,  20,  Portland-place.

Simpson,  Lieutenant.

Smith,  Edmund,  Esq.,  Hull.

Smith,  George,  Esq.,  21,  Russell-square.

Smith,  J.,  Esq.  (Messrs.  Smith  and  Elder.)


Somers,  Earl,  33,  Princes-gate,  Hyde  Park.

Sotheby,  Mrs.,  Kingston.

Spottiswoode,  William,  Esq.,  F.R.S.,  50,  Grosvenor-place.

Stanford,  jMr.  E.,  Charing  cross.

St.  Andrew's  University.

St.  David's,  the  Right  Rev.  the  Lord  Bishop  of,  Abergwili,  Carmarthen.

Stevens,  H.,  Esq.,  Boston,  United  States.

Stirling,  Wm.,  Esq.,  M.P.,  of  Keir,  128,  Park-street.

Strangford,  Viscount,  58,  Cumberland-street.

Stuart,  Alexander,  Esq.,  New  York.

Stuart,  R.  L.,  Esq.,  New  York.

Stubbs,  Commander,  Edward,  R.N.,  Royal  Naval  College,  Portsmouth.

Scurt,  W.  Neville,  Esq.,  India  Office.

Taylor,  John  George,  Esq.,  H.M.  Consul  at  Diabekir.

Thomas,  Luke,  Esq.,  Carlton-villa,  Blackheath  Park.

Tolstoy,  George,  Esq.,  St.  Petersburgh.

Toronto  University.

Trade,  the  Board  of,  Whitehall.

Traveller's  Club,  106,  Pall  Mall.

Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Trinity  Corporation,  Tower  Hill.

Tumour,  Capt.  Nicholas,  R.N.,  II. M.S.  Clio,  Pacific.

Union  Society,  Oxford.

United  Service  Institution,  Scotland  Yard.

Van  de  Weyer,  His  Excellency  INI.  Sylvaiu,  3,  Grosvenor-square.

Victoria  Library  and  Reading  Rooms,  Hong  Kong.

Vienna  Royal  Imperial  Library.

Vivian,  Geo.,  Esq.,  11,  Upper  Grosvenor-street.

Van  Ryckevorsel,  H.,  Consul  de  Venezuela,  Conseiller  a  la  Regence  de

Rotterdam.
Waite,  Henry,  Esq.,  68,  Old  Broad-street.
Wales,  George  Washington,  Esq.,  Boston,  U.S.
Walpole,  Lieut,  the  Hon.  Frederick,  R.N.,  Long  Stratton,  Norfolk.
Watkinson  Library,  Hertford,  Connecticut,  U.S.
Watts,  Thomas,  Esq.,  British  Museum.
Webb  Captain  John  Sydney,  24,  Manchester-square,  W.
Webb,  William  Frederick,  Esq.,  News:ead  Abbey.
Whewell,  the  Rev.  W.,  D.D.,  ^Alaster  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Whiteman,  J.  C,  Esq.,  Theydon  Grove,  Epping.

Wilcox,  R.  Wilson,  Esq.,  Royal  London  Ophthalmic  Hospital,  Moorfields.
Wilkinson,  John,  Esq.,  3,  Wellington-street,  Strand.
Williams,  T.,  Esq.,  Northumberland-house,  Strand.
Wilson,  Edward  S.,  Esq.,  Hull.

Woodd,  Basil  T.,  Esq.,  M.P.,  Conyngham  Hall,  Knaresborough.
Wright,  II.,  Esq.,  Cheltenham.
Young,  Allen,  Esq.,  R.N.R.,  Riversdale,  Twickenham


WORKS     ISSUED     BY


Cfjf  ?^afelugt  ^ofiftg.


THE    TRAVELS    OF
PEDRO     DE     CIEZA     DE     LEON.


ll.DCCC.LXIV.


fi

hi

'  i

O       /^

1

!

.  [

THE


TEAVELS


PEDEO  DE  CIEZA  DE  LEON,


A.D.  1532-50,


CONTAINED       IN       Till


jFirst  Part  of  jjts  Chronicle  of  Peru,


TRANSLATED    AND    EDITED,


WITH      NOTES      AND      AN     INTRODUCTION,


CLEMENTS    R   MAEKHAM,   RS.A.,   F.R.G.S.,;

ADTHOB   OF   "  CUZCO    AND   LIMA,"  "TRAVELS    IK   PERU   AND    INDIA,"   AND   A  >

"  QUICHUA   OBAMMAB  AND   DICTIONAEX."  '


LONDON:
PRINTED     FOR     THE     HAKLUYT     SOCIETY.

M.DCCC.LXIV.


I    -hMif-


%^   ■


THE


TKAVELS

OF

PEDEO  m  CIEZA  DE  LEON,

A.D.  1532-50,


CONTAINED       IN       THE


JFtrst  Part  of  jjts  (frijromcle  erf  Peru,


TRANSLATED    AND    EDITED,


WITH      NOTES      AND      AN      INTRODUCTION,


CLEMENTS    R.   MARKHAM,   F.S.A.,   F.R.G.S.,'^

AUTHOR   OF  "  CUZCO    AND   LIMA,"  "TRAVELS    IN   PERU   AND    INDIA,"   AND   A  >  •

"  QUICHUA   GRAMMAR   AND    DICTIONARY.  "  '  i


LONDON:
PRINTED     FOR     THE     HAKLUYT     SOCIETY.

M.DCCC.LXIV.


LONDON  :   T.    RICHARDS,  37,   GREAT   QUEEN    STREET.


COUNCIL


THE     HAKLUYT     SOCIETY.


SIR  BODERICK  IMPEY  MURCHISON,  K.C.B.,    G.C.St.S.,   F.R.S.,   D.C.L.,   Corr.   Mem.
Inst.  F.,  Hon.  Mem.  Imp.  Acad.  Sc.  St.  Petersburg,  etc.,  etc.,  President.

Rear-Admiral  C.  R.  DRINKWATRR  BETHUNE,  C.B.-)

[  Vice-Presidents.
The  Rt.  Hon.  Sir  DAVID  DUN  DAS,  M.P.  )

Rev.  G.  p.  BADGKR,  F.R.G.S.

J.  BARROW,  Esq.,  F.R.S.

Rt.  Hon.  LORD  BROUGHTON.

Rear-Admiral  R.  COLLINSON,  C.B.

Sir  henry  ELLIS,  K.H.,  F.R.S.

General  C.  FOX.

R.  W.  GREY,  Esq.

JOHN  WINTER  JONES,  Esq.,  F.S.A.

JOHN  W.  KAYE,  Esq.

His  Excellency  the  COUNT  DE  LAVRADIO.

R.  H.  MAJOR,  Esq.,  F.S.A.

Sir  CHARLES  NICHOLSON,  Bakt.

Captain  SHERARD  OSBORN,  R.N.,  C  B.

Sir  ERSKINE  PERRY.

Major-General  Sir  HENRY  C.  RAWLINSON,  K.C.B.

WILLIAM  STIRLING,  Esq.,  M.P.

Viscount  STRANGFORD.

CLEMENTS  R.  MARKHAM,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  Honorary  Secretary.


TABLE     OF     CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  i

Dedication  -  -•  -  -  -  -  -1

Prologue     -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -4

The  Travels  of  Pedro  de  Cieza  de  Leon.

Chap.  I. — Which  treats  of  the  discovery  of  the  Indies,  of  some  other
things  which  were  done  when  they  were  first  discovered,  and  of
the  present  state  of  affairs  -  -  -  -  -       11

Chap.  II. — Of  the  city  of  Panama,  and  of  its  founding,  and  why  it  is
treated  of  iirst,  before  other  matters        -  -  -  -       14

Chap.  III. — Of  the  ports  between  Panama  and  the  land  of  Peru,  of  the
distances  between  them,  and  of  their  latitudes     -  -  -       19

Chap.  IV. — Describes  the  navigation  as  far  as  the  Callao  of  Lima,
which  is  the  port  of  the  City  of  the  Kings  -  -  -       22

Chap.  V. — Of  the  ports  and  rivers  on  the  coast,  from  the  City  of  the
Kings  to  the  province  of  Chile,  and  their  latitudes,  with  other  matters
connected  with  the  navigation  of  these  seas         -  -  -       27

Chap.  VI. — How  the  city  of  San  Sebastian  was  founded  in  the  bay  of
Uraba  ;  and  of  the  native  Indians  in  that  neighbourhood  -       32

Chap.  VII. — How  the  barb  is  made  so  poisonous,  with  which  the  Indians
of  Carthagena  and  Santa  IMartha  have  killed  so  many  Spaniards       38

Chap.  VIII. — Li  which  other  customs  of  the  Indians  subject  to  the  city
of  Uraba  are  described  -  -  -  -  -  -       39


Vlll  TABLE    OF    CONTENTS.

Chap.  IX. — Of  the  road  between  the  city  of  San  Sebastian  and  the  city
of  Antioquia,  and  of  the  wild  beasts,  forests,  rivers,  and  other  things
in  tlie  way  ;  and  liow  and  in  what  season  it  can  be  passed  -       40

Chap.  X. — Of  the  grandeur  of  the  mountains  of  Abibe,  and  of  the
admirable  and  useful  timber  which  grows  there  -  -       43

Chap.  XI. — Of  the  cacique  Nutibara,  and  of  his  territory  :  and  of
other  caciques  subject  to  the  city  of  Antioquia  -  -       46

Chap.  XII. — Of  the  customs  of  these  Indians,  of  their  arms,  and  of
the  ceremonies  they  perform  ;  and  who  the  founder  of  the  city  of
Antioquia  was    -  -  -  -  -  -  -49

Chap.  XIII. — Of  the  description  of  the  province  of  Popayan,  and  the
reason  why  the  natives  of  it  are  so  wild,  and  those  of  Peru  so  gentle       54

Chap.  XIV. — Containing  an  accomit  of  the  road  between  the  city  of
Antioquia  and  the  town  of  Anzerma,  and  of  the  region  which  lies
on  either  side  of  it  -  -  -  -  -  -       56

Chap.  XV. — Of  the  customs  of  the  Indians  of  this  land,  and  of  the  forests
that  must  be  traversed  in  order  to  reach  the  town  of  Anzerma    -       59

Chap.  XVI. — Of  the  customs  of  the  Caciques  and  Indians  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  town  of  Anzerma,  of  the  founding  of  that  town,
and  who  its  founder  was  -  -  -  -  -       62

Chap.  XVII. — Concerning  the  provinces  and  towns  between  the  city  of
Antioquia  and  the  town  of  Arma ;  and  of  the  customs  of  the  natives      66

Chap.  XVIII. —  Of  the  province  of  Arma,  of  the  customs  of  the  natives,
and  of  other  notable  things         -  -  -  -  -       69

Chap.  XIX. — The  sacrifices  offered  up  by  these  Indians,  and  what
great  butchers  they  are  in  the  matter  of  eating  human  flesh         -       71

Chap.  XX. — Of  the  province  of  Paucura,  and  of  the  manners  and
customs  of  the  natives    -  -  -  -  -  -       74

Chap.  XXI. — Of  the  Indians  of  Pozo,  and  how  valiant  they  are,  and
how  dreaded  by  the  neighbouring  tribes  -  -  -       76

Chap.  XXII. — Of  the  province  of  Picara,  and  of  the  chiefs  of  it       80

Chap.  XXIII. — Of  the  province  of  Carrapa,  and  of  what  there  is  to  be
said  concerning  it  -  -  -  -  -  -       82

Chap.  XXIV. — Of  the  province  of  Quinbaya,  and  of  the  customs  of
the  chiefs.  Also  concerning  the  foundation  of  the  city  of  Cartago,
and  who  was  its  founder  -  -  -  -  -       85


TABLE    OP    CONTENTS.  IX

Chap.  XXV. — In  which  the  subject  of  the  precaling  chapter  is  con-
tinued ;  respecting  what  relates  to  the  city  of  Cartago,  and  its  founda-
tion, and  respecting  the  animal  called  cJiucha      -  -  -       90

Chap.  XXVI. — Which  touches  upon  the  provinces  in  this  great  and
beautifid  valley,  up  to  the  city  of  Cali  -  -  -  -       9;3

Chap.  XXVII. — Of  the  situation  of  the  city  of  Cali,  of  the  Indians  in
its  vicinity,  and  concerning  the  fovmder  -  -  -       99

Chap.  XXVIII. — Of  the  villages  and  cliiefs  of  Indians  who  are  within
the  jurisdiction  of  this  city  of  Cali  -  -  -  -     100

Chap.  XXIX. — In  which  the  matter  relating  to  the  city  of  CaU  is  con-
cluded ;  and  concerning  other  Indians  inhabiting  the  mountains  near
the  port  which  they  call  Buenaventm-a  -  -  -  -     10-i

Chap.  XXX. — In  which  the  road  is  described  from  the  city  of  Cali  to
that  of  Popayan,  and  concerning  the  villages  of  Indians  that  lie
between  them    -------     107

Chap.  XXXI. — Concerning  the  river  of  Santa  Martha,  and  of  the
things  which  are  met  with  on  its  banks  -  -      ,       -     1 1 1

Chap.  XXXII. — In  which  the  account  of  the  villages  and  chiefs  subject
to  the  city  of  Popayan  is  concluded  ;  and  what  there  is  to  be  said
imtil  the  boundary  of  Popayan  is  passed  -  -  -     111

Chap.  XXXIII. — In  which  an  account  is  given  of  what  there  is  between
Popayan  and  the  city  of  Pasto  ;  and  what  there  is  to  be  said  concern-
ing the  natives  of  the  neighbouring  districts        -  -  -     118

Chap.  XXXIV. — In  which  the  account  of  what  there  is  in  this  country
is  concluded,  as  far  as  the  boundary  of  Pasto      -  -  -     122

Chap.  XXXV. — Of  the  notable  fountains  and  rivers  in  these  pro-
vinces, and  how  they  make  salt  of  good  quahty  by  a  very  curious
artifice  ..._-.-     124

Chap.  XXXVI. — "Wliich  contains  the  description  and  appearance  of
the  kingdom  of  Peru  from  the  city  of  Quito  to  the  town  of  La  Plata,
a  distance  of  more  than  seven  hundred  leagues  -  -     128


Chap.  XXXVII. — Of  the  \illages  and   provinces  between  the  town
of  Pasto  and  the  city  of  Quito   -  -  -  -  -131

Chap.  XXXVIII. — In  wliich  it  is  stated  who  were  the  Kings  Yncas,
and  how  they  ruled  over  Peru    -----     135

Chap.  XXXIX. — Of  other  villages  and  buildings  between  Caraugue


X  TABLE    OF    CONTENTS.

and  the  city  of  Quito :  and  of  tlie  robbery  which  the  people  of  Otabalo
are  said  to  have  committed  on  those  of  Caxangue  -  -     137

Chap.  XL. — Of  the  situation  of  the  city  of  San  Francisco  del  Quito,  of
its  foimdation,  and  who  it  was  who  founded  it  -  -     140

Chap.  XLI. — Concerning  the  villages  beyond  Quito  as  far  as  the  royal
palaces  of  Tumebamba,  and  of  some  customs  of  the  natives  -     1-45

Chap.  XLII. — Of  the  other  villages  between  Llacta-cimga  and  Rio-
bamba  ;  and  of  what  passed  between  the  Adelantado  Don  Pedro  de
Alvarado  and  the  Marshal  Don  Diego  de  AhnagTO  -  -     153

Chap.  XLIII. — "Which  treats  of  what  there  is  to  be  said  concerning  the
other  Indian  villages  as  far  as  the  buildings  of  Tumebamba  -     160

Chap.  XLIV. — Concerning  the  grandeur  of  the  rich  palaces  of  Tume-
bamba, and  of  the  province  of  the  Caiiaris  -  -  -     164

Chap.  XLV. — Concerning  the  road  which  leads  from  the  province  of
Quito  to  the  coast  of  the  South  Sea,  and  the  bounds  of  the  city  of
Puerto  Viejo      -  -  -  -  -  -  -170

Chap.  XLVI. — In  which  an  account  is  given  of  certain  things  relating
to  the  province  of  Puerto  Viejo ;  and  also  concerning  the  equinoctial
line      --------       172

Ch.\p.  XLVII. — Treating  of  the  question  whether  the  Intlians  of  this
province  were  conquered  by  the  Yncas  or  not ;  and  concerning  the  death
which  they  inflicted  on  certain  captains  of  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui     177

Chap.  XLVIII. — How  these  Indians  were  conquered  by  Iluayna
Ccapac,  and  how  they  conversed  with  the  devil,  sacrificed  to  him,  and
buried  women  ahve  with  the  bodies  of  their  chiefs  -  -     179

Chap.  XLIX.— -  -     181

Chap.  L. — How  in  ancient  tunes  the  Indians  of  Manta  worshipped  an
emerald  as  their  God ;  and  of  other  things  concerning  these  Indians     182

Ch.vp.  LI. — In  which  the  account  of  the  Indians  of  Puerto  Viejo  is
finished  ;  and  concerning  the  founding  of  that  city,  and  who  was  its
founder  ...--..     \SQ

Chap.  LII. — Of  the  wells  which  there  are  at  the  jwint  of  Santa  Elena  ;
(if  tlie  story  they  tell  respecting  the  arrival  of  giants  in  those  i^arts;
and  of  the  tar  whieli  is  found  there  -  -  .  .      ISH


TAIiLK    OF    CONTENTS.  XI

Chap.  LIV.' — Concerning  the  foundation  of  the  city  of  (luayaquil ;  and
how  certain  of  the  natives  put  the  captains  of  Huayna  Ccapac  to
death      -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -     192

Chap.  LIV. — Of  the  island  of  Puna,  and  of  that  of  La  Plata;  and
concerning  the  admirable  root  called  sarsaparilla,  which  is  so  useful  for
all  diseases  -  -  -  -  -  -  -     11)<S

Chap.  LVI. — How  the  city  of  Santiago  de  Guayaquil  was  founded  and
settled,  of  some  Indian  villages  which  are  subject  to  it,  and  concerning
other  things  until  its  boundary  is  passed  -  -  -     2(Jl

Chap.  LVII. — Of  the  Lidian  villages  between  the  buildings  of  Tume-
bamba  and  the  city  of  Loxa,  and  concerning  the  founding  of  that
city        --------     2U4

Chap.  LVIII. — Concerning  the  provinces  between  Tamboblanco  and
the  city  of  San  Migxiel,  the  first  city  founded  by  the  Christian
Spaniards  in  Peru  ;  and  what  there  is  to  be  said  of  the  natives  -     209

Chap.  LIX. — In  wliich  the  narrative  is  continued  down  to  the  founda-
tion of  the  city  of  San  Miguel,  and  who  was  the  founder.  Also  of  the
difference  of  the  seasons  in  this  kingdom  of  Peru,  which  is  a  notable
thing ;  and  how  it  does  not  rain  along  the  whole  length  of  these  plains,
which  are  on  the  coast  of  the  South  Sea  -  -  -     212

Chap.  LX. — Concerning  the  road  which  the  Yncas  ordered  to  be  made
along  these  coast  valleys,  with  buildings  and  depots  like  those  in  the
mountains  ;  and  why  these  Indians  are  called  Yuncas     -  -     210

Chap.  LXI. — How  these  Yuncas  were  very  supei'stitious,  and  how  they
were  divided  into  nations  and  hneages   -  -  -  -     219

Chap.  LXII. — How  the  Indians  of  these  valleys  and  of  other  parts  of
the  coimtry  believe  that  souls  leave  the  bodies,  and  do  not  die  ;  and
why  they  desired  theii' wives  to  be  buried  with  them       -  -'221

Chap.  LXIII. — How  they  buried  their  dead,  and  how  they  mom-ned
for  them,  at  the  performance  of  their  obsequies  -  -     225

Chap.  LXIV.—  -  -  -  -  -  -  -     230

Chap.  LXV. — How  they  have  a  custom  of  naming  children,  in  most  of
these  provinces,  and  how  they  sought  after  sorceries  and  charms     230

Chap.  LXVI. — Of  the  fertility  of  the  land  in  these  coast  valleys,  and

•  See  note  at  page  192.


xii  TABLE    OF    CONTENTS.

of  the  many  fruits  and  roots  they  contain.     Also  concerning  their
excellent  system  of  irrigating  the  fields  -  -  -  -     233

Chap.  LXVII.— Of  the  road  from  San  INIiguel  to  Truxillo,  and  of  the
valleys  between  those  cities         ...  -  -     238

Chap.  LXVIII. — In  which  the  same  road  is  followed  as  has  been  treated
of  in  the  former  chapter,  until  the  city  of  Truxillo  is  reached     -     2-iO

Chap.  LXIX.— Of  the  founding  of  the  city  of  Truxillo,  and  who  was
the  founder        -------     244

Chap.  LXX. — Of  the  other  valleys  and  villages  along  the  coast  road,
as  far  as  the  City  of  the  Kings  -----     245

Chap.  LXXL— Of  the  situation  of  the  City  of  Kings,  of  its  founding,
and  who  was  the  founder  .  -  .  .  -     248

Chap.  LXXII. — Of  the  valley  of  Pachacamac,  and  of  the  very  ancient
temple  in  it,  and  how  it  was  reverenced  by  the  Yncas     -  -     251

Chap.  LXXIII. — Of  the  valleys  between  Pachacamac  and  the  fortress
of  Huarco,  and  of  a  notable  thing  which  is  done  in  the  valley  of
Huarco  -------     255

Chap.  LXXIV. — Of  the  great  province  of  Cliincha,  and  how  much  it
was  valued  in  ancient  times        -----     260

Chap.  LXXV. — Of  the  other  valleys,  as  far  as  the  province  of  Tara-
paca       .-------     263

Chap.  LXXVI. — Of  the  founding  of  the  city  of  Arequijia,  how  it  was
founded,  and  who  was  its  founder  .  -  .  -     267

Chap.  LXXVIL— In  which  it  is  declared  how  that,  beyond  the  pro-
vince of  Huancabamba,  there  is  that  of  Caxamarca,  and  other  large
and  very  populous  provinces        -----     269

Chap.  LXXVIII. — Of  the  foundation  of  the  city  of  the  frontier,  who  was
its  fovmder,  and  of  some  customs  of  the  Indians  in  the  province  -     277

Chap.  LXXIX. — Which  treats  of  the  foundation  of  the  city  of  Leon  de
Iluanuco,  and  who  was  its  founder  .  .  -  -     282

Chap.  LXXX. — Of  the  situation  of  this  city,  of  the  fertiUty  of  its
fields,  and  of  the  customs  of  its  inhabitants ;  also  concerning  a  beauti-
ful edifice  or  palace  of  the  Yncas  at  Iluaiuico     -  -  -     283


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS.  XIU

Chap.  LXXXI. — Of  what  there  is  to  be  said  concerning  the  country
from  Caxamarca  to  the  valley  of  Xauxa  ;  and  of  the  district  of  (4ua-
niachuco,  which  borders  on  Caxamarca  -  -  -  -     2H7

Chap.  LXXXII. — In  which  it  is  told  how  the  Yncas  ordered  that  the
storehouses  should  be  well  provided,  and  how  these  were  kept  in
readiness  for  the  troops  .....     290

Chap.  LXXXIII. — Of  the  lake  of  Bombon,  and  how  it  is  supposed  to
be  the  source  of  the  great  river  of  La  Plata        ...     294

Chap.  LXXXIV. — Which  treats  of  the  valley  of  Xauxa,  and  of  its
inhabitants,  and  relates  how  great  a  place  it  was  in  times  past    -     297

Chap.  LXXXV. — In  which  the  road  is  described  from  Xauxa  to  the
city  of  Guamanga,  and  what  there  is  worthy  of  note  on  the  road     301

Chap.  LXXXVI. — Wliich  treats  of  the  reason  why  the  city  of  Gua-
manga was  founded,  its  provinces  having  been  at  first  partly  under  the
jurisdiction  of  Cuzco,  and  partly  under  that  of  the  City  of  the
Kings    ..---...     304

Chap.  LXXXVII. — Of  the  founding  of  the  city  of  Guamanga,  and
who  was  its  founder       ......     307

Chap.  LXXXVIII. — In  which  some  things  are  related  concerning  the
natives  of  the  districts  near  this  city       -  -  -  -     310

Chap.  LXXXIX. — Of  the  great  buildings  in  the  province  of  Vilcas,
which  are  beyond  the  city  of  Guamanga  -  -  -     312

Chap.  XC. — Of  the  province  of  Andahuaylas,  and  what  is  to  be  seen  as
far  as  the  valley  of  Xaquixaguana  -  -  -  -     31.'^

Chap.  XCI. — Of  the  river  of  Apurimac,  of  the  valley  of  Xaquixaguana,
of  the  causeway  which  passes  over  it,  and  of  what  else  there  is  to
relate  until  the  city  of  Cuzco  is  reached  -  -  -     319

Chap.  XCII. — Of  the  manner  in  which  the  city  of  Cuzco  is  built,  of
the  four  royal  roads  which  lead  from  it,  of  the  grand  edifices  it  con-
tained, and  who  was  its  founder  .  .  .  .     322

Chap.  XCIII. — In  which  the  things  of  this  city  of  Cuzco  are  described
more  in  detail    -.--.--     330

Chap.  XCIV. — Wliich  treats  of  the  valley  of  Yucay  and  of  the  strong
fortress  at  Tambo,  and  of  part  of  the  province  of  Cunti-suyu     -     331


XIV  TABLE    OP    CONTEXTS.

Chap.  XCV. — Of  the  forests  of  the  Andes,  of  theii"  great  thickness,  of
the  huge  snakes  wliich  are  bred  in  them,  and  of  the  evil  customs  of  the
Indians  who  live  in  the  interior  of  these  forests  -  -     336

XoTE  TO  Chap.  XCV. — On  the  river  Funis,  a  tributary  of  the  Amazon.
By  Mr.  Richard  Spruce  -  -  -  -  -     339

Chap.  XCVI. — How  the  Indians  carry  herbs  or  roots  in  their  mouths,
and  concerning  the  herb  called  coca,  which  they  raise  in  many  parts
of  this  kingdom  _..-..     352

Chap.  XCVII. — Of  the  road  from  Cuzco  to  the  city  of  La  Paz  ;  and  of
the  villages,  until  the  Indians  called  Canches  are  passed  -     353

Chap.  XCVIII.— Of  the  provinces  of  Canas,  and  of  Ayavire        -     356

Chap.  XCIX. — Of  the  great  district  which  is  inhabited  by  the
Collas^  of  the  appearance  of  the  land  where  their  villages  are  built,
and  how  the  Mitimaes  were  stationed  to  supply  them  with  pro^n-
sions      --------     359

Ch.vp.  C. — Of  what  is  said  concerning  the  origin  of  these  Collas,  of
their  appearance,  and  how  they  buried  their  dead  -  -     362

Chap.  CI. — How  these  Indians  perform  their  annual  ceremonies,  and  of
the  temples  they  had  in  ancient  times    -  -  -  -     366

Chap.  CII. — Of  the  ancient  ruins  at  Pucara,  of  the  former  greatness  of
Hatun-coUa,  of  the  village  called  Azangaro,  and  of  other  things  which
are  here  related  -  -  -  -  -  -     368

Chap.  CHI. — Of  the  great  lake  which  is  within  the  province  of  the
Collao,  of  its  depth,  and  of  the  temple  of  Titicaca  -  -     370

Chap.  CIV. — In  wluch  the  narrative  continues,  and  the  villages  are
described  as  far  as  Tiahuanaco   -  -  -  -  -     372

Chap.  CV.— Of  the  village  of  Tiahuanaco,  and  the  great  and  ancient
edifices  which  are  to  be  seen  there  -  -  -  -     374

Chap.  CVL— Of  the  founding  of  the  city  called  of  Oiu-  Lady  of  Peace,
who  was  its  founder,  and  of  the  road  thence  to  the  town  of  Plata     380

Chai'.  evil. — Of  the  founding  of  the  town  of  Plata,  which  is  situated
in  tlie  province  of  Charcas  -  -  -  -  -     382


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS.  XV

CiiAP.  CVIII. — Of  tlie  riches  in  Porco,  and  how  there  are  large  veins
of  silver  near  that  town  .  .  .  .  .     335

Chap.  CIX. — How  they  discovered  the  mines  of  Potosi,  whence  they
have  taken  riches  such  as  have  never  been  seen  or  heard  of  in  other
times ;  and  how,  as  the  metal  does  not  run,  the  Indians  get  it  by  the
invention  of  the  huayras  .  .  _  .  .     ggC

Chap.  CX. — There  was  the  richest  market  in  the  world  at  this  hill  of
Potosi,  at  the  time  when  these  mines  were  prosperous     -  -     390

Chap.  CXI. — Of  the  sheep,  hnanacus,  and  vicunas^  which  they  have
in  most  parts  of  the  mountains  of  Peru  .  _  .     392

Chap.  CXII. — Of  a  tree  called  molle,  and  of  other  herbs  and  roots  in
this  kingdom  of  Peru     ------     395

Chap.  CXIII. — How  there  are  large  salt  lakes  and  baths  in  this
kingdom ;  and  how  the  land  is  suited  for  the  growth  of  olives
and  other  fruits  of  Spain,  and  for  some  animals  and  birds  of  that
country  -------     399

CiiAP.  CXIV. — IIow  the  native  Indians  of  tliis  kingdom  were  great
masters  of  the  arts  of  working  in  silver  and  of  buUding  :  and  how
they  had  excellent  dyes  for  their  fine  cloths         -  -  -     403

Chap.  CXV. — How  there  are  great  mines  in  most  parts  of  this  king-
dom       --------     406

Chap.  CXVI. — How  many  nations  of  these  Indians  make  war  one  upon
the  other,  and  how  the  lords  and  chiefs  oppress  the  poorer  people     407

Chap.  CXVII. — In  which  certain  things  are  declared  concerning  the
Indians  ;  and  what  fell  out  between  a  clergyman  and  one  of  them,  in
a  village  of  this  kingdom  -  -  -  -  -411

Chap.  CXVIII. — How,  when  a  chief  near  the  to\vn  of  Anzerma  wished
to  become  a  Christian,  he  saw  the  devils  visibly,  who  wished  to  deter
him  from  his  good  intention  by  their  terrors       -  -  -     415

Chap.  CXIX.— How  mighty  wondei-s  have  been  clearly  seen  in  the
discovery  of  these  Indies,  how  our  Sovereign  Lord  God  desires  to  watch
over  the  Spaniards,  and  how  He  chastises  those  who  are  cruel  to  the
Indians  -------     41S

Chap.  CXX.— Of  the  dioceses  in  this  kingdom  of  Peru,  who  are  the


XVI  TABLE    OF    CONTENTS.

bishops  of  them,  and  of  the  Royal  Chancellery  in  the  City  of  the
Kings     --------     424

Chap.  CXXI. — Of  the  monasteries  which  have  been  founded  in  Pern,
from  the  date  of  its  discovery  down  to  the  present  year  1550      -     426

Index         --------     429


INTRODUCTION.


The  work  of  Pedro  de  Cieza  de  Leon  is,  in  many
respects,  one  of  the  most  remarkable  literary  produc-
tions of  the  age  of  Spanish  conquest  in  America,  Written
by  a  man  who  had  passed  his  life  in  the  camp  from  early
boyhood,  it  is  conceived  on  a  plan  which  would  have
done  credit  to  the  most  thoughtful  scholar,  and  is  exe-
cuted with  care,  judgment,  and  fidelity.  But  before
examining  the  work  itself,  I  will  give  some  account  of
its  author — of  whom,  however,  little  is  known,  beyond
what  can  be  gathered  from  his  own  incidental  state-
ments in  the  course  of  his  narrative.

Cieza  de  Leon  is  believed  to  have  been  born  in  the
year  1519  in  the  city  of  Seville,  where  he  passed  the
first  fourteen  years  of  his  life.  It  has  been  conjectured
that  his  father  was  a  native  of  Leon,^  in  the  north  of
Spain,  but  absolutely  nothing  is  known  of  his  parent-
age.

In  1532,  at  the  extraordinarily  early  age  of  fourteen,
young  Pedro  embarked  at  Seville,  and  set  out  to  seek
his  fortunes  in  the  New  World.  At  that  time  scarcely
a  year  elapsed  without  seeing  an  expedition  fitted  out,

^  Don  Pascual  de  Gaj-ango.s  is  inclined  to  this  opinion.

h


11  INTRODUCTION.

to  undertake  some  new  discovery  or  conquest.  Seville
and  Cadiz  were  crowded  with  adventurers,  all  eagerly
seeking  for  a  passage  to  that  marvellous  land  beyond
the  setting  sun.  It  was,  indeed,  a  time  of  wild  excite-
ment. Every  ship  that  returned  from  the  Indies  might,
and  not  a  few  did,  bring  tidings  of  the  discovery  of
new  and  powerful  empires  before  undreamt  of  Peoj)le
of  all  ages  and  of  every  grade  in  society  flocked  to  the
sea  ports,  and  took  ship  for  the  Indies  ;  excited  beyond
control  by  the  accounts  of  those  inexhaustible  riches
and  fabulous  glories,  which  penetrated  to  every  village
in  Spain.  Among  the  leaders  of  these  expeditions
there  were  some  honoural;)le  knights,  with  courteous
manners  and  cultivated  minds,  such  as  Diego  de  Alva-
rado,  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  and  Lorenzo  de  ALlana.^
But  the  majority  were  either  coarse  and  avaricious
adventurers,  or  disappoined  courtiers,  like  that  3^oung
scamp  Alonzo  Enriquez  de  Guzman,  whom  I  intro-
duced to  the  notice  of  the  Hakluyt  Society  in  1862.
Cieza  de  Leon,  at  the  time  of  his  embarkation,  was  a
mere  boy,  too  young  to  be  classed  under  any  of  these
heads.  His  character  was  destined  to  be  formed  in  a
rouo-h  and  savao;e  school,  and  it  is  most  remarkable  that
SO  fine  a  fellow  as  our  author  really  was,  should  have  been
produced  amidst  the  horrors  of  the  Spanish  American
conquest.  Humane,  generous,  full  of  noble  sympathies,
observant,  and  methodical ;  he  was  bred  amidst  scenes
of  cruelty,  pillage,  and  wanton  destruction,  which  were
calculated  to  produce  a  far  different  character.  Con-
sidering the  circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed  from

'  See  notes  at  pag-es  157  and  123.


INTRODUCTION.  Ill

early  boyhood,  his  book  is  certainly  a  most  extraordi-
nary, as  well  as  an  inestimable  result  of  his  labours
and  military  services.

It  does  not  appear  in  what  fleet  our  boy  soldier  set
out  from  Spain;  but  judging^  from  the  date,  and  from
the  company  in  which  we  find  him  immediately  on
landing  in  America,  I  consider  it  more  than  probable
that  he  sailed  from  his  native  land  in  one  of  the  ships
which  formed  the  expeditionary  fleet  of  Don  Pedro  de
Heredia.

Heredia,  who  had  already  served  with  distinction
on  the  coast  of  Tierra  Firme,  had  obtained  a  grant  of
the  government  of  all  the  country,  between  the  river
Maojdalena  and  the  gulf  of  Darien,  from  Charles  V.
He  was  a  native  of  Madrid,  where,  having  had  his
nostrils  slit  in  a  street  brawl,  he  had  killed  three  of  the
men  who  had  treated  him  with  this  indignity.  Forced
to  leave  his  native  country,  he  took  refuge  in  San
Domingo,  and  a  relation  had  interest  enough  to  get
him  appointed  as  lieutenant  to  Garcia  de  Lerma,  in  an
expedition  to  Santa  Martha  ;  whence  he  returned  to
Spain.  He  was  a  man  of  considerable  ability,  judg-
ment, and  determination,  was  respected  by  his  own
followers,  and  had  already  had  some  experience  in
Indian  warfare.  His  lieutenant  was  Francisco  de
Cesar,  one  of  the  most  dashing  officers  of  the  time.^

Heredia  s  expedition,  which  consisted  of  one  galleon
and  two  caravels,  carrying  in  all  about  a  hundred  men,

*  Cesar  bad  been  \vitb  Sebastian  Cabot,  in  bis  expedition  to
tbe  moutb  of  the  Rio  de  la  Plata ;  and  joined  Heredia  at  the
island  of  Puerto  Rico.     See  page  47,  and  note.

h2


IV  INTEODUCTIOX.

sailed  from  Cadiz  in  the  end  of  1532.  They  first
touched  at  San  Domingo,  where  Heredia  took  on  board
more  recruits,  forty-seven  horses,  and  some  leathern
cuirasses,  which  had  been  prepared  as  a  protection
against  the  poisoned  arrows  of  the  Indians.  On  the
14th  of  January  1533  the  expedition  entered  the  bay
of  Carthagena,-^  on  the  main  land  of  South  America,
where  the  disembarkation  of  the  Spaniards  was  bravely
contested  by  the  natives.  In  no  part  of  Spanish  Ame-
rica did  the  Indians  more  resolutely  defend  their
homes,  than  along  the  coast  of  the  Tierra  Firme,  as  it
was  called  ;  and  young  Cieza  de  Leon  saw  some  very
rough  service  on  his  first  landing  in  the  new  world.
Eventually  Heredia  succeeded  in  founding  the  city  of
Carthagena,  of  which  he  was  the  first  governor,  and  in
establishing  a  firm  footing  in  the  surrounding  country  :
and  for  some  three  or  four  years  the  future  author  con-
tinued to  serve  under  him.  In  1535  Cieza  de  Leon
accompanied  Heredia's  brother  Alonzo  to  the  gulf  of
Darien  or  Uraba,  where  a  settlement  was  formed  called
San  Sebastian  de  Buena  Vista.

Meanwhile,  a  judge,  named  Pedro  Yadillo,  was
sent  to  Carthagena  to  examine  into  the  ^proceedings  of
Heredia,  with  full  powers  from  the  Audiencia  of
San  Domingo  ;  and  he  threw  the  governor  into  })rison.
His  violent  proceedings  were  disapproved  in  Spain,
and  another  lawyer  was  sent  out  to  sit  in  judgment
on  the  judge.     The  licentiate  Vadillo,  who  seems  to

'  Herrera  says  that  Heredia  gave  the  name  of  Carthagena  to
the  bay  ;  but  in  reality  the  place  had  alread}^  received  that  name,
either  from  Ojeda  or  Bastidas.


INTRODUCTIOX.  V

have  been  better  fitted  for  a  soldier  than  for  a  j  udge,
resolved  to  perform  some  service,  or  make  some  dis-
covery in  the  interval,  the  importance  of  which,  in  a
military  point  of  view,  should  secure  oblivion  for  his
misconduct  as  a  lawyer.  He,  therefore,  organised  a
force  of  four  hundred  Spaniards  at  San  Sebastian  de
Uraba,  and,  setting  out  early  in  1538,  crossed  the  moun-
tains of  Abibe,  and  advanced  up  the  valley  of  the  Cauca.

Cieza  de  Leon,  then  in  his  nineteenth  year,  accom-
panied Vadillo  in  this  bold  adventure  as  a  private
soldier.  It  was  now  upwards  of  five  years  since  he
first  landed  in  the  new  world,  the  whole  of  which
time  had  been  spent  by  him  in  severe  and  dangerous
service  in  the  province  of  Carthagena.  At  an  age
when  most  boys  are  at  school,  this  lad  had  been
sharing  in  all  the  hardships  and  perils  of  seasoned
veterans  ;  and  even  then  he  w^as  gifted  with  powers  of
observation  far  beyond  his  years,  as  is  proved  by  his
very  interesting  account  of  the  Indians  of  Uraba. -^
Amongst  other  things  he  tells  us  that  the  women  of
Uraba  are  the  prettiest  and  most  loveable  of  any  that
he  had  seen  in  the  Indies.

The  expedition  of  Vadillo  w\as  one  of  those  despe-
rate undertakings  which,  common  as  they  were  in
the  history  of  those  times,  still  fill  us  with  astonish-
ment. Young  Cieza  de  Leon  took  his  share  in  the
dangers  and  privations  which  were  encountered,  and
which  none  but  men  endowed  with  extraordinary
bravery  and  fortitude  could  have  overcome.

After  marching  over  a  low  forest  covered  plain,  the

^  See  pages  35  to  40.


VI  INTRODUCTION.

explorers  had  to  cross  the  mountains  of  Abibe,  "where
the  roads  were  assuredly  most  difficult  and  wearisome,
while  the  roots  were  such  that  they  entangled  the  feet
of  both  men  and  horses.  At  the  highest  part  of  the
mountains  there  was  a  very  laborious  ascent,  and  a
still  more  dangerous  descent  on  the  other  side."  At
this  point  many  of  the  horses  fell  over  the  precipices
and  were  dashed  to  pieces,  and  even  some  of  the  men
w^ere  killed,  while  others  were  so  much  injured  that
they  were  left  behind  in  the  forests,  awaiting  their
deaths  in  great  misery.  On  one  occasion  our  young
soldier  was  posted  as  a  sentry  on  the  banks  of  a  stream
whence  some  kind  of  centipede  dropped  from  a  branch,
and  bit  him  in  the  neck.  He  adds  that  he  passed  the
most  painful  and  wearisome  night  be  ever  experienced
in  his  life.  At  length  Vadillo's  gallant  little  band
completed  their  march  over  the  terrible  mountains  of
Abibe,  and  entered  the  pleasant  valleys  ruled  by  the
cacique  Nutibara.  Thence  the  bold  licentiate  marched
up  the  valley  of  the  Cauca.

In  this  march  the  Spaniards  suffered  terribly  from
want  of  proper  food,  the  difficulties  of  the  road,  and
the  constant  attacks  of  the  Indians.  They  clamoured
for  a  retreat  to  the  coast,  but  this  did  not  suit  the
views  of  Vadillo,  who  knew  that  imprisonment  pro-
bably awaited  him  at  Carthagena  ;  and,  when  the  dis-
content of  his  men  became  formidable,  he  drew  his
sword  and  rushed  alone  into  the  woods,  crying  out
that,  let  who  would  go  back,  he  should  press  on  till  he
met  with  better  fortune.  The  troops  were  ashamed
to  desert  him,  and  eventually  they  reached  Call,  in


INTRODUCTION,  Vll

the  upper  part  of  the  Cauca  valley.  Here  at  length
he  was  abandoned  by  all  his  followers,  and  went  ou
almost  alone  to  Popayan,  whence  he  returned  to
Spain.  ^

The  followers  of  Vadillo  joined  those  of  Lorenzo  de
Aldana,^  who  was  then  governing  Popayan  for  Pizarro,
and  many  of  them  returned  down  the  valley  of  the
Cauca  again  with  an  officer  named  Jorge  de  Roljledo,
who  was  commissioned  to  conquer  and  settle  the
country  discovered  by  Vadillo.  Among  this  number
was  our  author,  who  witnessed  the  subjugation  of  the
cannibal  tribes  of  the  Cauca,  the  foundation  of  several
so-called  cities,  and  the  perpetration  of  much  cruelty.
He  received  a  repartimiento  of  Indians  in  the  pro-
vince of  Arma,  for  his  services.  Robledo  returned  to
Spain,  and  came  back  with  the  title  of  marshal,  and
the  grant  of  the  government  of  a  country  with  ill-
defined  limits,  in  1546.  The  fierce  and  unscrupulous
Sebastian  de  Belalcazar  was  then  governor  of  Popayan.
He  claimed  the  territory  which  Robledo  had  occu-
pied, and  when  that  officer  refused  to  retire,  he  sur-
prised him  at  a  place  called  Picara  on  the  1st  of
October,  1546,  took  him  prisoner,  and  hung  him,  in
spite  of  the  entreaties  of  the  unfortunate  knight  to  be
beheaded  like  a  gentleman.^  The  cannibal  Indians
are  said  to  have  eaten  the  body.  Cieza  de  Leon,  who
had  served  under  Robledo  for  several  years,  makes  the
folio  win  o'  remark  on  his  death,  in  recapitulating  the
fate    which    overtook   all   the    conquerors    who    were

'  AcosUi,  Descuhrinueuto  de  la  Neuva  Granada,  cap.  xiv,  p.  2-31.
-  See  note  p.  123.  ^  See  p.  79,  and  note.


Vlll  INTRODUCTION.

cruel  to  the  natives  :  "  The  marshal  Don  Jorge  Eo-
Lledo  consented  to  allow  great  harm  to  be  done  to  the
Indians  in  the  province  of  Pozo,  and  caused  many  to  be
killed  with  cross-bows  and  dogs.  And  God  permitted
that  he  should  be  sentenced  to  death  in  the  same
place,  and  have  for  his  tomb  the  bellies  of  Indians."^
Our  young  author  joined  the  service  of  Belalcazar,  on
the  death  of  Eobledo.

Cieza  de  Leon  began  to  write  a  journal  of  some
kind,  which  formed  the  material  for  his  future  work,
in  the  year  1541  at  Cartago,  in  the  Cauca  valley,  when
serving  under  Robledo.  He  tells  us  that  "as  he
noted  the  many  great  and  strange  things  that  are  to
be  seen  in  this  new  world  of  the  Indies,  there  came
upon  him  a  strong  desire  to  write  an  account  of  some
of  them,  as  well  those  which  he  had  seen  with  his  ow^n
eyes,  as  those  he  had  heard  of  from  persons  of  good
repute."^  He  was  then  twenty-two  years  of  age,  and
from  that  time  he  seems  to  have  persevered,  in  spite
of  many  difficulties,  in  keeping  a  careful  record  of  all
he  saw  and  heard.  "  Oftentimes,"  he  says,  "  when  the
other  soldiers  were  reposing,  I  was  tiring  myself  by
writing.  Neither  fatigue,  nor  the  ruggedness  of  the
country,  nor  the  mountains  and  rivers,  nor  intolerable
hunger  and  suffering,  have  ever  been  sufficient  to
obstruct  my  two  duties,  namely  writing  and  following
my  flag  and  my  captain  without  fault.'"^

In  1547  the  President  Gasca  landed  in  Peru,  and
marched  against  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  who  was  in  open
rebellion  at  Cuzco.     All  loyal  officers  were  called  upon

'   See  p.  422.  ^  Page  15.  ^  Page  8.


INTRODUCTION.  IX

to  join  the  royal  standard,  and  troops  at  Popayan  were
hurried  south  with  this  object.  Cieza  de  Leon,  now
a  stout  young  man  at  arms,  was  among  them.^  By
this  time  he  was  a  veteran  of  sixteen  years  service,
with  his  intellect  matured  and  sharpened  in  a  rough
and  trying  school,  and  every  faculty  on  the  alert.
His  habit  of  careful  observation  with  a  fixed  ol)ject,
and  the  practical  life  he  was  leading,  render  his  re-
marks, on  all  he  saw  during  this  march,  of  the  greatest
value.  Mr.  Prescott  says  of  him  that  "  his  testimony,
always  good,  becomes  for  these  events  of  more  than
usual  value." ^  The  reinforcements  from  Popayan
marched  by  Pasto  and  Quito  to  Tumebamba,  then
down  to  the  sea-shore,  and  along  the  coast  to  Lima,
then  across  the  Andes  again,  by  Xauxa  and  Guamanga,
until  they  joined  the  army  of  the  president  Gasca  in
the  valley  of  Andahuaylas.

Thus  Cieza  de  Leon  had  the  opportunity  of  seeing
a  very  extensive  and  varied  tract  of  country.  Nothing-
escaped  his  observation.  The  ruins  of  j^alaces  and
store-houses,  the  great  Ynca  roads,  the  nature  of  the
country,  the  products,  the  natural  phenomena,  the
method  of  irrigation,  the  traditions, — all  were  carefully
noted  down  by  this  indefatigable  and  intelligent
young  observer.  He  was  present  at  the  fiual  rout
of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  and  at  the  subsequent  trial  and
execution  of  that  chief,  and  of  his  fierce  old  lieutenant
Carbajal.^  He  afterwards  went  to  Cuzco,  and  to  the
valleys  to   the  eastward,   and,   in  the  year   1549,  he

'  Page  151.  ^  CoiKjucsf  uf  Peru,  ii^,J^.  oG5,  (note).

'  Paofe  362.


X  INTRODUCTION.

uiKlertook  a  journey  to  tlie  silver-yiekling  province  of
Cliarcas,  with  the  sole  object  "of  learning  all  that
was  worthy  of  notice,"^  under  the  special  auspices  of
the  President  Gasca  himself,  who  supplied  him  with
letters  of  introduction.  In  travelling  over  the  Collao,
and  along  the  shores  of  lake  Titicaca,  he  tells  us  that
"  he  stopped  to  write  all  that  deserved  mention  con-
cerning the  Indians;" 2  and  at  Tiahuanaco  "he  wandered
over  all  the  ruins,  writing  down  what' he  saw."^  He
then  visited  the  silver  mines  of  Porco  and  Potosi,  and
returned  to  Lima,  by  way  of  Arequipa  and  the  coast.
At  Lima  our  author  finished  writing  his  notes  on  the
8th  of  September,  1550,  and  sailed  for  Spain,  after
having  passed  seventeen  years  of  his  life  in  the
Lidies.

The  first  part  of  his  intended  work  was  published
at  Seville  in  1553;  and  the  author  died  in  about  1560.
We  may  gather  from  his  writings  that  he  was  humane
and  generous  in  his  dealinsjs  with  the  Indians,  indio;-
nant  at  the  acts  of  cruelty  and  oppression  which  he
was  forced  to  witness,  that  he  was  in  the  habit  of
weiohiiiQf  the  value  of  conflictins^  evidence  in  collectiup-
his  information,^  and  that  fuller  reliance  may  be  placed
on  his  statements,  than  upon  those  of  almost  any  other
writer  of  the  period.  It  is  very  much  to  be  regretted
that  so  little  is  knoxMi  of  the  life  of  this  remarkable
man,  beyond  what  he  incidentally  tells  us  himself.^

'  Page  339.  ^  -p^,^^  0^34  3  p^^^^  3-^  4  g^g  p   i;;^

*  The  fullest  biographical  notice  of  Cieza  de  Leon  is  to  be

found  in  Antonio,  and  is  as  follows  : —

"  Pcti'us  Cieza  de  Leon  (patria  an  dunitaxat  doinicilio  incola-

tuvc   Hi.spalensis)    tredceiiu  fere  anuorum  pucr  ad  occideniales


INTRODUCTION.  XI

The  young  anther  commences  his  first  part  with  a
dedication  to  Philip  II,  in  which,  while  dwelling  on  the
grandeur  and  importance  of  his  subject,  he  modestly
says  that  he,  an  unlearned  soldier,  has  undertaken  it,
because  others  of  more  learning  were  too  much  occu-
pied in  the  wars  to  write.  He  began  to  take  notes
because  no  one  else  was  writing  anything  concerning
what  had  occurred,  and   he  reflected  that  "time  de-

Indos  Peruanamqiie  plagam  transfretavit,  militiamque  ibi  seqiiu-
tus,  plusquani  septemdecim  in  his  oris  commoratns  est.  Fructum
tarn  longa?  peregrinationis,  eximium  quidem,  is  edidit  in  eo  libro,
qufe  prima  pars  est  designati,  an  vero  perfecti  ab  eo  atque  abso-
luti  operis  ?  Hispali  apud  Martinum  Clementem  1553,  fob,
Antwerpiwque  apud  Joannem  Stelzium  1554:  in  8.  Italica  anteni
ex  interpretatione  Augnstini  di  Gi^avaliz  prodiit  Romee  ex  officina
Valerii  Dorigii  1555  :  8.  Ex  qnatuor  partibus,  in  quas  fidem  suam
auctor  obstrinxerat,  hcec  tantTim  edita  est,  reliqnaB  valde  ab  omni-
bus desiderantur.  In  fine  istius  hoc  testatum  voluit,  se  primam
huic  parti  anno  M.D.XLi  in  Carthagine  gnibernationis  ut  vocant
Popajanica?,  manum  admo\n.sse,  postremam  vero  in  Regia  urbe
Lima  anno  m.d.l.  cum  per  id  tempus  duobus  super  triginta  natus
esset  annos.  Obiisse  eum  Hispali  anno  m.d.lx.  vel  paulo  ante
mouet  in  schedis  ad  Bibliotliecam  Universalem  Alfonsus  Ciaconius,
Dominicanus.  Bihliotheca  Hispana  Nova  sive  Hispanonmi  Scrip-
torum,  qui  ah  anno  M.D.  ad  M.DC.LXXXiv^/Zontere  notiUa  :  auctore  D.
Nlcolao  Antonio  Hispalensi  J.  G.     (Madrid,  1788:  ii,  p.  184.)

An  author  named  Fernando  Diaz  de  Valderrama,  who  published
a  biography  of  illustrious  sons  of  Seville  in  1791  (under  the
))seudonym  of  Fermin  Arana  de  Valflora),  transcribes  the  above
notice  of  Antonio,  without  adding  any  new  particulars.  His
work  is  entitled  Hijos  de  Sevilla,  ilustres  en  santidad,  letras,  armas,
artcs,  6  dignidad.  Don  Enrique  de  Vedia,  in  the  second  volume
of  Iris  Historiadores  primitiros  de  Indias,*  published  at  Madrid
in  1853,  also  merely  copies  his  notice  of  Cieza  de  Leon  from
Antonio.

*  Forming  part  of  the  liihliotcca  dc  Aatoren  Espanulcs  de
Hivadeneyro.


Xll  INTRODUCTION.

stroys  the  memory  of  events,  in  such  sort  that  soon
there  is  no  knowledge  of  what  has  passed."  In  his
prologue  he  gives  a  full  and  detailed  account  of  the
four  parts  of  his  Chronicle,  only  the  first  of  which  has
reached  us.  They  were  to  contain  respectively  the
geography,  the  early  history,  the  conquest,  and  the  civil
wars  of  Peru.  "  The  first  part,"  he  says,  "  treats  of  the
division  of  the  provinces  of  Peru,  as  well  towards  the
sea  as  inland,  with  the  longitudes  and  latitudes.  It
contains  a  description  of  the  provinces  ;  an  account  of
the  new  cities  founded  by  the  Spaniards,  with  the
names  of  the  founders,  and  the  time  when  they  were
founded ;  an  account  of  the  ancient  rites  and  customs
of  the  native  Indians,  and  other  strange  things  very
different  from  those  of  our  country,  which  are  worthy
of  note."  It  is  this  part,  the  only  one  that  was  ever
printed,  which  is  now  placed,  for  the  first  time  in  a
translated  form,  in  the  hands  of  Members  of  the
Hakluyt  Society.

The  work  opens  with  a  description  of  Panama  ;
wliicli  is  followed  by  a  very  accurate  notice  of  all  the
anchoraojes  and  headlands  alonoj  the  west  coast  of
South  America,  from  that  port  to  the  soutliern  part  of
Chile.  Cieza  de  Leon  seems  to  have  taken  much  pains
in  collecting  accurate  information  for  the  use  of  future
navigators.  "  I  have  myself,"  he  says,  "  been  in  most  of
the  ports  and  rivers  which  I  have  now  described,  and
1  have  taken  much  trouble  to  ascertain  the  correctness
of  what  is  here  written,  having  communicated  with  the.
dexterous  and  expert  i)ilots  who  know  the  navigation
of  these  ports,  and  who  took  the  altitudes  in  my  pre-


INTRODUCTION.  XIll

sencc.  I  have  taken  no  little  trouble  to  ascertain  the
truth,  and  I  have  examined  the  new  charts  made  by
the  pilots  who  discovered  this  sea."  He  appears  also
to  have  collected  reports  from  mariners  who  had  sailed
through  the  straits  of  JMagellan,  but  they  were  lost,
together  witli  other  papers  and  journals,  Avhich  were
stolen  in  the  confusion  consequent  on  the  battle  of
Xaquixaguana.^  The  sailing  directions  of  Cieza  de
Leon  for  the  west  coast  of  South  America  are  among
the  earliest  attempts  of  the  kind.  Information  of  the
same  sort  is  given  in  Dampier's  voyages  ;  and  these
were  the  rude  forerunners  of  the  complete  works  of
Admiral  Fitz  Eoy,  and  other  modern  surveyors.

Having  given  the  reader  a  clear  idea  of  the  coast  of
the  great  newly  discovered  empire  of  the  Yncas,  Cieza
de  Leon  lands  him  in  the  gulf  of  Darien,  and  conducts
him  up  the  valley  of  the  Cauca  to  Popayan.^  This
portion  of  his  narrative  is  the  more  important,  because
no  other  writer  has  since  given  so  complete  an  account
of  the  Cauca  valley.  Cieza  de  Leon  is  still  the  best
authority  concerning  this  region,  notwithstanding  that
more  than  three  hundred  years  have  elapsed  since  he
wrote.  It  is  true  that  Eestrepo,  in  the  beginning  of
this  century,  published  a  valuable  memoir  on  Antio-
cpiia  ;  and  that  such  travellers  as  Cochrane,  Mollien,
and  Holton  have  written  accounts  of  Cali  and  Cartago,
in  the  upper  part  of  the  valley  of  Cauca  ;  but  our
author  still  stands  alone  in  having  given  a  fuU  descrip-
tion of  the  whole  length  of  this  little-known  valley.
He  not  only  describes  the  manners  and  customs  of  the

'  Page  27  and  page  32.  ^  Chapters  vi  to  xxxii.


XIV  INTRODUCTION.

aboriginal  tribei=5,  which  all  appear  to  have  been  ad-
dicted to  cannibalism,  but  adds  many  very  interesting
pieces  of  information,  such  as  a  notice  of  the  different
kinds  of  bees,  of  the  various  methods  of  obtaining
salt,  and  of  the  prevailing  forms  of  animal  and  vege-
table life.

From  Popayan  the  reader  is  conveyed  by  this  very
pleasant  companion  along  the  great  plateau  of  the
Andes,  by  Pasto,  Quito,  and  Riol.iamba,  to  Tume-
bamba,  and  Loxa.^  Here,  no-ain,  as  indeed  throuohout
the  work,  the  nature  of  the  country,  the  distances,  the
manners  and  customs  of  the  natives,  the  climate,  the
staple  products,  and  the  animals  to  be  met  with,  are  all
carefully  noted.  There  are  also  descriptions  of  several
ruined  edifices,  and  a  glowing  account  of  the  great  road
of  the  Yncas,^  In  this  section,  too,  there  is  an  excellent
general  sketch  of  the  principal  geographical  features  of
Peru,^  and  some  information  respecting  the  origin  and
rise  of  the  Ynca  dynasty.^

The  chapters  relating  to  the  emeralds  of  Manta,  the
giants  on  point  Santa  Elena,  the  island  of  Puna,  and
the  city  of  Guayaquil,  are  derived  from  hearsay,  as  our
author  does  not  appear  to  have  visited  that  part  of
the  country  ;  but  he  was  careful  to  sift  his  authorities,
and  to  weigh  their  value,^  and  in  this,  as  in  many
other  respects,  he  is  far  superior  to  most  of  the  writers
of  his  time.  His  chapter  on  the  equator*"  shows  that
questions  of  geographical  science  attracted  the  atteii-

'   Clmpters  xxxvi  to  xliv.  ^  P.  1-53,  and  note.

'  Chapter  xxxvi.  *  Chapter  xxxviii.

'  See  p.  177.  "  See  p.  .173.


INTRODUCTION.  XV

tion  of  the  yoniig  soldier  ;  while  his  careful  notes  in
connection  with  the  absence  of  rain  on  the  Peruvian
coast,^  are  evidence  that  he  was  not  unmindful  of  the
natural  phenomena  of  the  strange  land  which  he  was
exploring.

After  traversing  the  valley  of  the  Cauca,  and  the
Cordillera  of  the  Andes  from  Popayan  to  Loxa,  Cieza
de  Leon  descends  to  the  Peruvian  coast,  and  describes
the  sandy  deserts,  and  every  intervening  fertile  valley
from  Tumbez  to  Tarapaca.^  Here  again  we  have
interesting  accounts  of  the  manners  and  customs  of
tlie  natives,  especially  of  the  method  of  burying  their
dead  ;  descrijDtions  of  ruins,  of  works  of  irrigation,  and
of  the  great  coast  road  of  the  Yncas  ;  and  notices  of
the  fruits,  trees,  and  animals.

Having  completed  a  survey  of  the  coast  valleys,
Cieza  de  Leon  returns  to  the  Cordillera  of  the  Andes,
nnd  describes  the  country  from  Caxamarca,  l)y  way  of
Huanuco,  Xauxa,  Guamanga,  Andahuaylas,  and  Aban-
cay,  to  Cuzco,^  the  capital  of  the  empire  of  the  Yncas.
After  devoting  two  chapters  to  the  city  of  Cuzco,"^  he
then  gives  an  account  of  the  lovely  valleys  and  in-
terminable tropical  forests  to  the  eastward  ;^  and  com-
pletes his  extensive  travels  by  a  description  of  the
cold  region  of  the  Collao,  the  shores  of  lake  Titicaca,
the  imposing  ruins  of  Tiahuanaco,  and  the  silver-
yielding  provinces  of  Plata  and  Potosi.  The  interest
of  the  latter  part  of  this  remarkable  work  is  enhanced

'  See  p.  214.  -  Chapters  lix  to  Ixxvi.

3  Chapters  Lxxvii  to  xci.  *  Chapters  xcii  and  xciii.

^  Chapter  xciv  and  xcv.


XVI  INTRODUCTION.

by  the  discussion  of  such  points  in  physical  geography
as  the  drainage  of  hike  Titicaca,  and  by  information
respecting  the  silver  mines,  the  animals  of  the  llama
tribe  found  in  Peru,  the  vegetable  products  of  the
country,  and  the  progress  of  the  Indians  in  the  arts  of
building,  weaving,  dying,  and  working  in  silver,  stone,
and  clay.

Such  is  a  brief  sketch  of  the  contents  of  Cieza  de
Leon's  chronicle.  Bearing  evident  marks  of  honesty
of  purpose,  and  skill  in  the  selection  of  materials,  on
the  part  of  its  author,  it  is  at  the  same  time  written
by  one  who  examined  almost  every  part  of  the  empire
of  the  Yncas,  within  a  few  years  of  the  conquest.  It
is,  therefore,  a  work  of  the  greatest  possible  value  to
the  student  of  early  South  American  history,  and  has
always  stood  very  high  as  an  authority,  in  the  estimation
of  modern  historians.  Among  these,  Mr.  Prescott  bears
strong  testimony  to  the  merits  of  Cieza  de  Leon.^

1  The  following  is  Mr.  Prescott's  notice  of  Cieza  de  Leon,
given  in  the  second  volume  of  the  Conquest  of  Peru,  p.  297  : —

"  Cieza  de  Leon  is  an  author  worthy  of  particular  note.  His
Crnnica  del  Peru  should  more  properly  be  styled  an  itinerary,  or
rather  geography  of  Peru.  It  gives  a  minute  topographical  view
of  the  country  at  the  time  of  the  conquest ;  of  its  provinces  and
towns,  both  Indian  and  Spanish ;  its  flourishiug  sea  coasts ;  its
forests,  valleys,  and  interminable  ranges  of  mountains  in  the
interior,  with  many  interesting  particulars  of  the  existing  popu-
lation— their  dress,  manners,  architectural  remains,  and  public
works, — while  scattered  here  and  there  may  be  found  notices  of
their  early  history  and  social  polity.  It  is,  in  short,  a  lively
picture  of  the  country  in  its  physical  and  moral  relations,  as  it
met  the  eye  at  the  time  of  the  conquest,  and  in  that  transition
period  when  it  was  first  subjected  to  European  influences.  The
conception  of  n  work,  at  so  early  a  period,  on  this  philosophical


INTRODUCTION.  XVll

The  first  part  of  the  Chronicle  of  Peru,  by  Pedro
de  Cieza  de  Leon,  was  published  at  Seville  (folio)  by
Martin  Clement  in  1553.  A  second  edition,  irf  duo-
decimo, was  printed  at  Antwerp  by  the  famous  pub-
lisher Jean  Steeltz,  in  1554  ;  and  a  third  edition,
translated  into  Italian  by  Augustino  di  Gravalis,
appeared  at  Eome,  from  the  press  of  Valerius  Dorigius
(octavo)  in  1555.     A  copy  of  the  first  Seville  edition,

plan,  reminding  us  of  that  of  Malte-Brun  in  oui'  own  time —
parva  covijjonere  magnis — was,  of  itself,  indicative  of  great  com-
prehensiveness of  mind  in  its  author.  It  was  a  task  of  no  little
difficulty,  where  there  was  yet  no  pathway  opened  by  the  laboui'S
of  the  antiquarian,  no  hint  from  the  sketch-book  of  the  traveller,
or  the  measurements  of  the  scientific  explorer.  Yet  the  distances
from  place  to  place  are  all  carefully  jotted  down  by  the  indus-
trious compiler,  and  the  bearings  of  the  different  places  and  their
peculiar  features  are  exhibited  with  sufficient  precision,  consider-
ing the  nature  of  the  obstacles  he  had  to  encounter.  The  literary
execution  of  the  work,  moreover,  is  highly  respectable,  sometimes
even  rich  and  picturesque ;  and  the  author  describes  the  grand
and  beautiful  scenery  of  the  Cordilleras  with  a  sensibihty  of  its
charms  not  often  found  in  the  tasteless  topographer,  still  less
often  in  the  rude  conqiieror.

"  The  loss  of  the  other  parts  of  his  work  is  much  to  be  re-
gTetted,  considering  the  talent  of  the  writer,  and  his  opportunities
for  personal  observation.  But  he  has  done  enough  to  render  us
grateful  for  his  labours.  By  the  vivid  dehneation  of  scenes  and
scenery,  as  they  were  presented  fresh  to  his  own  eyes,  he  has
fui'nished  us  with  a  backgi-ound  to  the  historic  picture — the
landscape,  as  it  were,  in  which  the  personages  of  the  time  might
be  more  fitly  pourtrayed.  It  would  have  been  impossible  to
exhibit  the  ancient  topography  of  the  land  so  faithfully  at  a
subsequent  period,  when  old  things  had  passed  away,  and  the
conqueror,  breaking  down  the  landmarks  of  ancient  civilisation,
had  efiaced  many  of  the  features  even  of  the  physical  aspect  of
the  country  as  it  existed  under  the  elaborated  culture  of  the
Yncas."


XVlll  INTRODUCTION.

which  is  in  black  letter,  fetched  £10  at  Lord  Stuart
de  Eothesay's  sale  a  few  years  ago.

It  'would  appear  that  the  author  completed  the
second  and  third  parts  of  his  Chronicle  before  his
death,  if  not  the  fourth,  and  Mr.  Eich  found  them  at
Madrid  in  manuscript;^  but  they  have  never  been
printed.  The  disappearance  of  the  second  part  is  by
far  the  greatest  loss  that  has  been  sustained  by  South
American  literature,  since  the  burning  of  Bias  Valera's
manuscript,  when  Lord  Essex  sacked  Cadiz.  It  con-
tained an  account  of  the  government  of  the  Yncas,
described  their  customs,  laws,  temples,  and  roads,
and  related  the  traditions  connected  with  their  origin
and  history.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  was
written,  because  Cieza  de  Leon,  in  his  first  part,  fre-
quently refers  to  special  passages  in  it  for  further
information.  Our  author  had  peculiar  advantages  for
writing  the  history  of  ancient  Peruvian  civilisation.
He  was  in  Peru  so  soon  after  the  conquest,  that  he
had  opportunities  of  conversing  with  many  of  the  ad-
visers and  generals  of  the  greatest  of  the  Yncas  ;  while
his  habits  of  careful  observation,  his  caution,  and  his
sound  judgment  on  points  unconnected  with  his  reli-
gion, rendered  him  more  fit  to  record  the  history  of
the  Yncas,  than  even  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  or  any
subsequent  chronicler.  For  these  reasons  the  loss  of
his  second  part  can  never  be  sufiiciently  deplored.

Before  leaving  my  author  to  the  reader's  judgment,

1  Mr.  Rich,  of  Red  Lion  Square,  got  possession  of  a  manu-
script of  Cieza  de  Leon,  which  is  described  in  one  of  his  cata-
logues as  being  an  account  of  the  civil  wars  of  Peru.  He  sold  it
to  Mr.  Lenox  of  New  York.


INTRODUCTION.  XIX

it  will  be  well  to  give  some  general  idea  of  the  great
empire  of  the  Yncas,  as  it  appeared  in  the  days  when
Cieza  de  Leon  first  gazed  upon  its  snowy  mountains,
and  at  the  same  time  to  offer  some  account  of  what  is
known  concerning  the  peoj^le  who  inhabited  it.  Such
a  sketch  will  form  a  fitting  introduction  to  the  agree-
able chapters  of  the  young  Spaniard  ;  and  will,  I  trust,
stimulate,  in  some  degree,  the  interest  with  which  they
will  be  read.

There  is  scarcely  any  country  in  the  world  which
presents  so  great  a  variety  of  aspects  as  that  region,
stretching  from  the  Ancasmayu  to  the  Maule,  which
once  formed  the  empire  of  the  Yncas.  Within  these
wide  limits  there  are  snowy  mountain  peaks  second
only  to  the  Himalayas  in  height  ;  cold  plains  and
bleak  hills  where  a  tough  grass  is  the  only  vegetation ;
temperate  valleys  covered  with  corn  fields  and  willow
groves  ;  others  filled  with  richest  sub-tropical  vegeta-
tion ;  vast  plains  forming  one  interminable  primeval
forest  traversed  by  navigable  rivers  ;  trackless  sandy
deserts  ;  and  fertile  stretches  of  field  and  fruit  gar-
den on  the  Pacific  coast.  Cieza  de  Leon  properly
divides  this  region  into  four  great  divisions  : —
the  uninhabitable  frozen  plains  and  mountain  peaks,
the  temperate  valleys  and  plains  which  intersect  the
Andes,  the  great  primeval  forests,  and  the  deserts  and
valleys  of  the  coast.  It  is  a  land  of  surpassing  gran-
deur, and  exceeding  beauty.  The  snowy  peaks  of  the
Andes,  upwards  of  twenty  thousand  feet  above  the
sea,  may  be  seen  from  the  deserts  of  sand  which  fringe
the  coast,  rising  in  their  majesty  from  the  plains,  and

c  2


XX  INTRODUCTION.

towering  up  into  a  cloudless  sky.  In  the  northern  and
central  part  of  this  Peruvian  cordillera,  the  mountain
ranges  are  broken  up  into  profound  ravines  and  abysses,
producing  scenery  of  unequalled  splendour.  At  one
glance  of  the  eye  a  series  of  landscapes  may  here  be  taken
in,  representing  every  chmate  on  the  globe.  On  the
steep  sides  of  one  mountain  are  the  snowy  wilds  and
bleak  ridges  of  the  Arctic  regions,  the  cold  pastures  of
northern  Scotland,  the  corn  fields  and  groves  of  central
Europe,  the  orange  trees  and  vineyards  of  Italy,  and
the  palms  and  sugar  canes  of  the  tropics.  But  it  is  in
the  lovely  ravines  which  lead  from  the  eastern  slopes
of  the  Andes  to  the  virgin  forests  of  the  interior  that
nature  has  been  most  profusely  decked  with  aU  the
charms  that  can  please  the  eye,  and  enriched  with
overflowino;  ve2:etable  and  mineral  wealth.  The  forests
here  abound  in  those  beautiful  chincliona  trees,  the
fragrance  and  beauty  of  whose  flowers  are  almost  for-
gotten because  of  the  inestimable  value  of  their  bark.
Slender  and  delicate  palms  and  tree  ferns  of  many
kinds,  matted  creepers,  and  giant  buttressed  trees
clothe  the  steep  hill  sides  ;  and  cascades  and  torrents
unite  to  form  rivers,  whose  sands  sparkle  with  gold.
Whether  it  be  in  these  forest-covered  valleys,  in  the
stupendous  ravines  of  the  Cordillera,  on  the  frozen
heights,  or  amidst  the  sandy  wildernesses  of  the  coast,'
the  scenery  is  ever  on  a  scale  either  of  sublime  gran-
deur or  of  exquisite  beauty.  Eich,  indeed,  was  the
prize  which  the  hardy  comrades  of  Cicza  de  Leon  won
for  the  Castilian  crown.

In  contemplating   this  glorious  region,  one  of  the


INTRODUCTION.  XXI

first  thoughts  that  naturally  suggests  itself  is  that  the
early  inhabitants  must  have  been,  to  a  great  extent,
isolated  and  shut  out  from  all  intercourse  with  their
neighbours,  by  the  almost  insuperable  obstacles  which
the  nature  of  the  country  presents  to  locomotion  ;  and
this  remark  is  equally  applicable  to  every  part  of  a
country  which  is  unequalled  in  the  variety  of  its
climates  and  of  its  general  features.  The  spread  of
the  empire  of  the  Yncas  is,  considering  all  the  circum-
stances, the  most  remarkable  occurrence  in  the  history
of  the  American  race  ;  and  one  of  its  results  was  the
destruction  of  all  former  land  marks  of  tribe  or  creed,
and  the  reduction  of  the  numerous  ancient  nations  of
the  Cordillera  and  the  coast  to  one  great  family  under
one  head,  by  a  process  not  unlike  that  which  takes
place  on  the  acquisition  of  every  new  province  by
modern  France.  Hence  the  great  difficulty  of  obtain-
ing any  clear  idea  of  the  condition  of  the  various
tribes  which  inhabited  Peru,  at  a  date  anterior  to  the
Ynca  conquests  and  annexations.  A  careful  study  of
the  subject,  however,  enables  us  at  least  to  distinguish
a  few  leading  facts — namely  that  the  region,  which
afterwards  formed  the  empire  of  the  Yncas,  was  origi-
nally peopled  by  a  number  of  distinct  nations,  speak-
ing different  languages,  and  slowly  advancing  on  inde-
'  pendent  paths  of  very  gradual  progress,  though  all
bearing  a  strong  family  likeness  to  each  other.  I  will
briefly  state  what  I  have  been  able  to  gather  respect-
ing these  aboriginal  tribes,  commencing  with  the
Quichuas,  that  imperial  race  which  eventually,  under
its  renowned  Yncas,  swallowed  up  all  the  others.


XXll  INTRODUCTION".

In  tlie  central  part  of  the  Peruvian  Cordillera,  round
the  city  of  Cuzco,  the  country  consists  of  cool  but
temperate  plains  and  warm  genial  valleys.  On  the
plains  there  were  clumps  of  molle  trees,^  and  crops  of
qiiinoa,^  ocas,^  and  potatoes,  while  large  flocks  of
llamas  browsed  on  the  coarse  tufts  of  ychu  grass.  In
the  valleys  the  rich  and  abundant  fields  of  maize  were
fringed  by  rows  of  delicious  fruit  trees — the  chiri-
moya,*  the  paccay,  the  palta,^  the  lucuma,  and  the
granadilla.  This  region  was  called  in  the  native  lan-
guage— Quichua,  and  the  inhabitants  were  Quichuas.^

The  eventual  predominance  of  these  Quichuas  may
probably  be  accounted  for  by  the  superiority  of  the
climate  and  natural  conformation  of  their  native  coun-
try. AVhile  their  neighbours,  on  the  one  hand,  had
to  struggle  painfully  with  the  encroaching  vigour  of
tropical  forests,  and,  on  the  other,  with  the  hardships
of  a  sterile  and  half  frozen  alpine  plateau,  or  with  the
isolation  of  small  villages  surrounded  by  trackless  sandy
deserts,  the  Quichuas  were  enjoying  a  warm  though
healthy  climate,  and  reaping  abundance  from  a  fertile
soil.  They  were  placed  in  a  position  which  was  most
advantageous  for  the  complete  development  of  all  the
civilisation  of  which  that  great  family  of  mankind,  to
which  they  belong,  are  capable.

And  they  attained  to  that  degree  of  civilisation  by'
very  slow  and  gradual  advances.  Many  things,  and
especially  the  character  of  the  peoj^le,  lead  to  the  belief

1  See  chapter  cxii,  and  note  at  page  397.

2  See  note  at  p.  143.         ^   Oxalis  tuberosa.  See  note  at  p.  361.
^  See  note  at  p.  234.  ^  gge  note  at  p.  10.

'''  For  a  theorj'-  of  the  derivation  of  this  word,  see  note  at  p.  316.


INTRODUCTION.  XXIU

that  cycles  of  ages  must  have  elapsed  before  these
Quichuas  were  in  a  position  to  establish  a  superiority
over  their  neighbours,  and  assume  the  position  of  an
imperial  people.

The  Quichuas  were  a  fine,  well-developed  race,  of
short  stature.  They  were  square  shouldered,  and
broad  chested,  with  small  hands  and  feet,  and  a  com-
paratively large  head.  The  hair  is  black  and  long,
and  usually  plaited  into  numerous  minute  plaits,  and
they  have  little  or  no  beard.  The  eyes  are  horizontal
with  arched  brows,  the  forehead  his^h  but  somewhat
receding,  the  nose  aquiline  and  large,  the  lips  thick,
cheek  bones  rather  high,  and  chin  small.  These  people
were  gentle,  hospitable,  and  obedient.  They  were  good
fathers  and  husbands,  patient,  industrious,  intelligent,
and  sociable,  and  loved  to  live  together  in  villages,
rather  than  in  scattered  huts.^  The  women,  when
young,  were  exceedingly  pretty  and  well  shaped,
and  they  held  an  honourable  and  respected  place  in
society.  The  mass  of  the  people  were  either  farmers
or  shepherds.  Each  family  had  a  piece  of  land  appor-
tioned to  it  by  the  State,  often  in  well-built  terraces  up
the  sides  of  the  mountains,  on  which  the  members
either  hoed  and  ploughed  the  soil,  and  raised  crops  of
gourds,  maize,  potatoes,  ocas,  or  quinoa ;  or  they
cultivated  fruit  trees  ;  or,  again,  they  tended  flocks  of
llamas  on  the  pasture  lands,  according  to  the  situation
of  their  little  patrimonies.  Their  habitations  were  of
stone  or  mud,  covered  with  admirable  thatched  roofs,^
they  wove  warm  cloth  from  llama  wool,  made  eartheu-
^  See  note  at  page  407.  ^  See  page  129.


XXIV  INTRODUCTION.

ware  and  stone  vessels,  manufactured  tasteful  orna-
ments of  gold  and  silver,  and  used  hoes,  rakes,  rude
ploughs,  and  other  simple  agricultural  implements.

One  important  test  of  the  capacity  of  a  people  for
civilisation  is  their  ability  to  domesticate  animals.  The
inferiority  of  the  African,  as  compared  with  the
Hindu,  is  demonstrated  by  the  latter  having  domes-
ticated the  elephant  and  made  it  the  useful  and  hard-
working companion  of  man  ;  while  the  former,  during
the  thousands  of  years  that  he  has  inhabited  the
African  continent,  has  never  achieved  any  such  result,
and  has  merely  destroyed  the  elephant  for  the  sake  of
his  ivory  tusks.  Now,  in  the  case  of  the  Quichuas,
although  their  domesticated  animals  were  few,  they
comprised  all  that  were  capable  of  domestication
within  the  limits  of  their  country.  During  the  three
centuries  that  Europeans  have  since  been  masters  of
Peru,  not  a  single  indigenous  quadruped  or  bird  has
been  added  to  the  list.  The  domesticated  animals  of
the  Quichuas  were  the  llama,  the  alpaca,  a  dog,  the
ccoy  or  guinea  pig,  and  a  duck.  Besides  these  they
tamed,  as  pets,  the  moiikey,  the  parrot,  the  toucan,^
a  kind  of  gull  frequenting  the  lakes  of  the  Andes,  a
hawk,  and  several  finches.  The  lUma  and  alpaca  do
not  exist  in  a  wild  state  at  all,  and  the  variety  in  the
colours  of  their  fleeces  seems  to  be  a  sio^n  of  long
domestication.  The  huanacu  and  vicuna,  the  wild
species  of  their  family,  have  fleeces  of  a  uniform  and
unalteraljle  colour,  and  it  j^robably  took  an  incalculable

^  Tlic  liird  called  by  Cicza  de  Leon  viaca,  and  described  at
page  175,  is  no  doi;bt  the  toucan.


INTRODUCTION.  XXV

period^  to  change  the  wild  into  the  domesticated  form.
The  llama  served  the  Quichuas  as  a  beast  of  burden,
its  flesh  supplied  them  with  food,  its  fleece  with  cloth-
incr,  and  its  hide  with  thono-s  and  sandals.  The  finer
fleece  of  the  alpaca  was  reserved  for  the  use  of  the
sovereign  and  his  nobles,^  Guinea  pigs  ran  in  hun-
dreds about  the  huts,  they  were  used  as  food,  and  the
variety  of  their  colours  points  out  the  length  of  time
during  which  they  had  been  in  a  domesticated  state.
The  alco  or  dog  was  the  companion  of  the  Quichua
shepherds  ;  and  the  duck  was  bred  in  their  homesteads
for  food,  and  for  the  sake  of  the  feathers,  which  often
formed  a  fringe  for  the  women's  llicllas  or  mantles.

These  simple  Quichua  farmers  and  shepherds  seem
to  have  kept  many  festivals,  and  other  observances
handed  down  to  them  by  their  fathers.     A  half  philo-

1  Animals  closely  allied  to  the  present  wild  forms  of  the  llama
tribe,  namely  to  the  hiianacu  and  vicuiia,  wandered  over  the
Cordilleras  in  the  post-pleistocene  g-eological  period ;  but  there
is  no  vestige  either  of  the  llama  or  of  the  alpaca  at  that  remote
epoch.  Fossil  remains  of  an  animal,  resembling  a  gigantic
huanacu,  have  been  found  in  Patagonia,  and  named  by  Professor
Owen  Macrauchemia.  In  1859  a  fossil  skeleton  of  a  mammal  was
produced  in  Bolivia  by  Mr.  Forbes,  and  examined  by  Professor
Huxley-  It  was  found  in  one  of  the  copper  mines  of  Corocoro,
and  the  bones  are  almost  converted  into  copper,  the  strata  in
which  it  was  found  being  highly  impregnated  with  that  metal.
This  animal  has  been  named  Macraucliemia  Boliviensis.  It  is  not
half  as  large  as  the  Patagonian  species,  and  its  proportions  are
nearly  as  slender  as  the  modem  vicuna,  with  even  a  lighter  head.
Quarterly  Journal  of  the  Geological  Society,  February  1st,  1861,
pages  47  and  73.  Fossil  Mammalia  of  the  Voyage  of  the  Beagle.
1839.

2  See  chapter  cxi,  and  its  notes,  for  more  detailed  particulars
respecting  the  animals  of  the  llama  tribe.


XXVI  INTRODUCTION.

sopliic  sun  worship  was  enjoined  by  their  superiors,
but  the  people  retained  an  ancient  habit  of  deifying  and
making  household  gods  of  their  llamas,  their  corn,  and
their  fruit.  Their  seasons  of  sowing  and  of  harvest
were  celebrated  by  dancing  and  singing,  and  their
songs,  some  of  which  have  been  preserved,  were  lively
and  graceful :  but  the  cliicha  bowl  flowed  far  too
freely.  A  barbarous  rite  of  burial  was  practised  by
these  people  in  common  with  nearly  all  South  Ameri-
can tribes,  and  is  described  in  many  places  by  Cieza
de  Leon  ;  and  they  held  the  malquis  or  mummies  of
their  dead  in  superstitious  veneration.

The  productiveness  of  the  soil  and  the  increasing
prosperity  of  the  people  had,  in  the  course  of  time,
given  rise  to  a  governing  class  of  Curacas  and  nobles,
to  a  caste  of  Umus  and  Huaca-camayocs,  or  priests
and  diviners,  and  eventually  to  a  despotic  sovereign
or  Ynca,  with  a  privileged  royal  family.  This  upper
class  had  leisure,  was  exempted  from  ordinary  toil,
acquired  numerous  artificial  wants,  and  therefore  gra-
dually developed  that  higher  civilisation  in  the  Quichua
nation  which  eventually  enabled  it  to  spread  its  con-
quests over  an  immense  region,  and  to  consolidate  a
great  and  well  organised  empire.

The  advances  in  civilisation  of  this  upper  class  were
by  no  means  contemptible.  The  ruins  at  Cuzco,  and
in  the  neighbourhood,  bear  witness  to  their  marvellous
skill  in  masonry.  Their  buildings  were  massive,  indeed
Cyclopean,  Ijut  the  huge  stones  were  cut  and  put  in
their  places  with  extraordinary  accuracy  ;  and,  although
the  general  cfl'ect  is  plain  and  sombre,  there  was  fre-


INTRODUCTION.  XXVll

qiiently  some  attempt  at  ornamentation.  Such  were
the  rows  of  recesses  with  sides  sloping  inwards,  the
cornices,  and  the  occasional  serpents  and  other  figures
carved  in  relief  on  the  stones.  The  roofs,  though
merely  of  thatch,  were  thick  and  durable,  and  so  artis-
tically finished  as  to  give  a  very  pleasing  effect  to  the
buildings.^

In  the  furniture  of  their  dwellino;s  and  the  clothino-
of  their  persons  the  Ynca  nobles  had  reached  a  high
degree  of  refinement.  Their  pottery  is  especially  re-
markable, and  the  Peruvian  potter  gratified  the  taste
of  his  employers  by  moulding  vessels  into  every  form
in  nature,  from  which  he  could  take  a  model.  Pro-
fessor Wilson,  who  has  carefully  examined  several  col-
lections of  ancient  Peruvian  pottery,  says — "  Some  of
the  specimens  are  purposely  grotescjue,  and  by  no
means  devoid  of  true  comic  fancy  ;  while,  in  the
greater  number,  the  endless  variety  of  combinations  of
animate  and  inanimate  forms,  ingeniously  rendered
subservient  to  the  requirements  of  utility,  exhibit  fer-
tility of  thought  in  the  designer,  and  a  lively  percep-
tive faculty  in  those  for  whom  he  wrought."^  Many
of  these  vessels,  moulded  into  forms  to  represent
animals  and  fruits,  were  used  as  conopas  or  household
gods  ;  others  were  for  the  service  of  the  temjDle  ;  others
for  interment  with  the  malquis  or  mummies,  and
others  for  the  use  of  the  Yncas  and  their  nobles.  The
common  people  used  vessels  of  simple  form.  The  Yncas
also  had  drinking  cups  of  gold  and  silver,  beaten  out
very  fine,  and  representing  llamas,  or  human   heads.

1   See  note  at  p.  166.  ^  Prehistoric  Man,  i,  p.  110.


XXVlll  INTRODUCTION.

Vessels  of  copper  also,  and  plates  and  vases  of  stone
with  serpents  carved  round  them  in  relief,  are  of  fre-
quent occurrence,  as  well  as  golden  bracelets  and
breast-plates,  and  mirrors  of  silver  or  polished  stone.
Their  knives  and  other  cutting  instruments  were
of  copper,  hardened  with  tin  or  silica.^  Their  cloth-
ing consisted  of  cloth  woven  from  the  wool  of  the
llama,  alpaca,  and  vicuna ;  the  latter  as  fine  as
silk  and  undyed,  for  its  own  rich  chestnut  colour  was
sufficiently  becoming.  They  had  attained  to  great
proficiency  in  the  art  of  weaving  and  dyeing.  Taste-
ful designs  were  woven  in  the  cloth,  which  was  dyed
flesh  colour,  yellow,  gray,  blue,  green,  and  black  ;  for
they  knew  the  art  of  fixing  dyes  extracted  from  vege-
table substances,  so  that  the  cloth  will  never  fade.^
They  ornamented  their  robes,  tunics,  rugs,  and  blankets
with  fringes,  borders  of  feathers,  and  also  by  sowing
on  them  rows  of  thin  gold  and  silver  plates,  sometimes
square,  at  others  cut  into  the  shape,  of  leaves  and
flowers.  They  also  adorned  wooden  seats  and  couches,
by  covering  them  with  these  thin  plates  of  gold  and
silver.  The  interior  of  a  hall  in  the  palace  of  an  Ynca
was  thus  filled  with  articles  of  luxury.  The  great  doors,
with  the  sides  gradually  approaching,  were  often  orna-
mented with  a  cornice,  and  finished  above  with  a  huge
stone  lintel.      The  walls  of  solid  masonry,  beautifully

1  Humboldt  mentions  a  cutting-  instrument  found  near  Cuzco,
wliich  was  composed  of  0.94  parts  of  copper  and  0.06  of  tin.  The
latter  metal  is  scarcely  ever  found  in  South  America,  but  I
believe  there  ai'e  traces  of  it  in  parts  of  Bolivia.  In  some  of
the  instruments  silica  was  substituted  for  tin.

2  See  page  405.


.  INTRODUCTION.  XXIX

cut  and  polished,  had  small  square  windows,^  and  deep
recesses  of  the  same  size,  at  intervals.  The  walls  were
hung  with  rich  vicuna  cloth  fringed  with  bezants  of
gold  and  silver,  or  with  llama  cloth  dyed  with  bright
colours,  and  woven  into  tasteful  patterns.  The  niches
were  filled  with  gold  and  silver  statues,  and  with  vases
moulded  into  the  shape  of  llamas,  birds,  and  fruit.  The
floors  were  soft  with  rich  carpets  and  rugs,  and  the
seats  and  couches  were  plated  with  gold.  Numerous
small  chambers  opened  on  the  great  halls,  and  the
baths  were  fitted  up  with  metal  spouts  in  the  form  of
serpents,  from  which  the  water  flowed  into  stone  basins.^

The  intellectual  advancement  of  the  Quichua  people
had  kept  pace  with  the  increase  in  their  material  com-
forts ;  and  their  religious  belief,  their  literary  culture,
their  discoveries  in  the  sciences  of  astronomy  and
mechanics,  and  their  administrative  talent,  if  not
of  a  very  high  order,  at  least  prove  very  clearly  that
they  were  not  incapable  of  attaining  a  respectable
rank  amongst  civilised  nations.  During  the  last  two
centuries  of  their  existence  as  an  independent  people,
their  progress  was  very  rapid.

The  religion  of  the  Yncas  and  their  nobles  was,  as  is
well  known,  a  worship  of  the  celestial  bodies,  and  es-
pecially of  the  sun ;  that  of  the  cultivators  and  shep-
herds a  reverence  for  every  object  in  nature — for  their

1  It  has  been  stated  that  the  ancient  Pertivian  buildings  had
no  windows.  This  is  a  mistake.  Amongst  other  instances  I  may
mention  the  occiuTence  of  one  in  tlie  palace  of  the  Colcampata,
at  Cuzco.

2  See  note  at  page  400.


XXX  INTRODUCTION.

llamas,  for  their  corn,  for  their  fruits,  for  hills  and
streams,  and  above  all  for  the  mcdquis  or  mummies  of
their  dead.  To  all  these,  sacrifices  of  the  fruits  of  the
earth  were  made.  The  more  spiritual  worship  of  the
men  of  leisure  was  combined  with  complicated  cere-
monial observances,  gorgeous  temples,  and  an  influen-
tial caste  of  priests,  wise  men,  and  virgins.  The
worship  of  the  sun,  and  the  great  inaportance  attached
to  its  apparent  course,  as  connected  with  the  seasons
of  sowing  and  reaping,  led  to  the  acquirement  of  some
astronomical  knowledge,  but  there  is  no  evidence  that
any  great  progress  was  made  in  this  direction.  The
Chibchas  of  Bogota  and  the  Aztecs  of  Mexico  were  in
advance  of  the  Quichuas  in  astronomical  science.  The
Yncas  knew  the  difference  between  the  solar  and
lunar  year,  they  had  introduced  intercalary  days  to
reconcile  that  difi"erence,  and  they  observed  the  periods
of  the  solstices  and  equinoxes.  They  also  watched
and  recorded  the  courses  of  some  of  the  stars,  and  of
comets.  They  had  a  complete  system  of  numerals,
perfectly  balanced  pairs  of  scales  have  been  found  in
Peruvian  tombs,  and  their  administrators  must  have
been  in  the  habit  of  making  and  recording  very  com-
plicated revenue  accounts.  Their  year  was  divided
into  twelve  months,  and  great  periodical  festivals  cele-
brated the  periods  of  the  solstices  and  equinoxes.^   The

^  The  year,  called  hnata,  was  divided  into  the  following  twelve
moons  or  months  (qullla).  It  commenced  at  the  summer  solstice
on  the  22nd  of  December  with  the  month  of

1.  Raymi  or  December.

2.  HuCHUY  POCCOY  or  January,  when  the  corn  begins  to  ripen.

3.  Hatdn  Poccoy  or  February,  when  the  ripeness  of  the  corn
increases.


INTRODUCTION.  XXXi

proficiency  of  the  QuicLuas  in  mechanical  science  was
of  a  high  order,  as  is  attested  by  their  magnificent
roads  and  aqueducts,  and  by  the  conveyance  of  Cyclo-
pean blocks  of  stone  for  their  buildings.

The  language  of  the  Quichuas  was  carefully  culti-
vated during  many  centuries  by  the  Haravecs  or  bards
in  their  love  ditties  and  songs  of  triumph,  and  by  the
Amautas  or  wise  men,  whose  duty  it  was  to  preserve
the  traditions  of  the  people,  and  to  prepare  the  rituals
for  the  worship  of  the  Deity ;  and  their  literary  pro-
ductions in  prose  and  verse  were  preserved  by  means
of  the  qiiipus.  The  Quichua  was  a  highly  polished
language,  and  the  student  who  may  turn  his  attention
to  the  history  of  the  South  American  races,  will  find  in
this  rich  and  copious  tongue  many  ancient  fragments
of  prose  and  poetry  which  will  convince  him  of  the
civilisation  of  the  ancient  Peruvians.^  It  is  true  that
they  had  not  discovered  the  use  of  letters,  but  it  must
be  remembered  that  they  were  completely  isolated  and
precluded  from  exchanging  ideas  with  the  other  races
of  mankind.     If  no  communication,  direct  or  indirect,

4.  Paccaei  Huanut  and  Paucar  Huaeat  or  March.

5.  Arihua  or  April.

6.  Aymueay  or  May.     The  time  of  harvest.

7.  Yntip  Ratmi  and  CusQUic  Ratmi  or  June.

8.  Ajtta  Asitua  or  July.     The  season  of  sowing.

9.  CcAPAC  Asitua  or  August.

10.  Umu  Ratmi  or  September.

11.  Ata  jMaeca  or  October.

12.  CcAPAC  Ratmi  or  N'ovember.
(See  Ciizco  and  Lima,  pp.  121-26.)

■  For  further  information  respecting  the  Quichua  language,
see  the  introduction  to  my  Quichua  Graminar  and  Didionanj.
(Triibner.     1863.)


XXXU  INTEODUCTION.

had  existed  between  Phoenicia  and  the  other  countries
of  the  old  world,  how  many  of  them  would,  by
their  own  unassisted  genius,  have  discovered  the  use
of  letters.  Would  the  Tamils  and  Canarese  of  India  1
Would  the  Malays  of  the  islands  ?  It  may  well  be
doubted ;  and,  after  all,  the  quipus,  though  a  clumsy,
were  not  altogether  an  inefficient  substitute.^

But  it  is  in  their  administrative  arrangements  that
the  intellectual  progress  of  the  Yncas  is  most  strik-
ingly displayed.  Theirs  was  the  most  enlightened
despotism  that  ever  existed.  The  Ynca  claimed  to  be
Yntip-churi  or  "child  of  sun,"  but  his  not  less  glorious
title  was  Huaccha-cuyac  or  "  friend  of  the  poor."  His
duty  was  to  superintend  the  comfort  and  happiness  of
the  people,  and  to  take  care  that  no  family  was  with-
out a  topu  or  plot  of  ground  sufficient  for  his  main-
tenance. The  net  produce  of  the  land  was  divided
into  three  equal  parts,  one  for  the  cultivators,  the
second  for  religious  and  charitable  purposes,  and  the
third  for  the  Ynca  and  his  government ;  including
the  clothing  and  maintenance  of  the  nobles,  and  of
soldiers,  miners,  potters,  weavers,  and  other  artizans.
Cnracas  or  chiefs  were  placed  over  the  different  dis-
tricts, with  subordinate  officers  under  them,  and  a
minute  supervision  was  exercised  over  all  matters
connected  with  revenue  and  judicial  administration.
Crime  was  almost  unknown.^

^  See  chapter  Ixxxii,  and  note  at  page  201.

^  On  this  point  let  the  last  of  the  Spanish  conquerors  give  his
remorseful  testimony  : —

"  True  confession  and  protestation  in  the  hour  of  death  by  one
of  the  first  Spaniards,  conquerors  of  Peru,  named  Marcio  Sorra  de


INTRODUCTION.  XXXlll

Such  were  the  Quichuas,  the  representative  people
of  the  Peruvian  Andes.  To  the  eastward  of  their
original  territory,  in  the  virgin  forests  which  are  tra-
versed by  the  tributaries  of  the  Amazon,  dwelt  the

Lejesama,  with  his  will  proved  in  the  city  of  Cuzco  on  the  15th
of  November  1589,  before  Geronimo  Sanchez  de  Quesada,  public
notary — First,  before  beginning  my  will,  I  declare  that  I  have
desired  much  to  give  notice  to  his  Catholic  Majesty  king  Philip,
our  lord,  seeing  how  good  a  Catholic  and  Christian  he  is,  and
how  zealous  in  the  service  of  the  Lord  our  God,  concerning  that
which  I  would  relieve  my  mind  of,  by  reason  of  having  taken
part  in  the  discovery  and  conquest  of  these  countries,  which  we
took  from  the  Lords  Tncas,  and  placed  under  the  royal  crown,  a
fact  which  is  known  to  his  Catholic  Majesty.  The  said  Yncas
governed  in  such  a  way  that  in  all  the  land  neither  a  thief,  nor  a
vicious  man,  nor  a  bad  dishonest  woman  was  known.  The  men
all  had  honest  and  profitable  employment.  The  woods,  and
mines,  and  all  kinds  of  property  were  so  divided  that  each  man
knew  what  belonged  to  him,  and  there  were  no  law  suits.  The
Yncas  were  feared,  obeyed,  and  respected  by  their  subjects,  as  a
race  very  capable  of  governing ;  but  we  took  away  their  land,
and  placed  it  under  the  crown  of  Spain,  and  made  them  subjects.
Your  Majesty  must  understand  that  my  reason  for  making  this
statement  is  to  relieve  my  conscience,  for  we  have  destroyed  this
people  by  our  bad  examples.  Crimes  were  once  so  little  known
among  them,  that  an  Indian  with  one  hundred  thousand  pieces  of
gold  and  silver  in  his  house,  left  it  open,  only  placing  a  little
stick  across  the  door,  as  the  sign  that  the  master  was  out,  and
nobody  went  in.  But  when  they  saw  that  we  placed  locks  and
keys  on  our  doors,  they  understood  that  it  was  from  fear  of
thieves,  and  when  they  saw  that  we  had  thieves  amongst  us^  they
despised  us.  All  this  I  tell  your  Majesty,  to  discharge  my  con-
science of  a  weight,  that  I  may  no  longer  be  a  party  to  these
things.  And  I  pray  God  to  pardon  me,  for  I  am  the  last  to  die
of  all  the  discoverers  and  conquerors,  as  it  is  notorious  that  there
are  none  left  but  me,  in  this  land  or  out  of  it,  and  therefore  I
now  do  what  1  can  to  relieve  my  conscience."  Calancha,  lib,  i,
cap.  15,  p.  98.

d


XXXIV  INTRODUCTION.

Antls  and  Chunchos,  who  wandered  about  in  search
of  food,  through  the  interminable  wilderness  of  matted
vegetation.  They  never  seem  to  have  made  any  pro-
gress; what  they  are  now,  such  they  were  centuries
ago  :  the  nature  of  the  country  renders  advance-
ment impossible.  Moreover  they  probably  belong  to
the  great  Tupi-Guarani  race  of  Brazil,  and  are  distinct
from  the  Peruvian  tribes.  To  the  south  of  the  Qui-
chuas,  on  either  side  of  the  upper  valley  of  the  Yilca-
mayu,  were  the  wild  shepherd  tribes  called  Asancatus,
AsiLLUS,  Cavinas,  Canas,  and  Canches.^  But  still
further  south,  beyond  the  Vilcanota  range  of  moun-
tains, there  was  a  great  people,  almost  rivalling  the
Quichuas,  who  seem  to  have  made  some  progress  in
civilisation,  in  the  face  of  formidable  natural  difficul-
ties.    These  were  the  Collas  or  Aymaeas.

In  the  southern  part  of  Peru  the  Cordillera  of  the
Andes  is  divided  into  two  chains.  That  to  the  east-
ward, containing  the  peaks  of  Illimani  and  Yllampu,
consists  of  rocks  of  Silurian  formation  mixed  with
granite,  and  the  peaks  themselves  are  said  to  be  fossili-
ferous  to  their  summits.  The  other  range  to  the  west-
ward is  chiefly  volcanic,  and  contains  the  famous  volcano
of  Misti,  and  the  glorious  peaks  of  Chuquibamba  and
Chacani.  Between  these  two  chains  of  mountains  there
are  lofty  plateaux,  never  less  than  twelve  thousand  feet
alcove  the  sea,  the  drainage  of  which  flows  into  the
great  lake  of  Titicaca.  Here  there  are  no  deep  tem-
perate valleys  and  ravines,  nothing  but  bleak  plains
covered   with   coarse   tufts   of  grass,   with  occasional

'  See  chapters  xcvii  and  xcviii,  and  note,  p.  35G.


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV

patches  of  potatoe,  quinoa,  and  oca.  The  cHmate  is
very  severe,  and  the  only  trees,  which  arc  few  and  far
between,  are  the  stunted  crooked  quenua  {Polylepis
villosa)  and  the  dark  leaved  ccolli  {Buddleia  coriacea).
In  some  places  a  low  shrubby  Baccharis  is  met  mth,
which  serves  as  fuel.  Tliis  region,  known  as  the  Collao,
was  inhabited  by  the  Aymara  nation.

These  Aymaras  had  to  contend  against  a  rigorous
climate  and  an  unproductive  soil ;  they  had  none  of  the
advantages  enjoyed  by  their  Quichua  neighbours,  and
had  consequently  made  slower  advances  in  civilisation,
but  they  were  apparently  an  offshoot  from  the  same
common  stock.  The  descendants  of  the  Aymaras  are
shorter  and  more  thick-set  than  those  of  the  Quichuas,
and  their  features  are  coarser  and  less  regular.  Cieza
de  Leon  says  that  they  flattened  their  skulls  in  infancy.
They  wore  woollen  cloths  and  square  caps,  and  the
women  had  hoods  like  those  of  a  friar.^  The  land  was
too  cold  for  maize,  and  the  people  lived  on  potatoes
and  ocas,  which  they  preserved  by  drying  them  in  the
sun  and  then  freezing  them,  for  winter  use.  In  this
state  they  were  called  chunus.  There  were  large  flocks
of  llamas  and  alpacas,  and  wild  vicunas  on  the  un-
frequented heights.  The  Aymaras  Hved  in  stone  huts
roofed  with  straw,  which  were  built  close  together
in  villages,  with  the  potatoe,  oca,  and  quinoa  fields
around  them.^  Cieza  de  Leon  states  that  the  Collao
was  once  very  populous,  and  the  numerous  vestiges  of
former  cultivation  up  the  terraced  sides  of  the  moun-
tains, bear  witness  to  the  truth  of  his  assertion.  The
'  See  page  363.  *  See  page  360.

d2


XXX  VI  INTRODUCTION.

people  were  ruled  by  chiefs  who  were  treated  with
great  respect,  and  carried  about  in  litters.

There  is  a  mystery  about  the  civilisation  of  the
ancient  Aymaras,  which  cannot  now  be  solved.  The
origin  and  history  of  the  extensive  unfinished  ruins  at
Tiahuanaco,  near  the  southern  shore  of  lake  Titicaca,
will  for  ever  remain  a  secret  ;  but  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  a  people  who  could  form  so  magnificent
a  design,  convey  such  huge  blocks  of  stone  from
great  distances,  hew  out  the  enormous  monolithic
doorways,  and  carve  them  with  such  minuteness
of  ornamental  detail,  must  have  been  numerous,  and
civilised.^  There  are  also  remains  of  Aymara  burial
places  in  various  parts  of  the  Collao,  especially  on  the
peninsula  of  Sillustani,  which  consist  of  towers  of  hewn
masonry.^  We  learn  from  Cieza  de  Leon  that  the
Aymaras  observed  the  movements  of  the  sun  and
moon,  and  divided  their  year  into  ten  months.  He  con-
sidered them  to  be  a  very  intelligent  people.  He  gives
an  account  of  their  funeral  ceremonies,^  and  a  very  in-
teresting description  of  a  harvest  home  among  the
Aymaras,^  and  states  that  they  were  often  engaged  in
civil  wars.^  The  Aymara  language,  which  is  still  in
common  use  on  the  banks  of  lake  Titicaca,  though
identical  with  Quichua  in  grammatical  construction,
has  a  distinct  vocabulary.^     It  is  worthy  of  remark,

'  For  a  full  description  of  the  ruins  of  Tiahuanaco  see  chapter
cv  ;  and  notes  at  pages  375  to  378.

^  See  note  at  page  364.  ^  See  pages  363-4.

*  See  page  412.  *  See  page  363.

"  An  Aymara  grammar  and  dictionary  by  Torres  Rubin  was
published  at  Lima  in  1616.     The  gospel  of  St.  Luke  was  ti-ans-


INTRODUCTION.  XXXVU

however,  that  though  the  first  few  numerals  in
Aymara  are  indigenous,  all  the  higher  numbers  are
l)orro\ved  from  the  Quichua.^  Next  to  the  Quichuas,
the  Aymaras  were  by  far  the  most  important  and  civi-
lised people  in  the  Peruvian  Andes  ;  and  though  their
climate  and  soil  was  against  them,  there  is  some  ground
for  the  opinion  that  their  civilisation,  such  as  it  was,
boasts  of  an  origin  more  ancient  than  that  of  the
Quichuas.  But  all  such  speculations  are  mere  conjec-
ture.

In  the  rich  valleys  and  on  the  grassy  mountain
sides  of  the  Central  Peruvian  Andes,  to  the  westward
of  the  Quichuas,  dwelt  three  nations  which  were  called
by  their  future  conquerors — the  Chancas,  Pocras,  and
HuANCAS.2  They  inhabited  the  districts  now  known
as   Abancay,   Andahuaylas,    Guamanga,    and    Xauxa.

lated  into  Aymara,  and  published  by  the  Indian  Pasoscanki.  An
Aymara  grammar,  by  Padre  Ludovico  Bertonio,  was  published
at  Rome  in  1 608.  A  second  edition,  which  was  edited  by  Diego
de  Gueldo,  was  printed  by  the  Jesuits  in  the  little  town  of  Juli,
on  the  banks  of  lake  Titicaca  in  1612.  See  also  Hervas,  the
Mithridates,  and  D'Orbigny.

'  In  the  same  way  the  Dravidian  languages  of  Southern  India
count  up  to  one  thousand,  but  for  higher  numbers  they  have  to
borrow  from  Sanscrit.  This  is  considered  as  one  proof  of  the
superiority  of  the  Aryan  Hindus  over  the  Tamils  in  civilisa-
tion :  and  a  similar  conclusion  may  be  dra^vn  from  the  same  fact,
as  regards  the  Quichuas  and  Aymaras.  Adam  Smith  says  that
numerals  are  among  the  most  abstract  ideas  that  the  human
mind  is  capable  of  forming.  See  Mr.  Crawfurd's  paper  "  On
Numerals  as  Evidence  of  the  Progress  of  Civilization."  (Etlinolo-
ijical  Society,  February  1862.)

■^  The  names  of  tribes,  which  have  come  down  to  us,  are  gene-
rally nicknames  given  by  their  conquerors.  Chanca  means  a
polluted  thing,  and  lawnca  is  a  drum  in  Quichua.


XXXVlll  INTRODUCTION.

Little  or  nothing  is  known  of  their  history  anterior  to
their  ahsorj)tion  into  the  empire  of  the  Yncas,  and  if
they  had  a  distinct  language,  it  must  have  been  either
very  barbarous  or  very  closely  allied  to  Quichua,  for
no  vestige  of  it  has  survived.^  All  the  ruins  which
might  have  enabled  us  to  form  an  idea  of  their  skill
in  building,  such  as  the  temple  of  Huarivilca  in  the
valley  of  Xauxa,^  have  entirely  disappeared.  It  ap-
pears, however,  that  they  were  very  fierce  and  warlike,
that  each  village  had  a  fortress,  and  that  they  made  a
desperate  struggle  for  independence  before  they  w^ere
finally  subjugated  by  the  Quichuas.^

North  of  Xauxa,  the  valleys  and  plateaux  of  the
Cordillera  were  inhabited  by  the  Conchucos,  and  by
the  Indians  of  Huamachuco,  Caxamarca,  Chachapoyas,
and  Bracamoras.  This  brings  us  to  the  frontier  of  Quito.
The  tribes  of  northern  Peru  are  also  said  to  have  been
warlike,  and  to  have  been  incessantly  engaged  in  feuds
with  each  other.^  They  are  described  as  intelligent
industrious  agriculturists,  with  some  knowledge  of  the
courses  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  the  same  customs
of  burying  their  dead  and  worshipping  huacas  in  the
form  of  stones  or  other  natural  objects,  as  prevailed
among  the  masses  of  the  Quichua  people.^

'  Except  possibly  the  word  for  water — yacu.  In  Quichua
water  is  mm.

*   Described  by  Cieza  de  Leon.     See  page  299  and  note.

^  See  page  299,  page  280  and  note,  and  page  317  and  note.
The  Morochucos  and  Yquichanos  of  the  department  of  Ayacucho,
who  are  descendants  of  the  Pocras,  fully  sustain  the  warlike  fame
of  their  ancestors.     See  Cttzco  and  Lhna,  p.  70.

'  See  page  285.

■^  A  vocabulary,  professing  to  be  of  the  language  spoken  by  the


INTRODUCTION.  XXXIX

AVe  now  come  to  the  inhaljitaiits  of  the  numerous
isolated  fertile  tracts  on  the  Pacific  coast,  who  were
all  known  by  the  Yncas,  as  Yuncas  or  "  dwellers  in
the  warm  valleys."^

The  Peruvian  coast  has  been,  geologically  speaking,
recently  upheaved  from  the  sea.  It  is  a  narrow  strip
of  land,  averaging  a  breadth  of  from  ten  to  forty  miles,
confined  on  one  side  by  the  ocean,  on  the  other  by  the
magnificent  Andes,  which  rise  abruptly  from  the  plains.
The  whole  of  this  region  consists  of  sandy  desert,  in-
tersected by  ranges  of  rocky  hills,  except  where  a
stream  flows  down  from  the  mountains  to  the  sea,  and
forms  an  oasis  of  verdure  and  fertility.  These  pleasant
valleys  are  in  some  parts  of  the  coast  of  frequent
occurrence,  and  are  only  separated  by  narrow  strips  of
sand  ;  while  in  others  the  trackless  deserts  extend  for
nearly  a  hundred  miles  without  a  break.  It  scarcely
ever  rains  on  the  Peruvian  coast,  but  a  heavy  dew,
during  part  of  the  year,  falls  on  the  valleys.

The  most  ancient  traces  of  the  American  race  have
been  found  on  the  Pacific  coast,  in  the  shape  of  mid-
dings  or  refuse  heaps,  similar  to  those  in  Denmark.
These  middings,  which  have  been  examined  by  Mr.
Spruce  at  Chanduy  and  Amotape,  consist  of  fragments
of  pottery,  sea  shells,  and  crystal  quartz  cutting  in-

tribes  in  Northern  Pern,  and  called  Chincliay-suyu,  is  printed  at
the  end  of  Figueredo's  edition  of  Torres  Rubio's  Quichua  gram-
mar. But  the  vast  majority  of  words  are  pure  Quichua,  and  it  must
have  been  collected  when  Quichua  was  generally  spoken,  and
after  the  aboriginal  language  had  fallen  almost  entirely  into  disuse.
It  is,  therefore,  of  very  little  use  to  the  comparative  philologist.
^  For  the  meaning  of  this  word,  see  pages  1G2  and  218.


Xl  INTRODUCTION.

straments.^  They  are  the  remains  of  a  very  ancient
people  of  what  is  called,  in  European  archaeology,  the
stone  age ;  and  they  suggest  the  possible  existence  of
man  in  South  America,  contemporaneously  with  the
post-pleistocene  fossil  vicuna  of  Corocoro.  Be  this  how
it  may,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  coast  valleys  of
Peru  had  been  inhabited  for  many  centuries  by  Indian
communities,  which  had  made  gradual  progress  in  the
improvement  of  their  condition.  Every  part  of  these
valleys,  which  could  be  reached  by  irrigation,  was  very
fertile.  Where  irrigation  ceased  the  desert  cominenced.
The  irrigated  parts  contained  fields  of  cotton,  of  yucas,
of  maize,  of  aji  pepper,  of  sweet  jDotatoes,  and  of
gourds  ;  which  were  shaded  by  fruit  trees  festooned
with  passion  flowers,^  and  by  groves  of  algoroba  {Pros-
opis  horrida),  of  a  sort  of  willow,  and  of  the  beautiful
suclii  (Flumieria).  The  most  important  traces  of
ancient  civilisation  are  met  with  in  the  most  extensive
valleys,  wdiere  the  population  w^as  denser  than  in  the
smaller  and  more  isolated  oases.

The  ancient  works  of  irrigation  in  these  valleys,  now
in  ruins,  excite  the  admiration  of  civil  engineers  who
come  to  Peru  to  draw  up  schemes  for  imitating  them.^
Every  square  foot  of  land  was  under  cultivation,  none
was  wasted  even  for  the  sites  of  villages  and  temples,
which  were  always  built  on  the  verge  of  the  desert,  or
on  the  rocky  spurs  of  the  maritime  cordillera,  over-

'  See  in  the  Anthropolo(jical  Revlctv  for  February  18G4,  p.  Ivii,
a  paper  "  On  Crystal  Quartz  Cutting  Instruments  of  the  Ancient
Inhabitants  of  Chanduy  (near  Guayaquil),  found  by  Mr.  Spruce  ;
by  Clements  li.  Markham."

■■'  See  page  2o4  and  notes.  ^  See  note  at  page  236.


INTRODUCTION.  xU

looking  the  algorobca  woods,  the  groves  of  fruit  trees,
and  the  rising  crops,^  The  fields  were  carefully
manured,  as  well  as  watered  by  means  of  irrigating
channels.  In  the  valley  of  the  Chilca  they  raised
crops  of  Indian  corn  by  putting  two  sardine  heads  into
each  hole  with  the  grain,  and  thus  the  fish  served  for
manuring  the  crops  as  well  as  for  food.^  The  guano
on  the  islands  off"  the  coast  was  also  utilised  as
manure.^  The  houses  were  built  of  huge  adobes,  or
bricks  baked  in  the  sun,  with  flat  roofs  of  reed,  plastered
with  mud  ;  and  the  people  were  clothed  in  cotton
dresses,  which  were  very  skilfully  woven. ^  Their
pottery  was  quite  equal  to  that  of  the  Quichuas,
but  at  the  same  time  clearly  original  in  design  ;  the
vessels  being  made  to  imitate  shells,  fruit,  fish,  and

'  See  Cuzco  and  Lima,  p.  12.  ^  See  page  255.

^  See  page  26G.

*  The  indigenous  cotton  of  the  coast  valleys  of  Peru,  from
which  the  Yunca  Indians  wove  their  cloths,  is  a  perennial  plant
with  a  long  staple,  which  now  fetches  a  very  high  price  in  the
Liverpool  market,  as  a  valuable  sort.  I  have  recently  inti'oduced
its  cultivation  into  the  Madras  Presidency,  where  the  result  has
been  very  successful,  and  the  Peruvian  cotton  is  considered  as  one
of  the  most  promising  of  the  foreign  kinds.  The  wool  is  perfectly
white,  but  about  one  in  every  fifty  plants  yields  cotton  of  a  deep
orange-brown  colour.  This  sport,  on  the  part  of  the  cotton
plants,  attracted  the  attention  of  the  Yuncas ;  who  looked  upon
the  dark  coloured  wool  as  sacred,  and  the  heads  of  their  mum-
mies were  wi'apped  in  it.  The  same  thing  has  taken  place  in
India,  much  to  the  astonishment  of  the  cultivators,  who  cannot
understand  why  one  of  the  plants  should  yield  brown  cotton,  and
all  the  others  snow  white  ;  when  the  leaves,  flowers,  seeds,  and
pods  ai-e  the  same  in  aU.  One  cultivator  in  South  Ai'cot  scrubbed
the  brown  cotton  with  soap  and  water,  but  without  changing  its
colour.


xlii  INTRODUCTIOK.

other  objects,  which  were  familiar  to  the  natives  of
the  coast.

The  great  ruins  at  Caxamarquilla,  at  Pachacamac,^
and  of  the  Gran  Chimu  near  Truxillo,^  still  afford  evi-
dence of  the  civilisation  of  the  Yunca  Indians,  and  of
the  wealth  and  power  of  their  chiefs.  The  people  were
warlike,  and  the  tribe  inhabiting  the  Chincha  valley  is
even  said  to  have  made  incursions  far  into  the  heart
of  the  Andes. ^  In  the  valley  of  the  Rimac  there  are
mounds  or  artificial  hills  of  immense  size,  which  ap-
pear to  have  been  intended  to  afford  protection  against
their  enemies  to  the  feudal  lords ;  and  to  serve  as  a
place  of  retreat  for  their  retainers.  A  collection  of
ruins  is  almost  always  found  at  their  feet,  which
formed  the  village  of  the  tribe.  Cieza  de  Leon  gives
a  detailed  account  of  the  manners  and  customs  of
these  Yunca  chiefs,  and  of  their  subjects.^  Nearly
every  valley  had  its  independent  chief  and  separate
tribe ;  although  some  of  the  more  powerful  chiefs,  such
as  the  Grand  Chimu,  the  Chuqui-mancu  of  the  Rimac,
and  the  Lord  of  Chincha,  had  extended  their  dominion
over  several  valleys.  The  language  of  the  coast  was
quite  distinct  from  Quichua.^

>  See  pages  251  to  254.  ^  See  page  242.

*  See  page  261.  *  See  cliapters  Ixi  to  Ixv.

°  A  grammar  of  the  Yunca  language  was  ^v^itten  by  Fernando
de  Carrera,  and  published  at  Lima  in  1644 ;  and  forty  words
were  collected  by  Mr.  Spruce  last  year  from  the  mouth  of  an  old
woman  at  Piura.  But  nearly  all  the  Indians  now  speak  Spanish,
and  the  ancient  language  is,  as  nearly  as  possible,  extinct.  Quichua
appears  never  to  have  been  generally  spoken  on  the  coast.  Yet
the  Ynca  conquerors  gave  names  to  some  of  the  principal  places,
such  as  Caxamar(|uilla,  Rimac,  Pachacamac,  Nanasca,  etc.     In


INTRODUCTION.  xliii

In  many  parts  of  the  coast  the  aboriginal  Indians
have  been  exterminated  by  Spanish  cruelty,  in  others
they  have  disappeared  through  frequent  crosses  with
negroes,  in  others  they  have  entirely  lost,  with  their
native  language,  all  traces  of  the  distinctive  character
which  once  marked  their  ancestors.  It  is  exceedingly
important,  therefore,  to  obtain  authentic  information
concerning  any  of  the  coast  tribes  which  have  retained
their  language  and  national  characteristics  ;  and  the
memoranda  collected  by  Mr.  Spruce  at  Piura,  on  this
subject,  which  will  be  found  in  the  accompanying
note,  contain  some  particulars  of  great  interest.^

the  case  of  Pachacamac,  the  reasons  of  the  Ynca  for  sanctioning
the  reverential  worship  of  the  natives  at  that  great  temple,  is
given  by  Cieza  de  Leon  at  page  252.  Originally  an  idol  with  a
fish's  head,  or,  according  to  others,  a  figure  of  a  she-fox,  was
worshipped  there.  The  Tncas  put  aside  this  idol,  called  the
temple  and  its  deity  Pachacamac  (literally  "  Creator  of  the
world"),  and,  from  motives  of  policy,  encouraged  pilgrimages  to
this  grandly  situated  fane,  overlooking  the  ocean.  It  seems,
however,  to  have  lost  much  of  its  importance  after  the  Ynca
conquest,  for  when  Hernando  Pizarro  first  arrived  at  it,  a  con-
siderable portion  of  the  adjoining  city  was  in  ruins.  Caxamar-
quilla,  the  name  of  another  great  ruined  city  near  Lima,  is  a
corrupt  word,  half  Quichua  half  Spanish,  meaning  "  a  little  ice-
house," from  the  circumstance  that  the  snow  from  the  Cordilleras,
for  the  use  of  wealthy  citizens  at  Lima,  was  deposited  there  as
a  resting  place  on  the  road.  None  of  these  names  are  those
originally  used  by  the  Yunca  Indians  who  erected  the  buildings.
Another  Quichua  word  is  Chuqui-maiicu,  a  name  given  by  the
Yncas  to  the  chief  of  the  Rimac  valley,  whom  they  conquered.
Chuqui  is  a  lance,  and  tnancuni  to  hew  wood.  This  latter  woi'd
may  be  the  derivation  of  the  first  part  of  the  name  of  Manco
Ccapac,  though  it  is  stated  by  Garcilasso  to  have  no  meaning  in
Quichua.

^   "  According  to  information  obtained  at  Piura,  in  the  north


xliv  INTRODUCTION.

It  will  be  natural  to  inquire  whether  a  race,  which
had  for  centuries  inhabited  the  valleys  on  the  Pacific

of  Peru,  there  still  exist,  along  and  near  tlie  neighboui-ing  coast,
large  remnants  of  five  distinct  nations,  viz.  the  Etenes,  the  Mor-
ropes,  the  SecMras,  the  Gatacaos,  and  the  Colanes.  The  Etenes
inhabit  the  first  coast- valley  to  the  southward  of  the  large  valley
of  Lambayeque,  and  their  town  stands  on  a  steep  hill  (morro)
close  by  the  sea ;  they  still  preserve  their  original  language  and
speak  it  constantly  among  themselves,  so  that  it  ought  to  be
possible  to  obtain  a  complete  vocabulary  of  it.

"  The  Morropes  occupy  chiefly  a  village  of  that  name  lying  on
the  north  side  of  Lambayeque.

"  The  Sechuras  inhabit  the  large  village  of  Sechura,  still
farther  northward,  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Piura  (which,  ac-
cording to  Fitz  Roy,  is  in  latitude  5°  35'  S.,  long.  80°  49'  W.).
Only  the  very  oldest  people  recollect  anything  of  their  original
language,  but  they  relate  that  in  their  younger  days  it  was  in
general  use.  They  are  the  stoutest  and  best  looking  Indians  I
have  seen  on  the  Peruvian  coast,  and  their  favorite  occupation  is
that  of  muleteer,  in  which  (as  their  beasts  of  bm'den  are  all  their
own  property)  they  often  attain  considerable  wealth — not  to  be
laid  up,  however,  but  to  be  liberally  spent  in  the  decoration  of
their  church,  their  houses,  and  their  wives.  The  church  of
Sechura  is  internally  one  of  the  most  gorgeous  in.  Peru.  I  have
seen  a  list,  filling  several  folio  pages,  made  last  year  (1863),  of
the  sacred  vessels  it  contains,  including  great  numbers  of  gold
and  silver  candlesticks,  censers,  crucifixes,  etc.  These  are  in
charge  of  a  mayordomo,  who  is  chosen  each  year  out  of  the
wealthier  inhabitants,  and  who  on  retiring  from  office  always
adds  some  costly  gift  to  the  stock ;  so  that  I  suppose  Sechura  to
be  at  this  moment  richer  in  the  precious  metals  than  it  was  when
the  Si)aniards  landed  in  Peru,  and  perhaps  neai'ly  as  rich  as  the
neighbouring  to\\Ti  of  Tumbez  was  at  that  time.

"  The  Scchurano  has  a  great  predilection  for  the  number  four.
He  divides  his  gains  into  four  equal  portions,  the  first  for  God  (or
the  church),  the  second  for  the  devil  (i.e.,  his  wife  or  women),  the
third  for  drink  (chicha  and  brandy  of  Pisco),  and  the  fourth  for
fiHul.  If  he  has  four  sons,  the  first  must  be  an  arriero  (muleteer),
the  second  a  salinero  (worker  and  trader  in  salt,  which  is  pro-


INTRODUCTION.  xlv

coast,  had  halntually  navigated  the  ocean  which  was
always  in  sight  ;  and  we  find  that  they  occasionally
did  venture  to  sea  for  fish,  and  that  they  undertook
coasting  voyages.  The  crooked  algorobas,  the  willows,
and  fruit  trees,  afforded  no  suitable  timber  for  boat-
building ;  but  the  Yuncas  supplied  the  place  of  timber
by  going  afloat  on  inflated  sealskins.^  In  this  way
they  passed  to  and  fro  from  the  shore  to  the  Guano
islands,  and,  according  to  Acosta,  they  even  went  on
long  voyages  to  the  westward.^

cured  in  large  quantities  at  the  mouth  of  the  Piura),  the  third  a
pescador  (fisherman),  and  the  fourth  a  somhrerero  (maker  of
Panama  hats).

"  The  Catacdos  live  in  the  village  of  that  name,  about  five
leagues  higher  up  the  valley  of  Piura.  They  are,  perhaps,  more
numerous  than  the  Sechuras,  but  are  in  every  way  an  inferior
race,  lower  in  stature  and  coarser  looking.  Still  they  are  very
industrious,  and  manufacture  great  numbers  of  hats,  besides
working  up  the  native  cotton  and  wool  into  stout  fabrics  for  their
own  gai'ments,  and  also  for  alfoijas,  or  saddle-bags  (often  beauti-
fully woven  in  various  coloui'ed  devices),  mantas,  belts,  etc.  I
was  unable  to  find  among  them  any  one  who  recollected  any-
thing of  their  ancient  language,  bej'ond  the  tradition  that  it  was
entirely  distinct  from  the  Sechura.

"  The  Coldnes,  formerly  very  numerous  on  the  lower  part  of
the  river  Chira  (a  little  to  the  north  of  the  port  of  Payta),  and
still  existing  in  the  village  of  Col  an,  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,
and  at  Amotape,  a  little  way  within  it,  have  also  lost  all  remem-
brance of  the  language  of  their  forefathers.

"  By  none  of  these  Indian  nations  is  the  Quichua  language
spoken  or  understood,  nor  is  there  any  evidence  of  its  ever  having
been  used  by  them."     R.  S.

•  For  a  good  account  of  these  balsas,  see  the  Nautical  Magazine
for  1832,  vol.  i,  p.  345.

^  "  The  Indians  of  Yea  and  Ai-ica  relate  that,  in  ancient  times,
they  used  to  make  voyages  to  some  very  distant  islands  to  the
westward ;  and  that  these  voyages   were  performed  on  the   in-


xlvi  INTRODUCTION.

The  kingdom  of  Quito,  which  eventually  formed  the
most  northern  province  of  the  empire  of  the  Yncas,
consists  of  a  series  of  lofty  plateaux  from  which  rise
the  towering  peaks  of  Chimborazo,  Cotopaxi,  and
Chanduy  ;  while  both  to  the  east  and  west  a  rich
tropical  vegetation  fills  the  ravines  which  gradually
subside  on  one  side  into  the  valley  of  the  Amazon,
and  on  the  other  into  the  Pacific  coast.  This  region
was  inhabited  by  several  aboriginal  tribes,  the  most
important  of  which  were  the  Canaris,  the  Puruaes,
and  the  Caras.  Velasco  relates  that  the  Caras,  after
having  been  settled  for  about  two  hundred  years  on
the  coast  of  Esmeraldas,  marched  up  the  Andes  and
established  themselves  at  Quito,  where  they  were  ruled
by  a  succession  of  sovereigns  called  Scyris,  until  the
country  was  conquered  by  the  Yncas.  These  Caras
are  said  to  have  been  little  advanced  in  architecture,
but  to  have  been  dexterous  in  weaving  fabrics  of
cotton  and  llama  wool,  and  to  have  excelled  as  lapi-
daries. A  great  emerald  in  the  head-dress  was  the
distinguishing  mark  of  the  reigning  Scyri.

But  all  this  information  respecting  the  early  in-
habitants of  Quito,  and  more  of  the  same  sort,  is  de-
rived from  Velasco,  who  wrote  only  in  the  end  of  the
last  century.  In  truth,  there  are  scarcely  any  reliable
facts  in  the  history  of  the  people  of  Quito,  previous  to
their  subjugation  by  the  Yncas,  and  all  the  remains
of  roads   and   buildings   confessedly   date   from   the

flated  skins  of  seals.  Thus  signs  are  not  wanting  that  tlie  South
Sea  liad  been  navigated,  before  the  arrival  of  the  Spaniards."
Ilutoria  Nntnral  de  I}idia,<i,  lib.  i,  cap.  20,  p.  68.


INTRODUCTION.  xlvii

times  of  Ynca  domination.^    Cieza  de  Leon  ^ives  some
account  of  the  inhabitants  of  tlie  Quitenian  Andes.^

The  principal  aboriginal  nations  which  inhabited  the
great  empire  of  the  Yncas  have  now  been  passed  in  re-
view. In  the  temperate  valleys  of  central  Peru  were  the
QuiCHUAS,  the  most  powerful  and  civilised  of  all.  To  the
eastward  of  them  were  the  savage  Antis  and  Chun-
CHOS  in  the  great  tropical  forests.  To  the  south  were  the
wild  shepherd  tribes  of  Canas,  Canches,  and  others ;
and  still  further  south  were  the  more  civilised  Aymaras,
struggling  against  the  difficulties  of  a  rigorous  climate.
To  the  westward  of  Cuzco  were  the  warlike  Chancas,

>  The  aboriginal  people  of  Quito,  or  at  least  the  dominant  race
which  was  found  there  when  the  first  Ynca  army  invaded  the
country",  is  said  to  have  spoken  the  Quichua  language ;  and  it
has  been  mentioned,  as  a  very  curious  fact,  that  the  same  lan-
guage should  have  been  spoken  at  Cuzco  and  Quito,  at  a  time
when  those  places  held  no  intercourse  with  each  other  ;  whilst  the
inhabitants  of  the  intervening  country  spoke  totally  distinct  lan-
guages. As  one  explanation  of  this,  it  has  been  suggested  that
the  Caras  were  a  Quichua  colony  which,  at  some  remote  period,  had
come  in  balsas  from  the  Peruvian  coast,  landed  at  Esmeraldas,  and
eventually  marched  up  to  Quito.  But  there  is  no  probability  that
any  large  body  of  Quichuas  ever  reached  the  coast  before  they
came  as  conquerors,  and  the  Yuncas  did  not  speak  Quichua.  In
my  opinion  there  is  no  sufficient  evidence  that  the  people  of
Quito  did  speak  Quichua  previous  to  the  Ynca  conquest.  They
were  forced  to  adopt  it  afterwards  by  their  conquerors,  and  it
completely  superseded  their  o^vn  more  barbarous  tongue :  but  in
Cieza  de  Leon's  time,  though  Quichua  was  the  official  language,
the  Puruaes  and  other  tribes  of  the  Quitenian  Andes  still  spoke
their  own  language  in  private.  (See  p.  161.)  There  is  a  tradi-
tion that  the  giants,  who  are  said  to  have  landed  at  Point  Santa
Elena  (see  chap.  Hi),  forced  the  Caras  to  abandon  the  coas!,  and
retire  into  the  mountainous  district  round  Quito.

-  See  chapters  xxxix  to  xliv.


xlviii  INTRODUCTION.

PocRAS,  HuANCAS,  ai)cl  Other  tribes  ;  and  on  the  coast
were  numerous  tribes  known  to  the  Yncas  by  the  col-
lective name  of  Yuncas.  Finally,  in  the  kingdom  of
Quito,  among  others  of  less  note,  were  the  nations  of
Caras,  Puruaes,  and  Canaris.

About  three  centuries  before  the  arrival  of  Pizarro
in  Peru,  the  civilised  and  populous  nation  of  Quichuas,
feeling  their  superiority,  began  to  make  permanent  and
rapid  conquests  over  the  surrounding  tribes  in  every
direction.  The  date  of  the  first  commencement  of
these  conquests  cannot  now  be  ascertained.  Many  cen-
turies must  have  elapsed,  and  a  long  succession  of  Yncas
must  have  reigned  at  Cuzco  before  an  aggressive  policy
became  the  leading  feature  of  their  government ;  and
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  their  civilisation  was  in-
digenous, and  not  derived  from  any  foreign  source.  The
traditional  Manco  Ccapac  may  or  may  not  have  been
the  first  Ynca,  but  there  is  no  good  reason  for  supposing
that  he  was  a  foreigner ;  and  I  am  decidedly  of  opinion
that  the  Quichua  civilisation  is  more  likely  to  have  re-
quired a  period  represented  by  the  hundred  Yncas  of
Montesinos,  than  by  the  dozen  of  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,
for  its  full  development.^     But  all  the  early  traditions

1  The  traditions  of  the  origin  of  the  first  Ynca,  given  by  Garci-
lasso de  la  Vega,  Herrera,  and  Montesinos,  arc  entirely  unworthy
of  credit.  They  are  mere  foolish  stories  obtained  from  the  Indians,
by  credulous  inquirers  who  probably  put  leading  qiiestions,  and
who  mixed  everything  up  with  Noah's  flood,  and  other  ideas  of
their  own.

Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  gives  three  stories,  one,  told  him  by  his
mother's  uncle,  that  two  children  of  the  sun  mysteriously  ap-
peared on  the  banks  of  lake  Titicaca,  marched  north  to  Cuzco,
and  tnught  the  savnge  people  fo  sow,  reap,  and  weave  :    another,


INTRODUCTION.  xllX

are  probably  fictitious,  and  the  first  really  historical
personage  we  meet  with  is  the  great  conqueror  Hiiira-

that  a  mighty  personage  appeared  at  Tiahuanaco  and  divided
the  land  amongst  four  kings,  one  of  whom  was  Manco  Ccapac  :
and  a  third,  that  four  men  and  four  women  came  out  of  a  hole
in  a  rock  near  Paccari-tampu,  of  whom  the  eldest  was  Manco
Ccapac,  the  first  Ynca.     G.  de  la  Vega,  i,  lib.  i,  cap.  xv-xviii.

HeiTera  also  gives  three  accounts.  The  first,  obtained  from
the  Huancas  and  Aymaras,  that  there  was  a  great  deluge,  during
which  some  people  were  preserved  by  hiding  in  caves  on  the
highest  mountains,  after  which  a,  mighty  civiliser  arose  in  the
Collao.  The  second,  that  the  sun,  after  a  long  absence,  rose  out
of  lake  Titicaca*  in  company  with  a  white  man  of  large  stature,
who  gave  men  rules  to  live  by.  He  eventually  spread  his  mantle
on  the  sea  and  disappeared.  The  third  story  is  the  same  as
Garcilasso's,  about  the  people  coming  out  of  a  hole  in  the  rock.
Herrera,  dec.  iii,  lib.  ix,  cap.  1.

Montesinos  says  that,  five  hundred  years  after  Noah's  deluge,
four  brothers  led  the  first  inhabitants  to  Peru,  of  whom  the
youngest  killed  his  brothers  and  left  the  empire  to  his  son  Manco
Ccapac.  Montesinos  then  gives  a  list  of  one  hundred  Tncas  who
succeeded  Manco ;  the  inventions  of  his  own  imagination,  or  at
best  the  results  of  affirmative  answers  from  Indians  who  only
half  understood  him  :  for,  as  Cieza  de  Leon  shrewdly  remarks,
"these  Indians  are  intelligent,  but  they  answer  Yes!  to  every-
thing that  is  asked  of  them."t

Cieza  de  Leon,  whose  testimony  I  consider  to  be  worth  more
than  that  of  all  the  other  chroniclers  put  together,  says  that
Manco  Ccapac  was  believed  to  have  been  the  first  Ynca,  and  that
the  Indians  relate  great  marvels  respecting  him.  J  Indeed,  all
that  Cieza  de  Leon  has  recorded  concerning  the  traditions  of  the
people  goes  to  prove  that  they  had  no  idea  of  their  ancestors
having  had  a  foreign  origin,  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  they
believed  them  to  have  sprung  from  their  native  rocks  or  lakes.
Thus  the  Huancas  thought  that  their  first  parents  came  forth
from  the  fountain  of  Huarivilca.§       The   Chancas    sought  the


*  See  p.  372.     t  See  p. -285.     +  See  pp.  136,329.     §Scep.29S.


1  INTRODUCTION.

ccocha  Ynca.  This  prince  is  frequently  mentioned  by
Cieza  cle  Leon,^  and  from  his  time  the  naiTative  of
Ynca  rule  is  clear  and  I  think  trustworthy.  It  was
gathered,  by  our  author  and  others,  from  the  mouths
of  the  old  Ynca  statesmen  and  generals,  who  told
what  they  had  themselves  seen,  and  what  they  had
heard  from  their  sires  and  grandsires.  It  would  ap-
pear, however,  that,  even  before  the  time  of  Huira-
ccocha,  the  Quichuas  had  already  extended  their  sway

origin  of  their  race  in  the  hake  of  Soclo-cocha.*  The  Aymaras
were  divided  in  opinion  as  to  whether  their  first  parents  came
out  of  a  fountain,  a  lake,  or  a  rock,  but  beHeved  that  once  there
was  a  great  dekige.  In  short,  "no  sense  can  be  learned  from
these  Indians  concerning  their  origin. "f  All  that  we  know  for
certain  is,  that  they  had  dwelt  for  generation  after  generation  in
the  valleys  and  on  the  mountains  where  the  Spaniards  found
them  in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century.  "  A  very  long
period  has  elapsed,"  says  our  author,  "  since  these  Indians  first
peopled  the  Indies. ";{:

The  series  of  Ynca  sovereigns  according  to  Garcilasso  de  la
Vega,  the  last  ten  of  whom  are  historical  personages,  is  as  fol-
lows : —
Circa  1021    Manco  Ccapac.  Circa  1439    Tupac  Ynca  Yupan-

1062    Sinclii  Rocca.  qui.

1091    Lloque  Yupanqui.         „     1475    Huayna  Ccapac.

1126    Mayta  Ccapac.  ,,     1526    Huascar.

1156    Ccapac  Yupanqui.         „     1532    Atahualpa.

1197   Ynca  Rocca.  „     1533   Ynca  Manco.

1249   Yahuar-huaccac.  „     1553    Sayri  Tupac.

1289    Huira-ccocha.  „     1560    Cusi  Titu  Yupanqui.

1340    Pachacutec.  „     1562    Tupac    Amaru   {he-

1400   Ynca  Yupanqui.  liecuied  \h7\).

For  the  signification  of  these  names,  see  note  at  page  231.
1  See  pages  332,  338,  355,  etc.


See  p.  316.  t   See  p.  363.  +   See  p.  89.


INTRODUCTION.  ll

into  some  of  the  tropical  valleys  inhabited  by  the  Antis
and  Chiinchos,  had  subjugated  the  Canas  and  Canches,
and,  taking  advantage  of  the  civil  wars  of  the  Aymaras,
had  annexed  the  wide  plains  of  the  Collao  and  of
Charcas,  and  the  campina  of  Arequipa.

The  reigns  of  the  last  five  Yncas  were  very  long,  and
when  the  mummy  of  Huira-ccocha  was  discovered  by
the  Corregidor  Ondegardo,^  it  was  found  to  be  that  of
a  very  old  man.  We  are  justified,  therefore,  in  placing
his  reion  in  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  and  bec^innino^  of
the  fourteenth  century,  contemporary  with  Edward  I.
of  England.

Huira-ccocha  organised  an  army,  and,  after  having
defeated  the  united  forces  of  the  Chancas,  Pocras  and
Huancas,  in  the  great  battle  of  Yahuar-pampa,  annexed
the  whole  of  the  central  part  of  the  Peruvian  Andes  to
his  dominions.^  The  generals  of  his  son  and  successor
Pachacutec  conquered  the  rich  valleys  of  Xauxa  and
Caxamarca,^  and  the  coast  districts  inhabited  by  the
Yuncas."^  Pachacutec's  son,  the  Ynca  Yupanqui,  made
extensive  conquests  in  the  rich  forest-covered  tropical
plains  to  the  eastward  of  Cuzco,  which  were  completed
by  his  son  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui.^  The  latter  monarch
extended  his  dominions  as  far  as  Tucuman  and  Chile  on
the  south,  and  to  the  extreme  limit  of  the  kingdom  of
Quito  on  the  north.  Lastly,  the  famous  Huayna
Ccapac,  during  a  long  reign,  consolidated  and  brought
into  subjection  this  vast  empire.^

1  See  note  at  p.  226.      2  gee  note  at  page  280.

3  See  note  at  p.  269.      ^  See  p.  261.      ^  gee  p.  337  and  note.

^  The  last  aggressive  enterprise  of  the  Yncas  seems  to  have


lii  INTRODUCTION.

These  conquests,  extending  over  a  period  of
about  two  centuries  and  a  half  or  more,  were  not
achieved  without  much  hard  fighting  and  stubborn  re-
sistance on  the  part  of  the  invaded  nations.  This  was
especially  the  case  with  the  Yuncas  of  the  Pacific
coast.  The  Yncas,  however,  succeeded  in  permanently
establishing  their  power  more  by  conciliation  than  by
force  of  arms ;  and  though  their  disciplined  troops,
wielding  battle-axes,  clubs  and  spears,^  did  good  execu-
tion on  the  day  of  battle  ;  yet  the  liberal  treatment  of
the  vanquished,  and  their  experience  of  the  benefits  of
Ynca  rule,  were  far  more  efiicacious  agents  in  giving
security  to  the  new  government.^  At  the  same  time,
in  cases  of  treachery  or  revolt,  the  Yncas  were  capable
of  terrible  severity,  as  in  the  case  of  the  slaughter  at
Yahuar-ccocha,  described  by  Cieza  de  Leon,  which  was
perpetrated  under  orders  from  Huayna  Ccapac.^

During  this  period  of  conquest  the  Quichuas  pro-
bably made  more  rapid  progress  in  civilisation  than
they  had  done  during  many  previous  centuries.  By
becoming  the  dominant  race  over  a  vast  region,  their
views  became  enlarged,  their  wants  increased,  and  they

been  the  invasion  of  the  island  of  Puna,  in  the  gulf  of  Guayaquil.
Cieza  de  Leon  gives  a  detailed  account  of  the  transactions  con-
nected with  this  invasion.     See  chapters  xlvii,  xlviii,  and  liv.

1  The  battle-axe  was  called  cliampi,  the  club,  macana,  and  the
spear,  chnqni.  They  also  had  a  terrible  weapon  of  copper,  in
the  shape  of  a  star  ;  a  two-handed  axe ;  and  bows  and  arrows,
hiiachi.

2  Cieza  do  Leon  says  that  "  the  Yncas  were  very  astute  and
artful  in  turning  enemies  into  friends,  without  having  resort  to
war"  (p.  137).

^   See  page  133  and  note,  and  page  137.


INTRODUCTION.  liii

learnt  many  things  from  communication  with  their
conquered  neighbours.  Instead  of  being  confined
to  the  products  of  their  native  valleys,  the  Quichuas
now  obtained  gokU  and  their  beloved  coca  leaf^
from  the  eastern  forests  ;  increased  supplies  of  silver
and  copper  from  the  country  of  the  Aymaras  ;
emeralds  from  Quito;  fish  from  the  Pacific  Ocean  ;  aji
pepper,  cotton  fabrics,  and  an  improved  system  of  irri-
gation from  the  coast  valleys.  They  also  learnt  from
the  vanquished  the  use  of  many  medicinal  herbs  and
vegetable  dyes.

They  had  become  an  imperial  race,  and  Cuzco  was
henceforward  an  imperial  city,^  to  which  the  chiefs  and
retainers  of  a  hundred  tribes,  all  distinguished  by  pecu-
liar head-dresses,^  flocked  to  do  homage  to  their  com-
mon sovereign.  Then  it  was  that  great  palaces  were
erected.  Then  the  famous  fortress,  with  its  Cyclopean
stones,  rose  on  the  Sacsahuaman  hill.^  Then  the  Ccuri-
cancha  blazed  forth  in  its  almost  fabulous  splendour.^
In  short,  all  the  works  of  the  Yncas  of  imperial  magni-
ficence or  importance  date  from  this  period  of  busy
conquest,  and  some  of  them,  such  as  the  fortress  of
Ollantay-tambo,  were  in  course  of  construction  when
the  Spaniards  arrived,  and  they  remain  unfinished.  At
this  time,  too,  those  wonderful  lines  of  road  were  con-
structed, running  from  Cuzco  east,  west,  north,  and
south,  overcoming  every  natural  obstacle,  and  aflfording

^  See  page  369.  2  ggg  chapter  xcvi.

^  See  chapters  xcii  and  xciii ;  and  notes  at  pages  322  and  327.

*  See  pages  145  and  note,  and  167  and  note.

^  See  the  second  note  at  p.  322.  ^   See  page  328  and  note.


liv  INTRODUCTION.

the  means  of  rapid  commiinicatiou  from  the  capital  to
the  extreme  frontiers  of  the  empire.^  There  were
tampus  or  lodgings  at  short  intervals,  and  public
buildings  for  officials,  for  storing  tribute,  and  for  col-
lecting necessaries  for  an  army,  were  erected  in  almost
every  valley  along  the  line  of  the  roads.

The  organisation  of  every  branch  of  the  government
of  this  great  empire  displays  extraordinary  administra-
tive ability  on  the  part  of  the  Yncas.  Perhaps  their
most  remarkable  institution  was  the  system  of  mitimaes
or  colonists,  which  is  fully  explained  by  Cieza  de  Leon.^
Combined  with  their  policy  of  superseding  all  local
idioms  by  the  rich  and  cultivated  Quichua,^  this  system
of  mitimaes  would  soon  have  cemented  the  numerous
conquered  nations  and  tribes  into  one  people,  speaking
one  language.

If  good  government  consists  in  promoting  the  happi-
ness and  comfort  of  a  people,  and  in  securing  them
from  oppression ;  if  a  civilising  government  is  one
which  brings  the  means  of  communication  and  of  irri-
gating land  to  the  highest  possible  state  of  efficiency,
and  makes  steady  advances  in  all  the  arts, — then  the
government  of  the  Yncas  may  fairly  lay  claim  to  those
titles.  The  roads,  irrigating  channels,  and  other  pub-
lic works  of  the  Yncas  were  superior  to  anything  of  the
kind  that  then  existed  in  Europe.  Thcii-  architecture
is  grand  and  imposing.  Their  pottery  and  ornamental
work  is  little  inferior  to  that  of  Greeks  and  Etruscans.
They    were    skilled   workers    in    gold,    silver,   copper,

^  See  pages  153  with  note,  and  217  and  218  with  note.

2  See  pages  149,  150,  oOl,  and  oG2.  ^  Sec  page  146.


INTRODUCTION.  Iv

bronze,  and  stone.  Their  language  was  ricli,  polished,
and  elegant.  Their  laws  showed  an  earnest  solicitude
for  the  welfare  of  those  who  were  to  live  under  them.
Above  all,  their  enlightened  toleration,  for  the  existence
of  which  there  are  the  clearest  proofs,  is  a  feature  in
their  rule  which,  in  one  point  of  view  at  least,  and  that
a  most  important  one,  raises  them  above  their  con-
temporaries in  every  part  of  the  world.  ^

Cieza  de  Leon  bears  testimony  to  the  excellence  of
the  government  of  the  Yncas.  The  intelligent  young
soldier  seems  to  have  been  astonished  at  the  order  and
regularity,  the  beneficence  and  forethought  which  pre-
vailed in  the  government  of  that  empire  which  had
just  been  shattered  by  his  cruel  countrymen.  He  says
that  the  Yncas  ruled  with  such  wisdom  that  few  in
the  world  ever  excelled  them  ;^  and,  in  another  place,
he  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  "  if  the  ancient  polity
had  been  preserved,  it  would  not  have  failed  to  bring
the  Indians  nearer  to  the  way  of  good  living  and  con-
versation ;  for  few  nations  in  the  world  have  had  a
better  government  than  the  Yncas."  ^

^  Toleration  is  the  last,  as  it  is  the  greatest  vii'tue  that  a  ruler
learns.  It  is  a  virtiie  that  has  yet  to  be  learnt  by  the  nations  of
Europe.  An  eminent  divine  of  the  present  day  (^Spectator,  July
30th,  1864,  p.  877)  declares  that  it  is  well  he  has  not  the  power
to  persecute  his  theological  opponents,  for  that  he  would  not
trust  his  will.  The  brightest  European  examples  of  tolerant
princes  are  Marcus  Aui^elius  and  Oliver  Cromwell,  yet  one  per-
mitted the  persecution  of  Christians,  and  the  other  hunted  down
papists  and  malignants.  For  perfect  toleration  we  must  look
beyond  Europe,  and  contemplate  the  policy  of  the  illustrious
Akbar  in  India,  and  of  the  Yncas  in  South  America.

2  See  page  136.  ^  See  page  220.


Ivi  INTEODUCTION.

But  our  author  came  to  Peru  fifteen  years  after
the  seizure  of  Atahualpa  by  Pizarro,  and,  short  as  the
interval  was,  a  terrible  devastation  had  spread  over
the  leno'th  and  breadth  of  the  land.     Over  and  over

o

again  Cieza  de  Leon  mentions  the  destruction  of  the
people.  In  every  valley  he  entered,  tliey  had  been
killed  by  the  Spaniards  by  thousands,  and  their  build-
ings reduced  to  ruins.^  In  many  districts  the  whole
population  had  been  exterminated.  In  one  place  he
says — "  Nearly  all  these  valleys  are  now  almost  de-
serted, having  once  been  so  densely  peopled,  as  is  well
known  to  many  persons."  He  heard  of  misery  and
cruelty  in  every  part  of  the  land.  He  saw  the  palaces
and  store  houses  of  the  Yncas  in  ruins,  the  flocks
slaughtered,  the  grand  roads  destroyed,  and  the  posts
for  pointing  the  way  in  the  deserts  used  for  fire  wood.^
His  barbarian  countrymen  pulled  down  the  great  works
of  irrigation,^  and  turned  thousands  of  acres  of  fertile
land  into  desert.

These  sights  excited  the  indignation  of  the  humane
and  observant  man  at  arms,  who  in  this,  as  in  many
other  respects,  proved  his  superiority  of  head  and
heart  over  his  brutal  companions.  Cieza  de  Leon  felt
warmly  for  the  wrongs  of  the  Indians,  and  devotes  a
chapter  to  show  how  God  chastises  those  who  are
cruel  to  them."*  But  he  was  so  steeped  in  the  super-
stition of  his  age  and  country  that  all  the  simple  rites
of  the  Indians  appeared  to  him  to  be  the  work  of  the
devil,  and  in  every  harmless  ceremony  he   saw  the

1  See  pages  17,  93,  108,  119,  203,  213,  220,  etc.

2  See  note  at  p.  218.       ^  ggg  Ytngc  263.       ^  Sec  chapter  cxix.


INTRODUCTION.  IvU

cloven  feet.  He  tells  us  that  the  old  men  of  every
tribe  in  the  Indies  conversed  with  the  enemy  of  man-
kind, and  he  mocks  at  their  burying  food  with  their  dead
for  the  journey  to  the  other  world,  "  as  if  hell  was  so
very  far  off."^  The  whole  population  of  America  was
destined,  according  to  our  author,  to  eternal  torments
in  the  next  world  ;  yet  it  is  unjust  to  blame  him  for
asserting  a  belief  which  is  held  at  the  present  day,
and  by  the  most  tolerant  church  in  Christendom.^

AVhen  uninfluenced  by  religious  prejudices,  he  writes
with  an  impartiality  which  does  him  the  highest  credit.
He  laments  over  the  condition  of  the  Indians,  deplores
the  wanton  destruction  of  their  public  works,  and  con-
demns the  barbarity  of  the  Spaniards.  His  supersti-
tious folly  is  the  result  of  his  education,  his  merits  are
all  his  own.  In  arrangement,  in  trustworthiness,  in
accuracy,  and  in  the  value  of  his  observations,  the
work  of  Cieza  de  Leon  stands  higher  than  that  of  any
contemporary  chronicler  :  and  these  quahties  in  his
book  are  enhanced  by  the  romantic  life  and  noble  dis-
position of  its  author.  Cieza  de  Leon  will,  I  think,  be
found  an  agreeable  companion  over  a  country  of  no
common  interest,  at  a  most  important  period  of  its
history  ;  and  so  I  consign  him  to  the  favourable  at-
tention of  the  members  of  the  Hakluyt  Society.

^  See  page  40.

2  When  Columbus  returned  from  his  first  voyage,  he  brought
home  several  Indians,  who  were  baptised  at  Barcelona,  and  one
of  them  died  shortly  afterwards.  Herrera  tells  us  that  this  Indian
was  the  first  native  of  the  new  world  who  went  to  heaven.  (Dec.  i,
lib.  ii,  cap.  5.)  The  countless  millions  of  his  countrymen  who
had  died  unbaptised,  are  of  course  suffering  eternal  torments  in
hell !

/


FIRST     PART


OF  THE


CHRONICLE    OF    PERU

Which    treats    of  the   boundaries   of  provinces,    their

defcription,    tlie  founding  of  new  cities,    the  rites  and  customs

of  the  Indians,    and  other  flrange  things  worthy  to

be  known.


Written  by

PEDRO     DE     CIEZA     DE     LEON.

A    NATIVE    OF    SEVILLE.


IN      ANTWERP,

IX      THE      HOUSE      OF      JEAX     STEELTZ.

M.D.LIIII.

Con   privitegio.


TO    THE     MOST     HIGH    AND    MOST    PUISSANT

LOUD   DON   PHILIP,   PRINCE   OF   THE

SPAINS,   OUR  LORD.


Most  liigli  and  most  jjuissant  Lord, —

AS  not  only  the  notahle  deeds  of  many  very  brave  men,  hit
also  numerous  events  ivorthy  of  jperpetual  memory  in  different
provinces,  have  remained  in  the  shades  of  oblivion  for  want  of
writers  who  will  record  them,  and  of  historians  who  will  nar-
rate them  ;  I,  therefore,  having  crossed  over  to  the  New  World,
where  I  have  'passed  the  greater  part  of  my  time  serving  your
Majesty  in  loars  and  discoveries,  in  which  service  I  have
always  talcen  much  delight,  have  determined  to  imdertalce  the
history  of  the  events  in  the  great  and  memorable  kingdom  of
Feru.  I  luent  to  it  by  land  from  the  province  of  Carthagena,
where,  and  in  the  province  of  Popayan,  I  lo as  for  many  years.
After  I  had  been  in  your  Majesty's  service  in  that  last  war,
which  ended  in  the  overthrow  of  the  rebels  and  tyrants,  I
thought  over  the  great  tuealth  of  Peru,  the  ivonderful  things  in
its  provinces,  the  stirring  events  of  its  early  history  and  of
more  recent  times,  and  how  much  there  was  both  in  the  one
and  the  other  period  which  was  worthy  of  note.  Then  it  was
that  I  resolved  to  take  up  my  pen  and  accomplish  the  desire
I  had  conceived  to  perform  a  signal  service  for  your  Highness,
holding  it  to  be  certain  that  your  Highness  would  receive  it
ivithout  noticing  the  weakness  of  my  powers,  but  rather  judging
my  intention,  and,  in  your  royal  clemenrAf,  receiving  the  will


2  DEDICATION.

with  which  I  offer  this  hooh  to  your  Highness.  It  treats  of
that  great  kingdom  of  Peru  of  tvhicli  God  has  made  you  Lord.
I  do  not  fail  to  consider,  0  most  serene  and  gracious  Lord,
that  to  describe  the  wonderful  things  of  this  great  hingdom  of
Peru  ivould  require  one  who  could  write  lihe  Titus  Livius,  or
Valerius,  or  some  other  of  the  great  writers  that  have  appeared
in  the  tvorld,  and  that  even  they  would  find  some  difficulty  in
the  tash.  For  who  can  enumerate  the  mighty  things  of  Peru?
the  lofty  mountains  and  profound  valleys  over  which  we  ivent
conquering  and  discovering  ?  the  numerous  rivers  of  such  size
and  depth?  the  variety  of  provinces,  with  so  many  different
things  in  each  ?  the  tribes,  with  all  their  strange  customs,
rites,  and  ceremonies?  so  many  birds,  animals,  trees, fishes,
all  unhiown  ?  Besides  all  these  things,  who  can  xvorthily
describe  the  unheard-of  labours  which  a  handful  of  Spaniards
passed  through  in  this  vast  country  ?  Who  can  imagine  the
events  of  those  tvars  and  discoveries,  extending  over  sixteen  hun-
dred leagues  of  country  ?  the  hunger,  thirst,  death,  terrors,  and
fatigue  which  ivere  suffered  ?  Concerning  all  these  things  there
is  so  much  to  relate,  that  any  writer  would  be  tired  out  in  writing
it.  For  this  cause,  most  puissant  Lord,  I  have  collected  the
most  important  events  which  I  myself  saw  or  heard,  into  this
history.  I  have  not  the  audacity  to  place  it  before  the  judg-
ment of  an  mikind  world,  but  I  entertain  the  hope  that  your
Highness  ivill  protect  and  defend  it  as  a  tiling  belonging  to
yourself,  so  that  I  may  freely  dare  to  walk  under  your  protec-
tion. For  many  writers,  fearing  the  same  thing,  have  sought
for  Princes  of  great  note  to  tchom  they  might  dedicate  their
works,  and  some  of  these  works  have  never  been  read  by  any
one,  being  so  fantastic  and  absurd.  But  ivhat  I  have  ivrittcn
here  is  concerning  true  and  important  things,  both  pleasant
and  useful,  which  have  happened  in  our  time  ;  and  I  dedicate
my  work  to  the  greatest  and  most  powerful  Prince  in  the  world,
who  is  your  Highness.  Tlie  attempt  sarours  of  temerity  in  so
unlearned  a  man,  but  uthrrs  of  more  learning  arc  too  much


DEDICATION.  3

occupied  in  the  wars  to  write.     Oftentimes,  ivJien  the  otJier
soldiers  were  reposing,  I  was  tiring  myself  hy  lorithig.   Neither
fatigue  nor  the  niggedness  of  the  country,  nor  the  mountains
and  rivers,  nor  intolerable  hunger  and  suffering,   have  ever
been  sufficient  to  obstruct  my  two  duties,  namely,  writing  and
following  7mj  flag   and  my  captain  without  fault.     Saving
written  this  work  under  such  difficulties,  and  it  being  dedi-
cated to  your  Highness,  it  seems  to  me  that  my  readers  ought
to  pardon  any  faadts  which,  in  their  judgments,  they  may  find
in  it.     If  they  refuse  to  pardon  these  faults,  it  must  suffice  for
me  that  I  have  written  the  truth,  for  this  is  what  I  have  most
carefully  sought  after.     Much  that  I  have  ivritten  I  saio  with
my  own  eyes,  and  I  travelled  over  many  countries  in  order  to
learn  more  concerning  them.     Those  things  ivhich  I  did  not
see,  I  took  great  pains  to  inform  myself  of,  from  persons  of
good  repute,  both  Gliristians  and  Indians.    I  pray  to  Almighty
God  that,  as  He  was  served  by  giving  to  your  Highness
so  great  and  rich  a  Mngdom  as  Peru,  He  ivill
leave  you  to  live  and  reign  for  many
happy  years,  ivith  increase  of
many  other  Mngdoms
and  lordships.


B  2


PROLOGUE


AUTHOR,

IN    WHICH     HE     ANNOUNCES    THE    INTENTION    OF    THE    WORK,    AND    ITS
DIVISIONS.


I  SET  out  from  Spain,  where  I  was  born  and  bred,  at  sucli  a
tender  age  that  I  was  scarcely  thirteen  complete  years  old  when
I  sailed ;  and  I  spent  more  than  seventeen  years  in  the  Indies,
many  of  them  in  the  discovery  and  conquest  of  new  provinces,
others  in  new  settlements,  and  in  travelling  over  different  coun-
tries. As  I  noted  the  many  great  and  strange  things  that  are  to
be  seen  in  this  new  world  of  the  Indies,  there  came  upon  me  a
strong  desire  to  write  an  account  of  some  of  them,  as  well  those
which  I  had  seen  with  my  own  eyes  as  those  which  I  had  heard
of  from  persons  of  good  repute.  Bu.t  when  I  considered  my
small  stock  of  learning  I  put  aside  my  desire,  holding  it  to  be  a
vain  thing ;  for  I  remembered  that  it  was  for  learned  doctors  to
write  histories,  throwing  light  upon  them  by  their  learning  and
judgment,  while  those  who  are  not  learned  would  be  presumptu-
ous even  if  thej'-  thought  of  wi-iting.  I,  therefore,  passed  some
time  without  giving  heed  to  my  former  intentions.  At  last  the
Almighty  Grod,  who  can  do  anything,  favoured  me  with  His
divine  grace,  and  awoke  in  me  the  memory  of  what  I  had  before
forgotten.  Taking  heart,  I  then  determined  to  spend  some  part
of  my  life  in  writing  history,  to  which  resolution  I  was  moved  by
the  following  considerations.

The  first  was,  that  in  all  parts  where  I  had  been,  no  one  was


PROLOGUE.  5

engaged  in  -writing  anything  concerning  what  had  occurred  ;  and
time  destroys  the  memory  of  events  in  such  sort  that  soon  there
is  no  knowledge  of  what  has  passed.

The  next  was,  that  both  ourselves  and  these  Indians  draw  our
origin  from  our  ancestors  Adam  and  Eve,  and  that  the  Son  of
God  descended  from  the  heaven  to  the  earth  for  all  men,  and,
clothed  in  our  humanity,  received  a  cruel  death  on  the  cross  to
redeem  us  and  free  us  from  the  power  of  the  devil,  which  devil
had,  for  so  long  a  time,  held  these  people  captive  by  God's  per-
mission ;  and  that  it  was  right  that  the  world  should  know  in
what  manner  so  great  a  multitude  of  tribes,  as  there  is  in  these
Indies,  was  brought  into  the  bosom  of  the  holy  mother  church
by  the  exertions  of  Spaniards.  These  exertions  were  such  that
no  other  nation  in  the  world  could  have  endured  them.  Thus
God  chose  us  for  so  great  a  work,  before  any  other  nation.

Another  consideration  was,  that  in  future  times  it  ought  to  be
known  how  greatly  the  royal  crown  of  Castille  was  enlarged,  and
how,  when  the  invincible  Emperor  was  our  King  and  Lord,  the
rich  and  abundant  kingdoms  of  New  Spain  and  Peru  were  settled,
and  other  islands  and  vast  provinces  were  discovered.

I  beseech  all  learned  and  benevolent  men  to  look  upon  my
work  with  justice,  for  they  know  that  the  malice  and  murmuring
of  the  ignorant  and  stupid  are  such  that  they  never  fail  to  find
fault.  Thus  it  is  that  many,  fearing  the  rabid  envy  of  these
scorpions,  consider  it  better  to  be  called  cowards  than  to  allow
their  works  to  see  the  light.

But  I  will  not  desist  from  my  intention,  valuing  more  the
favour  of  the  few  and  learned,  than  caring  for  the  evil  which  the
many  foohsh  readers  may  bring  upon  me.

I  also  wrote  this  work  that  those,  who  learn  from  it  the  great
services  which  many  noble  knights  and  youths  have  done  for  the
royal  crown  of  Spain,  may  be  led  to  emulate  their  examples  ;  and,
at  the  same  time,  by  noting  how  others  committed  treasons,
robberies,  and  other  evil  deeds,  and  suffered  famous  punishments
for  them,  that  they  may  profit  by  these  examples,  and  loyally
serve  their  natural  king  and  lord.

For  the  reasons  which  I  have  now  set  forth,  I  undertook  the


6  PROLOGUE.

present  work,  for  the  better  understanding  of  wliicli  I  have
divided  it  into  four  parts,  in  the  following  manner.

The  first  part  treats  of  the  division  of  the  provinces  of  Peru,  as
well  towards  the  sea  as  inland,  with  the  longitudes  and  latitudes.
It  contains  a  description  of  aU  these  provinces,  an  account  of  the
new  cities  founded  by  the  Spaniards,  with  the  names  of  the
founders,  and  the  time  when  they  were  founded ;  an  account  of
the  ancient  rites  and  customs  of  the  native  Indians,  and  other
strange  things  very  different  from  those  of  our  country,  Avhich
are  worthy  of  note.'

In  the  second  part,  I  shall  treat  of  the  government  of  the
Yncas  Yupanquis,  who  were  the  ancient  kings  of  Peru,  and  of
their  great  deeds  and  policy,  how  many  of  them  there  were,  and
their  names.  I  shall  describe  the  superb  and  magnificent  temples
which  they  built,  the  roads  of  wonderful  size  which  they  made,
and  other  great  things  that  were  found  in  this  kingdom.  I  shall
also  give  an  account  in  this  book  of  what  the  Indians  say  con-
cerning the  deluge,  and  how  the  Tncas  magnify  the  grandeur  of
their  origin.

In  the  third  part  I  shall  relate  the  discovery  and  conquest  of
this  great  kingdom  of  Peru,  and  the  constancy  of  the  Marquis
Don  Francisco  Pizarro  ;  the  hardships  suffered  by  the  Christians
when  thirteen  of  them  with  the  same  Marquis  (God  permitting)
discovered  the  country  ;  how  the  said  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  was
nominated  governor  by  his  Majesty,  and  entered  Peru ;  and  how,
with  one  hundred  and  sixty  Spaniards,  he  captured  Atahualpa.
In  this  third  part  I  shall  also  treat  of  the  arrival  of  the  Ade-
lantado  Don  Pedro  de  Alvarado,  and  of  the  agreement  made
between  him  and  the  governor  Don  Francisco  Pizarro.  I  shall,
in  like  manner,  give  an  account  of  the  notable  things  which
happened  in  various  parts  of  this  kingdom,  of  the  rebellion  of  the
Indians,  and  of  the  causes  which  led  to  it ;  of  the  cruel  and  per-
fidious war  that  the  same  Indians  waged  against  the  Spaniards

1  This  is  the  part  which  is  now  translated,  the  only  one  which  was  ever
published,  and,  indeed,  the  only  one  which  is  suited  to  form  a  volume  for
the  Hakluyt  Society.  It  is  a  naiTative  of  travel  in  the  strictest  sense,
while  the  other  parts  would  have  been  purely  historical.


who  were  in  the  great  city  of  Cuzco,  and  of  the  death  of  some
Spanish  and  Indian  captains.  This  third  part  will  end  with  the
return  of  the  Adelantado  Don  Diego  de  Almagro  fi'om  Chile,  and
his  entry  into  the  city  of  Cuzco  by  force  of  arms,  the  captain
Hernando  Pizarro,  Knight  of  the  order  of  Santiago,  being  there
as  chief  justice.

The  fourth  part  is  more  important  than  the  three  which  pre-
cede it.  It  Avill  be  divided  into  five  books,  and  will  be  entitled
"The  Civil  Wars  of  Peru:"  in  which  will  be  related  stranger
things  than  ever  passed  before  in  any  other  part  of  the  world,
among  so  small  a  number  of  people  of  the  same  nation.

The  first  book  of  these  civil  wars  treats  of  the  war  of  Las
SaHnas,  and  gives  an  account  of  the  imprisonment  of  the  captain
Don  Hernando  Pizarro  by  the  Adelantado  Don  Diego  de  Al-
magro ;  it  relates  how  the  city  of  Cuzco  was  made  to  receive
Almagro  as  governor,  and  the  causes  of  the  war  between  the
governors  Pizarro  and  Almagro.  It  describes  the  treaties  and
interviews  between  them  until  the  dispute  was  placed  in  the
hands  of  an  umpire,  the  oaths  they  each  took,  and  the  commis-
sions and  letters  they  each  had  received  from  his  Majesty ;  the
sentence  that  was  given,  the  return  of  the  Adelantado  to  Cuzco,
and  how,  with  great  fury  and  enmity,  he  fought  the  battle
of  Las  Salinas,  which  is  half  a  league  from  Cuzco.  It  relates
also  the  march  of  the  captain  Lorenzo  de  Aldana  to  the  provinces
of  Quito  and  Popayan,  and  the  discoveries  of  the  captains  Gon-
zalo  Pizarro,  Pedro  de  Candia,  Alonzo  de  Alvarado,  and  others.
I  conclude  with  the  return  of  Hernando  Pizarro  to  Spain.

The  second  book  is  called  "  The  "War  of  Chupas."  It  Avill  treat
of  several  discoveries  and  conquests  ;  of  the  conspiracy  of  the
men  of  Chile  in  the  City  of  the  Kings  to  kill  the  Marquis  Don
Francisco  Pizarro,  and  of  his  death.  It  wiU  then  relate  how  Don
Diego  de  Almagro,  son  of  the  Adelantado,  was  received  as
governor  by  the  greater  part  of  the  kingdom;  how  the  captain
Alonzo  de  Alvarado,  who  was  captain  and  chief  justice  of  his
Majesty  for  the  Marquis  Pizarro  in  Chachapoyas,  rose  against
him,  and  how  Pero  Alvarez,  Holguin,  Gomez  de  Tordoya,  and
others,  did  the  same  in   Cuzco ;    how  the  licentiate  Christoval


8  PROLOGUE.

Vaca  de  Castro  arrived  from  Spain  as  governor,  and  how  there
was  discord  among  the  men  of  Chile.  I  shall  relate  how,  after
some  of  the  captains  had  killed  each  other,  the  cruel  battle  of
Chupas  was  fought  near  Guamanga,  and  how  the  governor  Vaca
de  Castro  went  to  Cuzco  and  cut  oft'  the  head  of  the  youth  Don
Diego.     This  will  conclude  the  second  book.

The  third  book  ^^U  be  entitled  "  The  Civil  War  of  Quito."
The  writing  of  it  will  be  very  difficult,  and  it  will  treat  of  various
important  events.  There  will  be  an  account  of  how  the  new  laws
were  promulgated  in  Spain,  and  of  the  consequent  meetings  and
consultations  in  Peru,  until  Conzalo  Pizarro  was  received  in  the
city  of  Cuzco  as  procurator  and  captain  general.  It  will  relate
what  occurred  in  the  City  of  the  Kings  until  the  viceroy  was
seized  by  the  judges  and  sent  to  sea ;  the  entry  of  Gonzalo
Pizarro  into  the  city,  where  he  was  received  as  governor ;  his
chase  of  the  viceroy ;  and  how  the  viceroy  was  conquered  and
killed  on  the  plain  of  Ailaquito.  I  shall  also  give  an  account,
in  this  book,  of  the  events  which  took  place  in  Cuzco,  in  Charcas,
and  in  other  parts  ;  of  the  rising  of  Diego  Centeno  on  the  part  of
the  king  and  of  Alonzo  de  Toro  and  Francisco  de  Carbajal  on  the
part  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  until  that  constant  worthy,  Diego  Cen-
teno, was  constrained  to  hide  in  secret  places,  and  his  master  of
the  camp,  Lope  de  Mendoza,  was  killed ;  also  of  what  passed
between  the  captains  Pedro  de  Hinojosa,  Juan  de  Yllanes,  Mel-
chior  Verdugo,  and  the  others  who  were  in  Tierra  Firme  ;  and  of
how  the  Adelantado  Belalcazar  put  the  marshal  Don  Jorge  Rob-
ledo  to  death  in  the  village  of  Pozo.  I  shall  then  recount  how
the  Emperor  our  Lord,  in  his  great  clemency  and  kindness,  sent
out  a  pardon  to  all  who  should  submit  and  enter  his  royal  service;
how  the  Hcentiate  Pedi'o  de  la  Gasca  was  appointed  president,
and  how  he  arrived  in  Tierra  Firme  ;  the  policy  by  which  he
drew  the  captains,  who  were  there,  into  the  service  of  the  king  ;
the  return  of  Gonzalo  PizaiTO  to  the  City  of  the  Kings  ;  the  cruel-
ties which  were  committed  there  by  him  and  his  captains  ;  how
a  general  assembly  was  convoked  to  determine  who  should
go  as  procurators  general  to  Spain  ;  and  the  delivery  of  the  fleet
to  the  president.     Here  I  shall  conclude  this  book.


PROLOGUE,  9

The  foui'tli  book  will  ho  entitled  "  The  War  of  Huarina."  It
will  treat  of  the  entei-prise  of  the  captain  Diego  Centeno  ;  how  he
entered  the  city  of  Cuzco  with  the  few  men  whom  he  had  been
able  to  induce  to  join  him ;  how  Lorenzo  de  Aldana  sailed  from
Panama  and  arrived  at  the  City  of  the  Kings ;  and  how  many
captains  left  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  and  passed  over  to  the  service  of
the  king.  I  shall  also  treat  of  what  passed  between  Diego  Cen-
teno and  Alonzo  de  Mendoza,  until  they  gave  battle  to  Gonzalo
Pizarro  on  the  plain  of  Huarina.  I  shall  relate  how  the  captain
Diego  Centeno  was  defeated,  how  many  of  his  captains  and  fol-
lowers were  killed  or  taken  prisoners,  and  how  Gonzalo  Pizarro
entered  the  city  of  Cuzco.

The  fifth  book,  containing  the  war  of  Xaquixaguana,  treats  of
the  arrival  of  the  president  Pedro  de  la  Gasca  in  the  valley  of
Xauxa ;  of  the  preparations  made  by  him  when  he  heard  that
Diego  Centeno  was  defeated  ;  of  his  march  to  Xaquixaguana,
where  Gonzalo  Pizarro  gave  him  battle  ;  it  relates  how  the  presi-
dent and  the  troops  of  the  king  were  victorious ;  and  how  Gonzalo
Pizarro  was  defeated  and  put  to  death  in  the  same  valley ;  how
the  president  arrived  at  Cuzco  and  proclaimed  the  tyrants  to  be
traitors  ;  how  he  retired  to  a  village  called  Huaynarima,  where
he  divided  the  greater  part  of  the  provinces  of  this  kingdom
among  persons  selected  by  himself;  and  how  he  went  thence  to
Lima,  and  established  the  Royal  Audience.

Having  completed  these  books,  which  form  the  fourth  part  of
my  work,  I  shall  add  two  Commentaries.  The  first  will  treat  of
the  events  in  Peru,  from  the  founding  of  the  Audience  to  the
departure  of  the  president.  The  second,  will  give  an  account  of
the  president's  arrival  in  Tierra  Firme ;  of  the  murder  of  the
Bishop  of  Xicaragua  by  the  Contreras  ;  of  how  the  Contreras,
with  tp-annical  intentions,  entered  the  city  of  Panama  and  stole
great  quantities  of  gold  and  silver,  of  how  the  citizens  gave  them
battle  outside  the  town,  defeated  and  put  them  to  death,  and  re-
covered the  treasure.  I  shall  conclude  with  an  account  of  the
insurrection  at  Cuzco,  relating  how  the  marshal  Alonzo  de  Alva-
rado  was  sent  by  the  judges  to  punish  the  rebels,  and  how  the
illustrious  and  politic  worthy,  Don  Antonio  de  Mendoza,  entered
this  kingdom  as  ^-iceroy.


10  PROLOGUE.

And  if  this  history  is  not  written  with  the  elegance  and  learn-
ing that  science  gives  to  letters,  it  will  at  least  be  truthful,  and
each  event  will  be  duly  noted  with  brevit}^,  while  e\al  deeds  will
be  commented  upon  with  moderation.

I  truly  believe  that  others  would  have  performed  this  work
with  more  satisfaction  to  the  reader,  being  more  learned  than  I
am.     But,  if  my  good  intentions  and  my  endeavours  to  do  my
best  ai'e   considered,  it  is  just,  at  all  events,  that  I  should  be
favourably  received.     The  ancient  Diodorus  Siculus  says  in  his
prologue,  that  mankind  owes  a  great  deal  to  authors,  for,  through
their  labours,  the  deeds  of  men  live   for  many  ages  ;    and  he,
therefore,  calls  Cicero  the  witness  of  time,  the  master  of  life,  the
light  of  truth.     What  I  ask,  in  return  for  my  labour,  is  that,
although  these  writings  may  be  devoid  of  elegance,  they
may  be   received  with   favour,    because    they  are
accompanied  with  truth.     I  submit  my  work
to  the  judgment  of  the  learned  and
vu'tuous  ;    and  I  beg  that
others  will  content
themselves
with
merely  reading  it,  without  attempt-
ing to  judge  what  they
do  not  understand.


THE    TRAVELS    OF

PEDKO    DE    CIEZA   DE    LEON.


CHAPTER    I.


Which  treats  of  the  discovery  of  the  Indies,  of  some  other  things  which
were  done  when  they  were  first  discovered,  and  of  the  present  state
of  affairs.

Fourteen  hundred  aud  ninety-two  years  liad  passed  away
since  the  Princess  of  life,  the  glorious  virgin  Mary  our  Lady,
begot  the  only-begotten  Son  of  God,  and  the  Catholic  kings
Don  Fernando  and  Dona  Isabel  of  glorious  memory  were
reigning  in  Spain,  when  the  illustrious  Christoval  Colon
set  forth  with  three  caravels  and  ninety  Spaniards,  whom
the  said  kings  ordered  to  serve  under  him.  After  sailing
twelve  hundred  leagues  to  the  westward  over  the  wide  ocean,
he  discovered  the  island  of  Espafiola,  where  now  stands  the
city  of  Santo  Domingo.  Then  also  were  discovered  the
islands  of  Cuba,  and  of  San  Juan  de  Puerto  Eico,  Yucatan,
Tierra  Firme,  New  Spain,  the  provinces  of  Gruatemala  and
Nicaragua,  and  many  other  islands  and  kingdoms  as  far  as
Florida ;  and  afterwards  the  great  kingdom  of  Peru,  Eio  de
la  Plata,  and  the  strait  of  Magellanes.  Yet  so  many  years
had  elapsed  during  which  this  vast  expanse  of  land  was
unknown  in  Spain,  nor  was  there  any  rumour  concerning  it !
The  judicious  reader  will  reflect  through  what  amount  of
labour,  hunger,  thirst,  terror,  danger,  and  death  the  Span-


12  THE    TRAVELS    0¥

iards  must  have  passed  in  tliese  navigations  and  discoveries,
and  what  waste  of  blood  and  hves  they  must  have  entailed.
And  all  was  held  as  good  service  by  the  Catholic  kings,
as  well  as  by  his  royal  Majesty  the  invincible  Ctesar  Don
Carlos  the  fifth  Emperor  of  that  name,  our  king  and  lord ;
because  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  preaching  of
His  holy  gospel  has  thus  been  extended,  and  our  holy  faith
exalted.  The  will  both  of  the  said  Catholic  kings  and  of
his  Majesty  has  been,  and  is,  that  great  care  should  be  taken
in  the  conversion  of  the  natives  of  all  these  provinces  and
kingdoms,  for  this  was  their  principal  aim  ;  and  that  the
governors,  captains,  and  discoverers  should  display  their
Christian  zeal  by  such  treatment  of  the  Indians  as  their  reli-
gion enjoins.  But  notwithstanding  that  this  is  and  was  the
desire  of  his  Majesty,  some  of  the  governors  and  captains
have  basely  committed  many  cruelties  and  outrages  on  the
Indians.  In  their  turn  the  Indians,  to  defend  themselves,
rose  in  arms  and  killed  many  Christians  and  some  of  the
captains,  which  was  the  reason  that  they  suffered  torments,
were  burnt,  and  put  to  other  cruel  deaths.  I  hold  that,  as
the  dealings  of  God  are  always  just,  it  must  be  that  his
divine  justice  permitted  that  these  people,  so  far  distant  from
Spain,  should  suffer  so  many  evils  from  the  Spaniards,  for
their  sins  and  for  those  of  their  ancestors,  which  must  have
been  many,  as  they  were  without  faith.  Nor  do  I  affirm
that  all  the  Christians  ill-treated  the  Indians ;  for  I  have
seen  many  temperate  and  God  fearing  men  treat  them  well,
curing  and  bleeding*  them  when  they  were  ill,  and  perform-
ing other  charitable  acts.  And  the  goodness  and  mercy  of
God  (which  permits  no  evil  without  extracting  some  good
from  it)  have  also  secured  great  blessings  out  of  these  ills,
by  bringing  so  many  people  to  the  knowledge  of  our  holy
Catholic  faith,  and  placing  them  in  the  road  to  salvation.
When  his  Majesty  was  informed  of  the  ills  which  the  Indians
suffered,  he  thought  it  good  to  appoint  viceroys  and  audi-


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  13

cnces,  with  presidents  and  judges  for  their  better  govern-
ment ;  and  thus  the  sufferings  of  the  Indians  have  ceased,
and  no  Spaniards,  of  what  rank  soever,  can  oppress  them
now.  Besides  the  bishops,  monks,  seculars,  and  friars  who
went  with  the  Spaniards,  there  were  a  sufficient  number
provided  to  teach  the  doctrine  of  the  holy  faith  to  the
Indians  and  to  administer  the  sacraments  to  them.  In  the
audiences  there  are  learned  men  of  great  piety,  who  punish
those  Spaniards  that  oppress  the  Indians  in  any  way ;  so
that  now  there  is  no  one  who  can  ill-treat  them,  and,  in  the
greater  part  of  these  kingdoms,  they  are  as  much  masters  of
their  own  estates  and  persons  as  are  the  Spaniards  them-
selves. Each  village  is  moderately  assessed  with  the  amount
to  be  paid  as  tribute.  I  remember  that,  when  I  was  in  the
pro\ance  of  Xauxa  a  few  years  ago,  the  Indians  said  to  me
with  much  satisfaction  :  "  This  is  a  happy  time,  like  the  days
of  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui ;"  a  king  of  ancient  times,  whose
memory  they  hold  in  great  veneration.  Certain  of  this,  we
Christians  ought  to  rejoice  and  give  thanks  to  our  Lord  God
that,  in  so  great  a  country,  so  distant  from  our  Spain  and  from
all  Europe,  there  is  such  justice  and  such  good  government,
with  churches  and  houses  for  prayer  in  all  parts,  where
Almighty  God  is  praised  and  worshipped;  and  the  de\'il
abused  and  defied,  while  the  places  which  had  been  set  apart
for  his  glorification,  are  pulled  down,  and  crosses,  the  signs
of  our  salvation,  raised  in  their  stead. '  The  idols  and  images
Avere  broken,  and  the  devils  fled  away  with  fear  and  trem-
bling. The  holy  gospel  is  preached,  and  spreads  powerfully
from  east  to  west,  and  from  north  to  south,  that  all  nations
may  know  and  worship  our  Lord  God.


14  THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    II.

Of  the  city  of  Panama,  and  of  its  founding,  and  why  it  is  treated  of
fii-st,  before  other  matters.

Bepoee  I  begin  to  treat  of  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of
Peru,  I  desire  to  give  some  account  of  what  is  known
of  the  origin  of  these  races  of  the  Indies  or  New  World,
especially  of  the  natives  of  Peru,  according  to  what  they  say
that  they  heard  from  their  old  men,  although  this  is  a  secret
which  God  alone  can  certainly  know.  But  as  my  principal
intention  is,  in  this  first  part,  to  describe  the  land  of  Peru,
and  to  relate  the  events  connected  with  the  foundation  of  its
cities,  I  will  leave  the  account  of  the  origin  of  the  people
(that  is,  what  they  themselves  say  respecting  their  origin,
and  what  we  may  conjecture)  until  I  come  to  the  second
part,  where  this  portion  of  the  subject  will  be  fully  treated  of.
In  the  present  part,  as  I  have  said,  I  shall  treat  of  the  founda-
tion of  many  cities ;  and  I  consider  that  if,  in  times  past.  Dido,
in  founding  Carthage,  perpetuated  her  name,  and  Romulus
gave  his  name  to  Rome,  and  Alexander  to  Alexandria,  with
how  much  more  reason  should  the  fame  and  glory  of  his
Majesty  be  perpetuated  in  future  ages ;  for  in  this  great  king-
dom of  Peru  many  great  and  rich  cities  have  been  founded  in
his  royal  name,  to  which  his  Majesty  has  given  laws,  and  he
has  enabled  the  people  to  live  quietly  and  peacefully.  But,
without  counting  these  cities  in  Peru,  the  city  of  Panama
was  founded  in  the  province  of  Tierra  Firme,  called  Castilla
del  Oro,  and  I  shall  commence  with  it,  although  there  are
others  in  this  kingdom  of  more  importance.  My  reason  for
beginning  with  Panama  is,  that  the  captains  who  set  forth
to  discover  Peru  started  from  that  city.  Thence  I  shall  go
to  the  port  of  Uraba,  which  is  in  the  pi'ovince  of  Carthagena,
not  veiy  far  from  the  great  river  of  Darien ;  and  I  shall  then
give  an  account  of  the  Indian  villages,  and  of  the  Spanish


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  15

settlements  from  this  place  to  the  town  of  Plata,  and  esta-
blishment of  Potosi  on  the  southern  boundary  of  Peru,  a
distance  of,  I  should  say,  more  than  twelve  hundred  leagues
of  road,  which  I  travelled  over  by  land,  and  saw,  examined,
and  know  the  things  which  I  describe  in  this  history.  And
I  noted  everything  with  much  care  and  diligence,  in  order
that  I  might  be  able  to  write  with  that  truth  which  is  due
from  me,  and  without  any  mixture  of  inaccuracies.

I  say,  then,  that  the  city  of  Panama  is  built  near  the  South
Sea,  and  eighteen  leagues  from  Nombre  de  Dios,  which  is
near  the  North  Sea.^  It  is  of  small  extent,  by  reason  of  a
lake  which  confines  it  on  one  side,  and  the  city  is  considered
unhealthy  on  account  of  the  evil  vapours  which  rise  from
this  lake.  It  is  built  with  the  streets  running  due  east  and
west ;  so  that  when  the  sun  rises  no  one  can  walk  in  any  of
the  streets,  because  there  is  no  shade  whatever ;  and  this  is
felt  very  much  as  the  heat  is  intense ;  and  the  sun  is  so  pre-
judicial to  health,  that  if  a  man  is  exposed  to  its  rays  even
for  a  few  hours  he  will  be  attacked  -svith  a  fatal  illness,  and
this  has  happened  to  many.  Half  a  league  from  the  sea
there  are  good  and  healthy  sites,  where  the  city  might  have
been  built  at  first ;  but  as  the  houses  have  a  high  price,  on
account  of  the  great  expense  of  building  them,  the  site  has
not  been  changed,  although  the  inhabitants  are  aware  of  the
notorious  harm  which  all  must  receive  from  living  in  so
unhealthy  a  place.  The  first  conquerors  are  now  all  dead  ;
and  the  present  inhabitants  do  not  expect  to  remain  long,
only  think  of  becoming  rich,  and  care  little  for  the  public
good.  A  river  flows  near  this  city,  which  rises  in  certain
hills ;  and  there  are  many  others,  on  the  banks  of  which  the

1  Old  Panama  was  founded  in  1520,  in  8°  57'  N.  latitude  and  79°  31'
W.  longitude  ;  on  the  shores  of  a  bay  discovered  by  Tello  de  Guzman,
one  of  the  companions  of  Columbus.  In  1521  the  city  was  granted  a
royal  charter  by  Charles  V,  with  the  title  of  "  Venj  noble  and  venj  loyal
city  of  I'anama.''


16  THE    TRAVELS    OF

Spaniards  have  their  farms^  where  they  have  planted  many-
trees  from  Spain^  as  oranges,  citrons,  and  figs.  Besides
these  there  are  other  fruits  belonging  to  the  country,  such
as  fragrant  pines  and  plantains,  many  excellent  guavas,^
caymitos,-  aguacatcs,^  and  other  fruits.  In  the  plains  there
are  large  herds  of  cattle,  for  the  country  is  well  adapted  for
breeding  them.  The  rivers  contain  much  gold,  and  at  the
time  that  the  city  was  founded  they  obtained  a  great  quantity.
Panama  is  well  supplied  with  provisions,  being  situated
between  two  seas, — that  is  to  say,  the  North  Sea,  by  which
the  ships  of  Spain  come  to  Nombre  de  Dios ;  and  the  South
Sea,  by  which  ships  sail  from  Panama  to  all  the  ports  of
Peru.  The  country  round  this  city  yields  neither  wheat  nor
barley ;  but  the  owners  of  farms  raise  much  maize,  and  they
bring  plenty  of  flour  from  Spain  and  Peru.  There  is  much
fish  in  all  the  rivers  and  also  in  the  sea,  though  different
from  those  on  the  coast  of  Spain.*  On  the  sea-shore,  close
to  the  houses  of  the  city,  they  find  great  quantities  of  very
small  mussels  (aimejas), which  they  call  chucha;  and  I  believe
that,  at  the  time  of  the  first  settlement,  the  city  remained  on
this  site  because  the  Spaniards  felt  themselves  safe  from
hunger  on  account  of  these  mussels.  In  the  rivers  there  are
great  quantities  of  alligators,  which  are  so  large  and  fierce
that  it  is  wonderful  to  see  them.  In  the  river  of  Genu  I
have  seen  many  very  large  ones,  and  have  eaten  the  eggs
which  they  deposit  on  the  shore.  We  found  one  of  these
large  alligators  in  the  river  which  they  call  San  Jorge,  when
we  went  with  Captain  Alonzo  de  Caceres  to  discover  the

1  Inga  spectahilis  Wild  :  the  paccay  of  Peru  ;  a  pod  with  black  seeds
in  sweet  juicy  cotton.

'^  Chryiiophijllum  Caimito  Lin. :  or  star  apple.

'^  Alligator  pear,  called  palla  in  Peru.  {Persea  (jratissima  R.  P.)
The  Aztec  name  ahuacahuitl  was  corrupted  by  the  Spaniards  into
aguacate,  and  by  the  English  West  Indians  into  avogada  (aUujator)
pears.     It  is  a  most  refreshing  fruit,  eaten  with  pepper  and  salt.

"*  Panama  is  an  Indian  word,  signifying  a  place  abounding  with  fish


PEDKO    DB    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  17

province  of  Unite.  It  was  so  monstrously  large  as  to
measure  more  than  twenty-five  feet  in  length ;  and  when  we
killed  it  with  our  lances,  it  was  a  grand  thing  to  witness  its
bravery.  Being  very  hungry  we  ate  some  of  the  flesh ;  but
it  is  bad,  and  has  a  disagreeable  smell.  These  alligators
have  eaten  many  Spaniards,  horses,  and  Indians,  when  pass-
ing over  the  land  from  one  river  to  another.

There  are  few  natives  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Panama,
for  nearly  all  have  been  destroyed  by  the  evil  treatment
they  received  from  the  Spaniards  and  by  sickness.  The  city
is  inhabited  by  many  merchants  from  all  parts,  who  trade
here  and  in  Nombre  de  Dios  ;  for  there  is  much  traffic,  and
the  place  might  almost  be  compared  with  the  city  of  Venice.
Very  often  ships  come  to  Panama  from  the  South  Sea  to
discharge  cargoes  of  gold  and  silver ;  and  the  number  of
vessels  is  very  great  that  arrive  at  Nombre  de  Dios,  bring-
ing much  merchandise,  which  is  transported  to  Panama  by
canoes  up  the  river  Chagres,  and  thence  over  five  leagues  of
road.  Near  the  city  the  sea  forms  a  large  bay,  and  the
vessels  come  into  the  port  with  the  tide.  The  anchorage  is
very  good  for  small  vessels.  Panama  was  founded  by  Pedra-
rias  de  Avila,  who  was  governor  of  Tierra  Firme,  in  the
name  of  the  invincible  Caesar  Don  Carlos,  the  august  King
of  Spain,  our  lord,  in  the  year  1520.  It  is  in  about  8°  north
of  the  equinoctial  Hne.^  It  has  a  good  port,  into  which  the
vessels  enter  with  the  ebb  tide  until  they  are  high  and  dry.
The  ebb  and  flow  of  this  sea  is  great,  so  that  the  shore
remains  uncovered  at  low  water  for  a  distance  of  half  a
league  ;  and  vessels  anchored  in  three  fathoms  at  low  water,
are  in  seven  fathoms  when  the  tide  comes  up.'^

1  8°  59'  K

■  About  a  mile  outside  the  present  city  of  Panama  there  is  a  hill,  now
laid  out  as  a  garden  with  a  summer  house  on  the  top.  This  is  the  "  Cerro
de  Buccaneros,"  whence  ^lorgan,  wdth  his  ruffians,  got  the  first  view  of
the  rich  city  of  old  Panama  ;  and  a  most  magnificent  view  it  is.  Undu-
lating hiUs  clad  in  bright  fohage,  gi-een  savannahs,  the  blue  bay  with  its

C


18  THE    TRAVELS    OF

In  this  chapter  I  have  treated  of  the  city  of  Panama.  In
the  following  I  shall  describe  the  harbours  and  rivers  along
the  coast  as  far  as  Chile,  for  this  plan  will  give  much  preci-
sion to  the  work.

islands,  and  the  modern  city  of  Panama  on  a  long  promontory  almost  sur-
rounded by  the  sea.  Far  away  to  the  left,  rising  out  of  a  dense  forest,
is  the  sohtary  tower  which  alone  remains  of  the  once  flourisliing  old
Panama,  the  town  founded  by  Pedrarias,  and  described  above  by  our
author.  So  complete  is  the  desolation  of  this  once  splendid  city,  the
centre  of  trade  between  Peru  and  Spain,  that  it  is  difficult  to  reach  the
site.  The  way  leads  tlu-ough  a  trackless  forest  of  taU  trees  and  tangled
undergrowth,  and  over  a  swampy  creek  of  deep  black  mud,  wliich  opens
on  the  sea-shore,  the  port  described  by  Cieza  de  Leon.  Tlie  taU  tower  of
San  Geronimo  covered  with  creepers,  with  decayed  and  falhng  walls
rising  up  around  it,  out  of  the  dense  jungle,  amidst  thick  brushwood  and
tall  forest  trees,  alone  marks  the  site  of  the  old  city.  AVhen  we  reached
the  beach  it  was  low  water,  and  the  wide  sands  were  covered  with  pelicans,
cranes,  sandpipers,  and  other  water  fowl,  which  made  the  place  look  still
more  melancholy  and  deserted.  Old  Panama  was  one  of  the  richest  cities
in  Spanish  America.  It  had  eight  monasteries,  two  splendid  churches
iand  a  cathedral,  a  fine  hospital,  two  hundred  richly  fiu-nished  houses,
near  five  thousand  houses  of  a  hmnble  kind,  a  Genoese  chamber  of  com-
merce, two  hundred  warehouses,  and  delicious  gardens  and  country  houses
in  the  environs.     All  is  now  covered  by  a  dense  and  impervious  forest.

The  buccaneers  marched  to  the  attack  of  this  doomed  city  under  the
command  of  the  notorious  Morgan,  and,  after  three  weeks  of  rapine  and
murder,  left  it  on  February  24:th,  1671,  with  one  hunch'ed  and  seventy-
five  laden  mules  and  over  six  hundred  prisoners.  The  houses  were  built
of  cedar,  so  that  when  Morgan  set  fire  to  them,  the  destruction  was
complete.

After  tills  fearful  calamity  the  governor  of  Panama,  Don  Juan  Perez
de  Guzman,  w;is  recalled  and  sent  piisoner  to  Lima  by  order  of  the  Vice-
roy of  Peru,  and  in  1673  Don  Alonzo  Mercado  de  Villacorta  was  ordered
to  found  a  new  town  on  the  present  site,  some  miles  from  the  ruins  of
old  Panama.

A  paved  road  led  from  old  Panama  to  Porto  Bello,  on  tlie  opposite
side  of  the  isthmus.


I'EDRO    DK    f'IKZA    DK    LEON.  19


CHAPTER    III.

Of  the  poi-ts  between  Panama  and  the  land  of  Peru,  of  the  distances
between  them,  and  of  their  latitudes.

It  is  known  to  all  the  world  how  the  Spaniards,  aided  by
God,  have  prosperously  gained  and  made  themselves  masters
of  this  new  world,  which  is  called  the  Indies.  These  Indies
include  so  many  and  such  great  kingdoms  and  provinces,
that  it  causes  wonder  even  to  think  of  them  ;  and  their  dis-
covery and  conquest  have  been  successful,  as  all  who  hve  in
this  age  well  know.  I  have  sometimes  thought  that,  when
one  people  and  nation  succeeds  another,  as  time  rolls  on  the
first  is  forgotten  ;  and  that  the  same  fate  may  overtake  us
as  has  befallen  others,  which  may  God  forefend  :  but  these
kingdoms  and  provinces  were  discovered  in  the  time  of  the
most  Christian  and  illustrious  Charles,  the  ever  august
Emperor  of  the  Romans,  and  our  lord  and  king,  who  has
taken  and  still  takes  so  much  care  for  the  conversion  of  the
Indians.  For  this  reason  I  believe  that  Spain  wiU  ever
retain  these  possessions,  and  that  aU  who  Hve  in  them  wiU
ever  acknowledge  the  kings  of  Spain  as  their  masters.

In  this  chapter  I  desire  to  explain  to  those  who  may  read
my  work  the  manner  of  navigating  by  points  and  degrees
from  Panama  to  Peru.  The  time  for  navigating  is  during
the  months  of  January,  February,  and  March,  because  in
tliis  season  there  are  always  fresh  breezes  from  the  north,
and  the  vessels  make  short  passages  ;  while  during  the  rest
of  the  year  the  south  winds  prevail  along  the  coast  of  Peru.^
Thus  the  vessels  finish  their  voyages  before  the  south  winds
set  in.  Ships  can  also  sail  in  August  and  September,  but
not  with  the  same  ease  as  in  the  season  before  mentioned ;
for  if  some  few  vessels  sail  in  these  months,  they  make  very

^  The  prevailing  winds  along  the  shores  of  Peru  blow  from  S.S.E.  to
S.W.,  seldom  stronger  than  a  fresh  breeze.

c2


20  THE    TRAVELS    OP

long  and  difficult  passages.  The  soutli  wind  is  prevalent  for
a  long  time  along  this  coast  from  Chile  to  near  Tumbez,
which  is  favourable  for  a  voyage  from  Peru  to  Tierra  Firme^
Nicaragua^  and  other  ports  ;  but  very  difficult  for  vessels
going  to  Peru.  Sailing  from  Panama,  vessels  first  sight
the  islands  called  "  of  the  Pearls/'  which  are  barely  in  8°.^
These  islands  consist  of  twenty-five  or  thirty,  clustering-
round  one  which  is  the  largest  of  all.  They  were  formerly
inhabited  by  Indian  natives,  but  now  there  are  none.  The
owners  of  these  islands  have  Negroes  and  Indians  of  Nica-
ragua and  Cubagua,  who  watch  the  flocks  and  sow  the  seeds,
for  the  land  is  fertile.  They  have  also  obtained  a  great
quantity  of  rich  pearls,  whence  the  islands  take  their  name.
From  these  islands  vessels  work  for  the  point  of  Carachine,
which  is  ten  leagues  to  the  E.S.E. ;  and  when  they  sight  it,
the  land  is  high  and  woody.  It  is  in  8g°.^  From  this  point
the  coast  runs  S.E.^S.  to  Puerto  de  Piiias  for  eight  leagues,
which  is  in  6j°.^  Here  the  land  is  high,  forest  covered,  and
rugged.  Thence  the  coast  trends  S.  \  E.  to  Cape  Corrientes;
and  following  the  same  course  vessels  arrive  at  the  island  of
Palms,  so  called  from  the  quantities  of  those  trees  which
grow  on  it.  It  is  little  more  than  a  league  and  a  half  round,
it  has  rivers  of  fresh  water,  and  used  to  be  inhabited.  This
island  is  twenty-five  leagues  from  Cape  Corrientes,  in  4g°.
From  this  point  the  coast  runs  in  the  same  direction  to  the
port  of  Buenaventura,  which  is  a  little  more  than  three
leagues  from  the  island.  The  entrance  to  the  bay  is  in  31°,"*
and  close  to  it  there  is  a  high  peaked  island.  The  country
is  covered  with  forests,  and  many  great  rivers,  rising  in  the
mountains,  fall  into  the  sea,  by  one  of  which  vessels  ap-
proach the  town  and  port  of  Buenaventura.  The  pilot  who
may  take  a  vessel  in,  should  know  the  river  well,  or  he  will
have  much  trouble,  as  was  the  case  with  me  and  many
others  who  employed  new  pilots.  Thence  the  coast  runs
>  8o  20'  to  8"  40'  N.  2  H-^  5'  N.  3  7,,  24'  N.  "  T)"  48'  N.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  21

W.  I  S.  to  the  island  called  Grorgona,  which  is  twenty-five
leagues  from  this  bay.  This  part  of  the  coast  is  low,  and
overrun  with  mangroves  and  other  dense  bushes.  Many
large  rivers  flow  into  the  sea,  the  principal  one  being  the
river  of  San  Juan,  the  banks  of  which  are  inhabited  by  wild
people,  who  build  their  houses  on  great  stages  raised  on
forked  poles.  These  Indians  are  very  rich  in  gold,  and  their
country,  which  is  fertile,  is  traversed  by  rivers  washing
down  abundance  of  this  metal.  But  it  is  so  swampy  and
full  of  lagoons,  that  it  is  impossible  to  conquer  it  without  an
expenditure  of  many  lives  and  much  trouble.

The  island  of  Gorgona  is  high,  and  it  never  ceases  to  rain
and  thunder  there,  so  that  it  seems  as  if  the  elements  were
fighting.  It  is  two  leagues  round,  covered  with  forest,  and
has  streams  of  very  good  water.  There  are  many  turkeys,
pheasants,  cats,  and  great  serpents,  besides  night  birds,  on
the  island.  It  seems  that  it  has  never  been  inhabited.  The
Marquis  Don  Francisco  Pizarro,  with  thirteen  Spanish
Christians,  his  companions,  was  many  days  on  this  island,
and  suffered  much  from  hunger  and  exposure,  until  at  last
God  was  weU  served  by  the  discovery  of  the  provinces  of
Peru.  This  island  of  Gorgona  is  in  3°,^  and  thence  the
coast  trends  W.S.W.  to  the  island  of  Gallo.  All  this  coast
is  low  and  woody,  and  many  rivers  here  fall  into  the  sea.
The  island  of  Gallo  is  small,  scarcely  a  league  round,  and  is
in  2°-  of  the  equator.  Thence  the  coast  turns  S.W.  to  the
point  of  Mangroves,"  which  is  a  httle  under  eight  leagues
from  Gallo.  Thence  the  coast  runs  S.W.  to  the  bay  of  Sant-
iago, where  it  fonns  a  creek,  and  an  anchorage  called
Sardinas.  Here  is  the  mouth  of  the  great  and  rapid  river
of  Santiago,  where  the  government  of  the  Marquis  Don
Francisco  Pizarro  commenced.  This  roadstead  is  twenty-
five  leagues  from  the  point  of  Mangroves.  Here  vessels
have  their  bows  in  eighty  fathoms  and  their  stems  nearly

*  2°  55'  N.  3  Q^ute  correct.  ^  Xear  the  port  of  Tumaco.


22  THE    TRAVELS    OF

aground^  and  sometimes  they  are  in  ninety  fathoms  at  one
moment,  and  in  two  at  another ;  but  these  inequalities,
which  are  caused  by  the  fury  of  the  river,  are  not  dangers,
nor  do  they  prevent  vessels  from  going  in  and  out  at  plea-
sure. The  coast  then  runs  west  towards  the  Cape  of  San
Francisco,  which  is  ten  leagues  from  the  roadstead.  This
cape  is  high  land,  and  near  it  there  are  some  brown  and
white  ravines.  It  is  1°  N.  of  the  equator.^  Thence  the
coast  runs  S.W.  to  the  point  of  Passaos,  which  is  on  the
equinoctial  line.^  Between  these  two  points  four  rivers  fall
into  the  sea,  called  the  Quiximies,^  which  are  very  large.
They  form  a  tolerable  port,  where  vessels  can  take  in  fresh
water  and  firewood.


CHAPTER    IV.


Describes  the  navigation  as  far  as  the  Callao  of  Lima,  wliich  is  the  port
of  the  City  of  the  Kings.

I  HAVE  now  described,  though  briefly,  the  way  by  which  this
South  Sea  is  navigated  as  far  as  the  Quiximies,  which  is  in
the  land  of  Peru.  It  will  now  be  well  to  continue  the  route
until  we  arrive  at  the  City  of  the  Kings.  Leaving  then  the
cape  of  Passaos,  the  coast  trends  to  the  S.  ^  W.  as  far  as
Puerto  Viejo,  and  before  reaching  it  there  is  the  bay  of
Caraquez,  which  vessels  enter  without  any  danger.  Its  con-
veniences are  such  that  ships  of  even  one  thousand  tons  may
be  careened  here,  and  it  is  easy  to  enter  and  sail  out,  except
that  there  are  some  rocky  islands  at  its  mouth,  but  there  are
no  obstructions  beyond  those  which  meet  the  eye.  Near
Puerto  Viejo,  and  two  leagues  inland,  is  the  city  of  Sant-
iago, and  two  leagues  to  the  south  of  the  port  there  is  a

'  Oo  38'  N.  2  ()o  20'  S.  3  Bajos  de  Cojimies.


PEDEO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  23

round  hill  called  Monte  Cristo.  This  Puerto  Viejo  is  1°  S.^
of  the  equator.  Five  leagues  further  on  in  the  same  direc-
tion is  the  cape  of  San  Lorenzo,  and  three  leagues  beyond
this  cape,  to  the  south-west,  is  the  island  which  is  called
La  Plata,  a  league  and  a  half  long.  Here,  in  ancient  times,
the  natives  of  the  main  land  held  their  sacrificial  festivals,
and  killed  many  lambs  and  sheep,  and  some  children,  whose
blood  was  oflfered  to  their  devils  and  idols,  figures  carved  in
stone  which  were  objects  of  worship.  The  Marquis  Don
Francisco  Pizarro,  with  his  thirteen  companions,  during
their  voyage  of  discovery,  landed  on  this  island  and  found
some  silver  and  jewels,  and  many  robes  and  dresses  of  cloth
richly  embroidered.  From  that  time  to  this  the  island  has
remained  with  the  name  which  it  now  bears.  Following  the
coast  line  to  the  S.  \  E.  we  come  next  to  the  point  of
Santa  Elena.  Before  reaching  this  point  there  are  two
places,  the  one  called  Callo  and  the  other  Calango,-  where
ships  touch,  and  take  in  wood  and  water.  The  distance
from  the  point  of  San  Lorenzo  to  that  of  Santa  Elena  is
fifteen  leagues.  There  is  a  creek  on  the  north  side  of  the
latter  point,  where  there  is  good  anchorage.^  At  the
distance  of  a  cross-bow  shot  from  the  point  there  is  a
fountain  of  bitumen,  which  appears  to  be  natural  tar.  Of
this,  and  of  the  wells  made  by  the  giants  on  this  point,
I  shall  give  an  account  further  on,  which  will  be  well  worth
hearing.*

From  this  point  of  Santa  Elena  vessels  go  to  the  river  of
Tumbez,  a  distance  of  twenty-eight  leagues.  The  river
bears  from  the  point  S.  I  E.,  and  between  them  there  is
another  great  inlet.  To  the  N.E.  of  the  river  of  Tum-
bez there  is  an  island  which  is  more  than  ten  leagues  round,

1  1°  2'  S.

^  Or  Salango,  Avhcre  good  water  may  be  got  from  a  rivulet,  and  also
very  fine  timber.

^  This  is  quite  correct,  there  is  good  anchorage,  but  no  fresh  water  to
be  had.  *  See  chapter  hi.


24  THE    TRAVELS    OF

and  it  lias  been  very  ricli  and  populous,  so  that  the  natives
rivalled  those  of  Tumbez  and  of  other  parts  of  the  main  land.
There  were  great  wars  and  many  battles  between  them,  so
that  time  and  the  arrival  of  the  Spaniards  have  greatly  dimi-
nished the  number  of  the  islanders.  The  island  is  very
fertile  and  well  wooded.  It  is  the  property  of  his  Majesty.
There  is  a  rumour  that  a  great  sum  of  gold  and  silver  was
buried  there  in  ancient  times.  The  Indians  say  that  these
islanders  were  given  to  idolatry,  and  were  very  vicious,
many  of  them  committing  the  abominable  offence,  and  being
guilty  of  other  great  sins.  Near  this  island  of  Puna  there  is
another  further  out,  called  Santa  Clara.  This  island  has
neither  inhabitants,  wood,  nor  water ;  but  the  ancient  people
of  Puna  had  their  cemeteries  on  it,  and  performed  sacrifices.
They  have  placed  on  the  heights,  where  they  built  their
altars,  great  quantities  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  fine  orna-
ments dedicated  to  their  gods.  When  the  Spaniards  arrived,
these  treasures  were  concealed  (so  the  Indians  say)  in  places
where  they  could  not  be  found.^

The  river  of  Tumbez  flows  through  a  country  which  is
thickly  inhabited.  Near  the  sea  there  is  a  fortress,  a  very
strong  and  handsome  structure,  built  by  the  Yncas,  kings  of
Cuzco  and  lords  of  all  Peru,  in  which  they  had  great  store
of  treasure.     There  was  also  a  temple  of  the   Sun,   and  a

1  Tlie  island  of  Santa  Clara  is  also  called  the  Isla  del  Muerto  ;  Pizarro
landed  on  it  during  his  first  voyage  to  Tmubez,  and  his  people  found  a
few  pieces  of  gold  there.  The  man  who  attends  the  lighthouse  on  the
island,  recently  opened  a  huaca^  and  found  in  it  a  quantity  of  gold  orna-
ments, which  he  sold  to  the  Prussian  Consul  at  Guayaquil.  ]\Ir.  Spruce
tells  me  that  they  are  the  most  interesting  and  perfect  specunens  of  Peru-
vian art  lie  has  seen.  One  of  the  objects  was  a  small  statue,  six  to  eight
inches  high,  of  very  creditable  sculptiu-e.  INIore  curious  still  were  several
thin  plates,  almost  like  a  lady's  muslin  collar  in  size  and  shape,  covered
with  figures.  One  of  them  has  jjerhaps  a  hundred  figures  of  pelicans  (the
sacred  bird  of  the  people  of  Puna).  Every  figure  represents  the  bird  in
a  different  attitude,  and  as  they  have  been  stamped,  not  engraved,  a
separate  die  must  have  been  used  for  each  figure.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  25

house  of  Mamacunas/  wliich  means  principal  women  of  the
virgins  dedicated  to  the  service  of  the  temple.  These
women  lived  according  to  rules  almost  the  same  as  those  of
the  vestal  virgins  of  Rome.  The  edifices  are  now  in  a  ruin-
ous state^  though  their  remains  show  how  great  they  once
were.  The  mouth  of  the  river  of  Tumbez  is  in  4°  S.^  Thence
the  coast  trends  S.W.  to  Cape  Blanco/  distant  fifteen
leagues/  and  then  towards  the  island  of  Lobos.^  Between
Cape  Blanco  and  the  island  of  Lobos  there  is  a  point  called
Pariilaj  which  runs  out  into  the  sea  almost  as  far  as  the
former  point.^  From  point  Pariiia  the  coast  runs  S.W.  to
Payta.  From  Tumbez  towards  the  south,  the  coast  is  without
trees,  and  if  there  are  any  hills  they  are  naked,  and  rocky.
The  rest  of  the  coast  is  a  sandy  desert,  and  few  rivers  fall
into  the  sea.  Payta  is  a  little  more  than  eight  leagues'''  from
Cape  Pariiia  j  it  is  a  good  port,  where  ships  refit,  in  5°  S.^
From  the  island  of  Lobos  (just  mentioned)  the  distance  to
Payta  will  be  about  five  leagues.  Following  the  coast  we
come  to  Punta  del  Aguja,^  and  between  it  and  the  island
there  is  a  large  inlet.  This  point  is  in  6°  S.  To  the  south
of  it  there  are  two  islands  called  Lobos,  from  the  great  num-
ber of  seals,  and  all  vessels  can  pass  between  them  and  the
main  land.^^     From  Punta  de  Aguja  the  coast  trends  S.W.

'  Mama  (Mother)  and  citna  (the  plural  particle)  in  Quichua.  They
were  Matrons  who  had  charge  of  the  virgins  of  the  Sun.

-  The  town  of  Tiuubez,  about  two  leagues  up  the  river,  now  consists  of
a  few  huts.     ^\Taalers  come  here  for  fresh  water.     It  is  in  3^  30'  S.

^  Cape  Blanco  is  high  and  bold.  *  Twenty-two  leagues.

'  The  island  of  Lobos  de  Tierra  is  two  leagues  long  and  two  miles  wide,
ten  miles  from  the  main  land.

®  A  bluff  about  eighty  feet  high,  with  a  reef  rimning  out  to  a  distance
of  half  a  mile  on  its  western  side.  Pariiia  Point  is  the  western  extre-
mity of  South  America.

'  Nine  leagues  S.E.^S.  «  5°  3'  S.

"  A  long  level  point  terminating  in  a  steep  bluff  one  hunch-ed  and  fifty
feet  high.     It  is  in  5^  55'  S.

>"  These  are  the  islands  of  Lobos  de  Afuera,  about  one  hundi-ed  feet
high.  There  are  regular  soundings  in  fifty  fathoms  between  them  and
the  shore.


26  THE    TRAVELS    OF

to  a  port  called  Casma.  The  coast  runs  S.W.
where  vessels  can  only  lie  in  fair  weather,  and  ten  leagues
further  south  is  the  reef  of  Trusillo,  a  bad  port,  with  no
other  shelter  than  the  buoys  of  the  anchors.  Vessels  some-
times touch  here  for  provisions.  Two  leagues  inland  is  the
city  of  Truxillo.  From  this  j)ort,  which  is  in  7|°,  vessels  go
to  the  port  of  Guanape/  seven  leagues  from  Truxillo,  in
8g°.  More  to  the  south  is  the  port  of  Santa,  where  vessels
touch,  and  near  which  there  is  a  great  river  with  very  good
water.^  All  the  coast  is  without  trees  (as  I  said  a  little  way
back),  sandy,  and  broken  with  craggy  rocks.  Santa  is  in  9°.
Five  leagues  further  on  is  Ferrol,'*  a  secure  port,  but  witliout
fuel  or  water.  Another  six  leagues  brings  us  to  Casma,
where  there  is  a  river  and  plenty  of  wood,  so  that  vessels
can  put  in  for  supplies.  It  is  in  10°.^  From  Casma  the
coast  runs  south  to  the  islets  of  Huara,  and  further  on  is
Guarmay,  where  there  is  a  river.^  Another  six  leagues  takes
us  to  Huara,  where  vessels  can  take  in  all  the  salt  they  re-
quire, for  there  is  enough  to  supply  Italy  and  all  Spain,  and
even  then  it  would  not  be  exhausted.'^  Thence  the  coast
trends  south  to  the  island  of  Lima.  Half  way,  a  little  nearer
Lima  than  the  islets  of  Huara,^  there  is  an  island  called  Salme-
rina,  nine  or  ten  leagues  from  the  land.  The  island  of  Lima
forms  the  shelter  to  CaUao,  which  is  the  port  of  Lima.^    The

1  The  road  of  Malabrigo  is  a  bad  anchorage,  though  somewhat  better
than  the  road  of  Huanchaco,  the  port  of  Truxillo,  wliich  is  in  8°  6'  S.

*  There  is  a  small  cove  vnth.  a  tolerable  landing  on  the  north  side  of
Guauape  hill.

3  Santa  bay,  though  small,  is  a  tolerable  port,  and  fresli  provisions,
vegetables,  and  water  may  be  procured.

*  Ferrol  bay  is  an  excellent  place  for  a  vessel  to  careen,  being  entirely
free  from  the  swell  of  the  ocean.     There  is  no  fresh  water.

^  The  bay  of  Casma  is  a  snug  anchorage.

^  Guarmay  is  the  best  place  on  the  coast  for  firewood.  The  river  cannot
be  depended  upon  for  supplies  of  water,  except  during  the  wet  season.

^  There  are  large  salt  lakes  here.  ®  Several  islets  off  the  coast.

^  The  high  barren  island  of  San  Lorenzo,  which  Cieza  de  Leon  called
the  island  of  Lima,  fonns  the  spacious  and  safe  anchorage  of  Callao  Bay.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  27

port  is  very  safe.     Callao,  which  (as  I  have  said)  is  the  port
of  the  City  of  Kings,  is  in  12^°.^


CHAPTER     V.


Of  the  ports  and  rivers  on  the  coast,  from  the  City  of  the  Kings  to  the
province  of  Cliile,  and  of  their  latitudes,  with  other  matters  con-
nected with  the  navigation  of  these  seas.

I  HAVE  myself  been  in  most  of  the  ports  and  rivers  which  I
have  now  described,  and  I  have  taken  much  trouble  to  ascer-
tain the  correctness  of  what  is  here  written,  having-  commu-
nicated with  the  dexterous  and  expert  pilots  who  know  the
navigation  of  these  ports,  and  who  took  the  altitudes  in  my
presence.  In  this  chapter  I  shall  continue  my  description
of  the  coast,  with  its  ports  and  rivers  from  Lima  until  we
arrive  at  the  province  of  Chile.  But  I  am  unable  to  describe
the  coast  down  to  the  straits  of  Magellan,  having  lost  a
copious  narrative  which  I  had  from  a  pilot  who  came  in  one
of  the  ships  sent  by  the  Bishop  of  Plazencia.

When  ships  sail  from  the  port  of  the  City  of  the  Kings,
they  shape  their  course  south,  until  they  reach  the  port  of
Sangalla,  which  is  very  good,  and  at  first  it  was  considered
certain  that  the  City  of  the  Kings  would  have  been  founded
near  it.  Sangalla  is  thirty-five  leagues  from  Lima,  in  barely
14°  S.  of  the  equinoctial."  Near  this  port  there  is  an  island
called  Seal  Island.     All  the  coast,  from  this  point,  is  low,

'  12°  4'  S.

*  Sangalla,  so  called  also  by  Alonzo  Enriquez  de  Guzman  (p.  149),
Herrera,  and  others,  was  no  doubt  close  to  the  modern  Pisco,  Avhich  is  in
latitude  13°  43'  S.  If  Sangalla  is  not  identical  with  Pisco,  it  was  pro-
bably on  the  site  of  the  modern  \dllage  of  Paraccas,  a  few  miles  further
south,  and  about  in  the  latitude  given  by  Cieza  de  Leon.  There  is  an
island  still  called  Saugallan,  off  the  peninsida  of  Paraccas,  about  two
mUes  and  a  half  long,  with  a  bold  cliffy  outline.


28  THE    TEAVELS    OF

though  in  some  parts  there  are  naked  chains  of  rocky  hills,
and  the  whole  is  a  sandy  desert,  on  which  it  has  never
rained,  nor  does  anything-  fall  except  a  thin  mist;  but  I  shall
treat  of  this  admirable  secret  of  nature  further  on.'  Near
this  Seal  Island  there  are  seven  or  eight  other  small  islets,
some  high  and  others  low,  uninhabited,  and  without  wood
or  water,  tree,  shrub,  or  anything  else,  except  seals  and
sand  hills.  The  Indians,  according  to  their  own  account,
used  to  go  to  these  islands  to  make  sacrifices,  and  it  is  pre-
sumed that  great  treasure  is  buried  on  them.  They  are  a
little  more  than  four  leagues  from  the  coast.  Further  on
there  is  another  island,  also  called  Seal  Island,  from  the
quantity  of  those  animals  that  frequent  it,  which  is  14g°.-

From  this  island  vessels  continue  the  voyage,  the  coast
trending  S.W.^S,,  and  after  twelve  leagues  more  they  come
to  a  promontory  called  Nasca,  which  is  in  15°  less  one
quarter.^  There  is  here  shelter  for  ships,  but  not  for  boats,
as  they  cannot  land.  Further  on  there  is  another  point
called  San  Nicolas,  in  log.*  From  this  point  of  San  Nicolas
the  coast  turns  S.W.,  and  after  twelve  leagues  the  port  of
Acari  is  reached,  where  vessels  take  in  provisions  and
water,  brought  from  a  valley  which  is  a  little  more  than  five
leagues  from  the  port.    This  port  of  Acari  is  in  16".^    Con-

1  See  chapter  lix.

-  These  are  the  Ballista  and  Chincha  islands  :  the  latter,  now  so  famous
for  their  g-uano  deposits,  supplying  all  the  world  with  that  rich  manure,
which  forms  the  chief  item  in  the  revenue  of  modern  Peru.

^  Cape  Nasca  is  a  lofty  bluff,  one  thousand  and  twenty  feet  high,  in
14°  57'  S.  ;  there  is  an  anchorage  called  Caballas  Roads  to  the  westward,
rocky  and  sliallow,  "  which  should  only  be  known  to  be  avoided."  The
Beagle  was  at  anchor  there  for  twenty-four  hours  without  being  able  to
effect  a  landing.  I  rode  along  the  whole  of  this  coast  in  January  1853,
a  most  desolate  miserable  region.  Near  C'ape  Nasca  there  are  a  feAv
huts,  called  Sta.  Anna,  used  as  a  bathing  station  for  the  ladies  of  Nasca,
San  Xavier,  and  other  coast  valleys.

•'  Tn  latitude  15"  If  S.

^  In  latitude  15°  20'  S.  'I'he  jiort  of  Acari  is  called  San  fluaii,  and  is
one  of  the  best  on  the  co;ist ;  but  wood,  water,  and  [irovisions  arc  all
brought  from  a  distance.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  29

tinning  the  voyage  vessels  next  arrive  off  the  river  of  Ocona,
and  further  on  are  the  rivers  of  Camana  and  Quilca.  Near
the  latter  river  there  is  a  cove,  which  affords  good  and
secure  anchorage.  It  is  also  called  Quilca,  and  forms  the
port  of  the  city  of  Arequipa,  which  is  seventeen  leagues
distant.  This  port  is  in  l?!".!  Saihng  from  Quilca,  vessels
pass  some  islets,  where  the  Indians  go  from  the  main  land
to  fish.  Three  leagues  further  on  there  is  another  island,
very  close  to  the  shore,  and  the  ships  anchor  to  leeward  of
it,  for  from  this  place  also  goods  are  sent  to  the  city  of
Arequipa.  It  is  twelve  leagues  beyond  Quilca,  in  17^''  or
more,  and  is  called  Chuti.^  Further  on  there  is  a  great
river  called  Tamboballa,  and  ten  leagues  more  bring  us  to
a  point  which  runs  out  for  a  league  into  the  sea,  and  there
are  three  pointed  rocks  near  it.^  There  is  a  good  port,  shel-
tered by  this  point,  called  Ylo,  where  a  river  of  very  good
water,  having  the  same  name  as  the  port,  falls  into  the  sea.
Ylo  is  in  ISg"".^  Thence  the  coast  trends  S.jE.,  and  seven
leagues  farther  on  there  is  a  promontory,  which  the  ma-
riners called  the  Hill  of  the  Devils.-^  All  this  coast  is  dan-
gerous. Further  on,  about  five  leagues  from  this  point,
there  is  a  small  river  of  good  water,  and  ten  leagues  more
bring  us  to  another  high  point  and  some  ravines.  Off  this
point  there  is  an  islet,  and  near  it  is  the  port  of  Arica,  in
29g'\^     From  Arica  the   coast  runs  S.E.  for  nine  leagues,

1  In  latitude  IB"  42'  S.  The  anchorage  is  much  exposed,  but  landing
is  tolerably  good.  Quilca  was  the  port  of  Arequipa  in  Spanish  times,  but
since  1827  it  has  given  place  to  Islay,  another  port  a  short  distance  down
the  coast.

-  In  lat.  17°  7'  there  is  a  point  of  that  name,  a  few  miles  S.E.  of  Islay.

'  This  is  Coles  point,  a  low  sandy  spit,  running  out  into  the  sea,  with
a  cluster  of  rocks  off  it.

■•  Ylo  is  five  miles  and  a  half  N.E.  of  Coles  point,  in  latitude  17''  36'  S.
^A'ater  is  scarce.

'  Tliis  may  be  Sama  hiU,  the  highest  and  most  conspicuous  land  near
the  sea,  on  tliis  part  of  the  coast.

*  In  latitude  18°  27'  S.  Our  author  is  beginning  to  get  a  good  deal
out  in  his  reckoning.


30  THE    TRAVELS    OF

wliere  there  is  a  river  called  Pisagua.  From  this  river  to
the  port  of  Tarapaca  the  coast  trends  in  the  same  direction
a  distance  of  twenty-five  leagues.  Near  Tarapaca  there  is
an  island  a  little  more  than  a  league  round  and  one  and
a  half  from  the  shore,  which  fonns  a  bay  in  21°,  This
is  the  port  of  Tarapaca.^  Thence  the  coast  trends  in
the  same  direction,  and  five  leagues  further  on  there  is  a
point  called  Tacama.  Passing  this  point  vessels  come  to
the  port  of  Mexillones,  sixteen  leagues  further  on,  which  is
in  22^°.^  The  coast  then  trends  S.S.W.  for  ninety  leagues".
It  is  a  straight  coast,  with  some  points  and  bays,  and  in  26°
there  is  a  good  port  called  Copayapo,^  vdih  an  islet  about
half  a  league  from  the  shore,  and  here  the  inhabited  part  of
the  province  of  Chile  commences.  Further  on  there  is  a
point  of  land  forming  a  bay,  with  two  rocks  in  it,  and  here
a  river  of  very  good  water  falls  into  the  sea,  called  Huasco.
The  point  is  in  28^°.*  Ten  leagues  further  on  there  is  another
point  which  affords  shelter  for  ships,  but  here  there  is  neither
wood  nor  water.  Near  this  point  is  the  port  of  Coquimbo,
and  between  it  and  the  point  there  are  seven  islands.  This
port  is  in  29|°.^  Ten  leagues  further  on  another  point  runs
out,  forming  a  large  bay  called  Atongayo,^  and  five  leagues

1  This  is  the  port  of  Iquique,  in  latitude  20O  12'  S.  ;  a  place  of  con-
siderable trade,  from  the  quantity  of  saltpetre  that  is  exported.  The
anchorage  is  under  a  low  island  correctly  described  by  our  author.

-  The  spacious  bay  of  JVIexillones  is  eight  miles  across,  but  no  wood  nor
water  can  be  obtained  there.

^  In  latitude  27°  2'  S.  A  very  bad  port,  with  a  remarkable  island
called  Isla  Grande  to  the  north.

*  The  point  forming  Huasco  bay  is  low  and  rugged,  with  several  small
islands  between  it  and  the  port.  The  river  is  small,  and  a  heavy  surf
breaks  outside  ;  the  water,  however,  is  excellent.  There  is  another  small
river  of  brackish  water  nearer  the  port.  The  port  is  in  latitude  28°  27'  S.
Here  our  author  becomes  more  correct  in  his  reckoning.

»  In  latitude  29°  .^5'  S.  The  islands  he  mentions  are  the  Pijaros  Niilos
islets  and  rocks.

®  The  point  lierc  mentioned  is  a  low  rocky  spit  called  Lcngua  de  Vaca,
round  which  is  Tongoy,  or,  as  our  author  calls  it,  Atongayo  bay.  About
twenty-two  miles  further  south  is  the  mouth  of  the  Limari  river.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  31

beyond  is  the  river  of  Limara.  From  this  river  vessels
reach  a  bay  after  sailing  nine  leagues,  where  there  is  a
pointed  rock,  and  no  fresh  water.  It  is  in  30",  and  is
called  Choape.^  Further  on,  continuing  the  same  course
for  twenty-one  leagues,  there  is  a  good  port  called  Quintero,
in  32",-  and  ten  leagues  more  bring  us  to  the  port  of  Val-
paraiso, and  the  city  of  Santiago,  which  is  what  we  call
Chile,  in  32 1°.^  Continuing  the  voyage  we  next  come  to
another  port  called  Topocalma,  in  34°,*  and  twelve  leagues
further  on  is  the  river  of  Maule.  Fourteen  leagues  further
on  there  is  another  river  called  Ytata,  and  twenty-four
leagues  more  bring  us  to  a  river  called  Biobio,  in  38°
nearly,^  In  the  same  direction,  after  sailing  fifteen  leagues
more,  we  come  to  a  large  island  five  leagues  from  the  shore,
which  is  said  to  be  inhabited.  It  is  called  Luchengo.®
Beyond  this  island  there  is  a  bay  called  Valdivia,  where
there  is  a  great  river,  the  name  of  which  is  Ayniledos.  The
bay  of  Valdivia  is  in  39|°.7  To  the  S.S.W.  of  the  port
is  the  Cape  of  Santa  Maria  in  42^°  S.  This  is  as  far  as  the
coast  has  been  examined  and  described.  The  pilots  say  that
it  then  turns  S.E.  to  the  straits  of  Magellan.  One  of  the
ships  which  sailed  from  Spain,  belonging  to  the  expedition
of  the  Bishop  of  Palencia,  passed  through  the  straits  of
IMagellan,  and  reached  the  port  of  Quilca,  which  is  near
Arequipa,  whence  she  went  on  to  Lima  and  Panama.  She
brought  a  good  account  of  the  latitude  of  the  strait,  and  of
what  happened  during  the  very  diSicult  voyage ;  but  I  do
not  insert  that  narrative  here,  because,  at  the  time  when  we

*  I  cannot  identify  tliis.

^  In  latitude  32°  50'  S.     The  bay  of  Quintero  is  roomy  and  sheltered
dining  southerly  ^vinds.
3  In  latitude  33°  S.

*  Coasters  sometimes  anchor  here  for  a  few  hoiu^,  but  there  is  no  place
fit  for  a  vessel  of  two  himdred  tons.

®  In  latitude  36°  47'  S.  ^  He  must  mean  the  island  of  Mocha.

^  In  latitude  39"  49'  S.


32  THE    TRAVELS    OP

gave  battle  to  Gonzalo  Pizarro  in  the  valley  of  Xaquixa-
guana^  five  leagues  from  the  city  of  Cuzco,  I  had  several  of
my  papers  and  journals  stolen,  and  this  among  the  number,
which  I  regret  very  much.  I  should  have  wished  to  con-
clude my  account  of  the  coast  with  this  narrative.  Receive,
therefore,  my  desire  to  give  this  further  information ;  for
I  have  taken  no  little  trouble  to  ascertain  the  truth,  and  I
have  examined  the  new  charts  made  by  the  pilots  who  dis-
covered this  sea.^

Here  I  must  conclude  the  portion  of  my  work  which  treats
of  the  navigation  of  this  South  Sea.  I  shall  now  proceed
to  give  an  account  of  the  provinces  and  nations  from  the
port  of  Uraba  to  the  city  of  Plata,  which  is  a  distance  of
more  than  1200  leagues,  and  I  shall  describe  the  govern-
ment of  Popayan  and  the  kingdom  of  Peru.

I  shall  commence,  then,  with  the  port  of  Uraba,  and  pass
thence  to  the  city  of  Antiochia  and  to  other  parts,  as  will
appear  presently.


CHAPTER  VI.


IIow  the  city  of  San  Sebastian  was  founded  in  the  bay  of  Uraba  ;"^  and
of  the  native  Indians  in  that  neighboiu'hood.

In  the  year  1509,  when  Alonzo  de  Ojeda  and  Nicuesa  were
governors  of  Tierra  Firme,  a  town  was  founded  in  the  pro-

'  The  above  is,  on  the  whole,  an  excellent  account  of  the  coast  from
Panama  to  Valdivia.  It  agrees,  in  aU  essential  points,  Avith  Admiral
Fitz-Roy's  sailing  directions  printed  in  1851 ;  and  Cieza  de  Leon  deserves
great  credit  for  his  care  and  dihgence  in  collecting  what,  in  those  days,
must  have  been  very  useful  information.  Indeed,  it  is  not  a  Uttle  re-
markable that,  in  those  early  days  of  the  conquest,  the  old  Spanish  pilots
should  have  completed  a  manual  of  sailing  directions  such  as  is  contained
in  the  preceding  chaj)ters,  on  a  plan  very  similar  to  those  now  issued  by  the
Ilydrographic  Othce.

2  Or  Darien.


PEDKO    DK    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  33

vincc  of  Darien,  and  was  named  Nuestra  Sefiora  del  Antigua.
Some  of  the  Spaniards,  who  were  among  the  early  discover-
ers, declare  that  they  found  the  flower  of  the  chiefs  of  the
Indians  in  these  parts.  At  that  time,  although  the  province
of  Carthagena  was  discovered,  it  was  not  settled,  nor  had  the
Christians  done  more  than  trade  with  the  Indians,  obtaining
a  quantity  of  fine  gold  by  exchanges.  The  Governor  Ojeda
marched  to  the  great  town  of  Turbaco,  four  leagues  from
Carthagena  (which  was  formerly  called  Calamar),  where  he
fought  a  great  battle  with  the  Indians.  Many  Christians
were  killed,  and  among  them  the  captain  Juan  de  la  Cosa,
a  valiant  and  resolute  man.  In  order  that  his  body  might
not  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Indians,  the  Spaniards  retreated
to  their  ships.  After  this  event  the  Governor  Ojeda  founded
a  town  of  Christians  in  the  country  called  Uraba,  and  ap-
pointed as  his  captain  and  lieutenant  there,  Francisco
Pizarro,  who  was  aftei-wards  governor  and  marquis.  In
this  city  or  town  of  Uraba,  this  captain  Francisco  Pizarro,
suffered  from  hunger  and  sickness,  and  from  the  attacks  of
the  Indians  of  Uraba.  These  Indians  (as  it  is  said)  were  not
natives  of  this  province,  their  ancient  home  having  been
in  the  country  which  borders  on  the  great  river  of  Darien.^
Desiring  to  escape  from  subjection  to  the  yoke  of  the
Spaniards  who  treated  them  so  ill,  they  left  their  homes
with  their  arms,  taking  their  women  and  children  with  them.
Having  arrived  at  Uraba,  they  attacked  the  natives  with
great  cruelty,  killed  them  all,  and  made  themselves  masters
of  their  land.

MTien  the  governor  Ojeda  heard  of  this  he  entertained
hopes  of  finding  great  riches  in  that  country,  and  sent  his
lieutenant  Francisco  Pizarro  to  form  a  settlement  there,
who  was  the  first  Christian  to  enter  this  land.  Afterwards
these  governors  Ojeda  and  Nicuesa  came  to  a  disastrous
end,  as  is  well  known  among  those  of  that  time  who
'  Or  Atrato.

D


34  THE    TRAVELS    OF

still  survive,  and  Pedrarias  came  as  governor  of  Tierra
Firme,  but  thoug-li  there  were  2000  Spaniards  in  the  city  of
Antigua,  none  of  tliem  settled  in  Uraba.^     Time  passed  on,

1  The  events  thus  briefly  alluded  to  by  oiu-  author,  mil  be  made  more
intelligible  by  a  short  summary.  The  main  land  of  the  American  conti-
nent was  first  discovered  by  Colmnbus  dm-ing  his  third  voyage  in  1498,
at  Paria,  opposite  to  the  island  of  Trinidad.  In  1499  one  of  his  com-
panions, Alonzo  de  Ojeda,  accompanied  by  Amerigo  Vespucci,  touched
the  coast  somewhere  near  Sm-inam,  and  coasted  along  as  far  as  the  gulf
of  Maracaibo,  naming  a  village  at  the  mouth  of  that  gulf  Ve^iezuela.  In
1508  Ojeda,  who  was  a  brave  soldier  of  great  personal  strength,  obtained
the  govermuent  of  the  coast  from  Cabo  de  la  A'ela  to  the  gulf  of  Uraba,
Avhich  was  called  Xew  Andalusia  ;  and  at  the  same  time  Diego  Nicueza,
a  very  different  sort  of  person, — a  polished  courtier  and  good  musician,
was  appointed  governor  of  Veragua  or  Castille  del  Oro,  a  territory  ex-
tending from  the  guK  of  Uraba  to  Cape  Gracias  li  Dios.

The  two  adventm-ers  arrived  at  Hispaniola  at  the  same  time  ;  but
Ojeda  set  out  first  on  his  voyage  of  discovery,  and  landed  at  Carthagena
in  1510.  Advancing  into  the  country  he  was  surprised  and  defeated  by
the  Indians  in  the  bloody  battle  of  Turbaco,  losing  seventy  Spaniards,
among  them  Juan  de  la  Cosa,  Ojeda's  lieutenant.  At  this  time  Nicuesa
arrived,  and,  in  spite  of  former  jealousies  and  quarrels,  offered  assistance
to  Ojeda.  The  Indians  were  in  their  turn  defeated,  and  all  were  put  to
the  sword,  neither  age  nor  sex  being  spared.

Ojeda  then  took  leave  of  Xicuesa,  and,  sailing  to  the  westward,  selected
a  spot  on  the  east  side  of  the  gulf  of  Uraba  or  Darien  as  a  site  for  a
town.  It  consisted  of  about  tliirty  huts  siuTounded  by  a  stockade,  and
was  called  San  Sebastian  de  Uraba.  Here  Ojeda  was  again  defeated  by
the  Indians,  and,  returning  to  Hispaniola  for  assistance,  he  died  there  in
extreme  poverty.  The  Spaniards  at  San  Sebastian  were  left  under  the
command  of  Francisco  Pizarro,  the  future  conqueror  of  Peru  ;  they  suf-
fered from  famine  and  disease,  and  at  last  Pizarro  embarked  them  all  in
two  small  vessels.  Outside  the  harbour  they  met  a  vessel  which  proved
to  be  that  of  the  Bachiller  Enciso,  Ojeda's  partner,  coming  with  pro-
visions and  reinforcements.  They  all  returned  to  San  Sebastian,  but
found  that  the  Indians  had  destroyed  the  fort,  and  Enciso  determined  to
abandon  it.  One  of  the  crew  of  Enciso's  sliip,  Vasco  Xuuez  de  Balboa,
the  future  discoverer  of  the  South  Sea,  induced  his  commander  to  form  a
settlement  on  the  other  side  of  the  gulf,  called  Santa  Maria  la  Antigua
del  Darien.  No  vestige  of  it  now  remains.  The  troops,  however,  soon
became  dLscontented,  Enciso  was  deposed,  and  Diego  Colmenares,  who
arrived  with  provisions,  was  sent  to  offer  the  command  to  Xieuesii.  'I'his
coniiiiander.  after  jiarting  fidin  Ojeda,  had  suffered  most  fearful  hardsliips


I'KDKO    1)E    CIKZA    J)K    LKON.  35

the  governor  Pedrarias  cut  off"  the  head  of  his  son-in-law
Yasco  Nunez  de  Balboa/  and  of  Captain  Francisco  Her-
nandez  in  Nicaragua,  and  the  Indians  of  the  river  Genu
killed  the  captain  Bezerra  and  the  Christians  who  were  with
him.  At  lastj  Don  Pedro  de  Heredia  came  out  as  governor
of  Carthagena,  and  sent  his  brother  the  captain  Alonzo  de
Heredia  with  a  party  of  Spaniards  to  settle  in  Uraba  for  a
second  time,  calling  the  city  San  Sebastian  de  Buena  Vista.'^
This  city  is  situated  on  some  small  hills  clear  of  trees,  and
there  is  no  thicket  near  them,  except  in  the  marshy  ground
and  on  the  banks  of  the  rivers.  But  the  province  is  covered
with  dense  forest  in  many  parts,  and  the  plains  are  full  of

on  a  desert  island,  and  Colmenares  found  liim  in  a  state  of  great  misery,
in  a  bay  wlaich  he  had  called  Nomhre  de  Dios.  When  he  arrived  at  Darien,
the  Spaniards  had  changed  their  minds,  and  refused  to  receive  him,
and  he  was  finally  obUged  to  sail  in  a  wretched  boat,  and  was  never  heard
of  again.  Tins  was  in  March  1511.  Vasco  Nuiiez,  a  clever  and  courage-
ous adventurer,  then  took  command  of  the  Darien  settlement,  and  the
Bachiller  Enciso  was  sent  back  to  Hispaniola.  The  new  commander
entered  upon  a  career  of  conquest  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Darien,
which  ended  in  the  discovery  of  the  Pacific  Ocean  on  September
25th,  1513.  In  1514  Pedrarias  de  Avila  was  appointed  governor  of
Darien,  an  old  man  of  rank  and  some  reputation,  but  with  no  abihty,
and  of  a  cruel  disposition.  He  set  out  with  a  large  expedition,  the  his-
torian Oviedo,  and  the  BachiUer  Enciso  being  in  his  train ;  and  superseded
Blasco  Nuiiez  in  the  govermnent  of  Darien  in  June.

1  In  1517.

2  Don  Pedro  de  Heredia  was  one  of  the  most  distinguished  among  the  dis-
coverers of  New  Granada,  a  firm,  intrepid,  enterprising  man,  gifted  with
the  art  of  securing  the  confidence  and  obedience  of  liis  usually  lawless  fol-
lowers. He  commenced  his  career  as  lieutenant  under  Garcia  de  Lerma,
the  second  governor  of  Santa  JNIartha,  and,  returning  to  Spain  with  great
wealth,  he  obtained  the  govermnent  of  all  the  countiy  between  the
mouth  of  the  river  ^lagdalena  and  the  gulf  of  Darien,  and  set  sail  again
with  a  hundred  men  in  1532.  He  founded  the  city  of  Carthagena  in
January  1533,  and  his  brother  Alonzo  de  Heredia  established  a  settle-
ment at  Uraba  in  1535.

Our  author  sailed  from  Spain,  in  the  fleet  of  Pedro  de  Heredia,  at  the
early  age  of  thirteen.  The  lad  seems  to  have  accompanied  Alonzo  de
Heredia  to  Uraba,  and,  with  the  interesting  account  of  the  Indians  of  that
region  which  now  follows,  the  pereonal  narrative  of  his  travels  commences.

d2


6b  THE    TRAVELS    OF

very  large  palm  trees  with  thick  bark^  and  bearing  large
jjalmitos,  -wliich  are  white  and  very  sweet.  When  the
Spaniards  explored  this  country,  in  the  time  when  Alonzo
Lopez  de  Ayala  was  lieutenant  to  the  governor  of  this  city,
they  ate  nothing  for  many  days  except  these  palmitos.  The
wood  is  so  hard  and  difficult  to  cut,  that  it  took  a  man  half
a  day  before  he  could  cut  a  tree  down  and  get  the  palmitos,
which  they  ate  without  bread,  and  drank  much  water,  so  tha^
many  Spaniards  died.  Near  the  town,  and  on  the  banks  of
the  river,  there  are  many  gardens  of  orange-trees,  plaintains,
and  guavas.  There  are  many  rivers  in  the  province,  which
rise  in  the  mountains.  In  the  interior  there  are  some  Indians
and  caciques,  who  used  to  be  very  inch  by  reason  of  their
trade  with  those  who  lived  in  the  plains  beyond  the  moun-
tains, and  in  the  country  of  Dobaybe.  These  Indians,  who
were  masters  of  this  region,  originally  came,  as  I  have
before  said,  from  the  other  side  of  the  great  river  of  Darien.
The  lords  or  caciques  are  obeyed  and  feared  by  the  Indians,
and  their  women  are  the  prettiest  and  most  loveable  of  any
that  I  have  seen  in  the  Indies.  They  are  clean  in  their
eating,  and  have  none  of  the  dirty  habits  of  other  nations.
These  Indians  have  small  villages,  and  their  houses  are  hke
long  sheds.  They  sleep  in  hammocks  and  use  no  other  sort  of
bed.  Their  land  is  fertile  and  abundantly  supplied  with  provi-
sions, such  as  well  tasted  roots.  There  are  also  herds  of  small
pigs  which  are  good  eating,  and  many  great  tapirs,  said  by
some  to  be  of  the  shape  and  form  of  zebras  ;  abundance  of
turkeys  and  other  birds,  plenty  of  fish  in  the  rivers,  and
tigers,  which  kill  the  Indians  and  commit  havoc  amongst
their  beasts.  Tliere  are  also  very  large  serpents  and  other
creatures  in  the  dense  forests,  the  names  of  which  we  know
not.  Among  them  are  the  creatures  which  we  call  Pcricos
ligeros,^  and  it  is  a  marvel  to  see  their  fierce  looks,  and  the
torpid  lazy  way  in  which  they  move  along.

^  Perico  ligero,  one  of  the  sloth  tribe  {Bradypns  didactylus) .  The  snout
is  sliort,  forehead  hi<rh,  eyes  black  and  almost  covered  with  loiiii-  black  cvc-


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  37

When  the  Spaniards  occupied  tlie  villages  of  these  Indians,
they  found  a  great  quantity  of  gold  in  some  small  baskets,
in  the  form  of  rich  ornaments.  There  were  also  many  other
oniaments  and  chains  of  fine  gold,  and  much  cotton  cloth.
The  women  wore  mantles,  which  covered  them  from  the  waist
to  the  feet,  and  other  mantles  over  their  bosoms.  They  are
very  pretty,  and  always  go  about  decently  dressed  and
combed.  The  men  go  naked  and  barefooted,  without  other
covering  than  what  nature  has  given  them;  but  they  have
shells  or  other  ornaments,  either  of  bone  or  of  very  fine  gold,
suspended  by  a  thread  in  front  of  their  privates.  Some  of  these
that  I  saw,  weighed  forty  to  fifty  j^'^sos  each,  some  more  and
some  less.  These  Indians  are  engaged  in  trade,  and  take  pigs,
which  are  native,  and  different  from  those  in  Spain,  to  sell
to  other  tribes  more  inland.^  These  pigs  are  smaller  than
Spanish  pigs,  and  they  have  a  navel  on  their  backs,-  which
must  be  something  which  has  grown  there.  The  Indians
also  trade  with  salt  and  fish,  getting  in  exchange  their  gold,
cloth  and  other  articles.  Their  arms  are  bows,  made  of  the
wood  of  a  black  palm,  a  braza  long,  with  very  long  and
sharp  arrows,  anointed  with  a  juice  which  is  so  evil  and
pestilential,  that  no  man  who  is  wounded  with  it  so  as  to
draw  blood,  can  live,  although  it  should  not  be  as  much  as
would  flow  from  the  prick  of  a  pin.  Thus  few  if  any  who
have  been  wounded  with  this  juice,  fail  to  die.

lashes,  no  incisors  in  the  upper  jaw,  legs  ill-formed,  thighs  ill-shapecl  and
clmnsy,  hind  legs  sliort  and  tliick,  the  toes  united,  having  thi-ee  long  curved
claws  on  the  liind  and  fore  feet,  twenty-eight  ribs,  and  veiy  short  tail.  The
whole  leng-th  of  the  body  is  between  four  and  five  feet.  The  animal  is
the  very  picture  of  misery,  and  covered  mth  long  shaggy  hair  like  dried
grass.  Its  motion  is  very  slow,  at  each  step  it  howls  most  hideously,  and
scarcely  walks  ten  yards  in  as  many  hom's.  It  feeds  on  leaves  and  buds,
and  when  it  has  once  gained  the  top  of  a  tree  it  wUl  remain  there  as  long
as  a  leaf  is  to  be  procured.     Stevenson,  ii,  j).  237.

^  The  Peccary,  or  South  American  wild  pig.

-  AMiat  Cieza  de  Leon,  and  other  old  -m-iters,  called  a  navel,  is  a  dorsal
gland  on  the  backs  of  these  peccaries,  which  must  be  cut  out  soon  after
the  animal's  death,  or  it  soon  vitiates  the  whole  cai'case.


38  THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    VII.

How  the  herb  is  made  so  poisonous,  with  which  the  Indians  of  Cartha-
gena  and  Santa  Martha  have  killed  so  many  Spaniards.

As  this  poisonous  juice  of  tlie  Indians  of  Carthagena  and
Santa  Martha  is  so  famous,  it  seems  well  to  give  an  account
here  of  the  way  it  is  made,  which  is  as  follows.  This  juice
is  composed  of  many  things.  I  investigated  and  became
acquainted  with  the  principal  ingredients  in  the  province  of
Carthagena,  in  a  village  called  Bahayre,  from  a  cacique  or
lord,  whose  name  was  Macavin.  He  showed  me  some  short
roots,  of  a  yellow  colour  and  disagreeable  smell,  and  told  me
that  they  were  dug  up  on  the  sea  shore,  near  the  trees  which
we  call  m an sanill OS, ^a.nd  pieces  were  cut  from  the  roots  of  that
pestiferous  tree.  They  then  burnt  these  pieces  in  earthen
pots,  and  made  them  into  a  paste.  After  this  was  done,  they
sought  for  certain  ants,  as  big  as  the  beetles  of  Spain,
which  are  very  black  and  evil,  and  which,  by  merely  biting  a
man,  cause  terrible  pain.  This  happened  when  we  were
journeying  on  the  expedition  with  the  licentiate  Juan  de
Vadillo ;  for  one  of  the  soldiers  was  bitten  by  an  ant,  and
suffered  so  much  pain  that  at  last  he  lost  all  feeling,  and
even  had  three  or  four  bad  attacks  of  fever,  until  the  poison
had  run  its  course.  They  also  seek  for  certain  very  large
spiders,  and  for  certain  hairy  worms,  creatures  which  I  shall
not  soon  forget ;  for  one  day,  when  I  was  guarding  a  river
in  the  forests  called  Abibe,  under  the  branch  of  a  tree,  one
of  these  worms  bit  me  in  the  neck,  and  I  passed  the  most
painful  and  wearisome  night  I  have  ever  experienced  in  my
life.  They  also  make  the  poison  of  the  wings  of  a  bat,  and
the  head  and  tail  of  a  fish  which  is  very  poisonous,  adding
toads  and  the  tails  of  serpents,  together  with  certain  small


1  "  Manzanillo  de  playa."     {Hipiwmane  Mancinella  Lin.),  a  enphor
biaccous  plant.     In  the  West  Indies  it  is  known  as  the  manshincel


J


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  39

apples,  which  appear  in  colour  and  smell  to  be  the  same  as
those  of  Spain.  Some  of  those  recently  arrived  in  these
parts,  on  landing,  eat  these  apples  without  knowing  that
they  are  poisonous.  I  knew  one  Juan  Agraz  (whom  I  have
lately  seen  in  the  city  of  San  Francisco  de  Quito),  who,
when  he  came  from  Spain,  and  landed  on  the  coast  of
Santa  Martha,  ate  ten  or  a  dozen  of  these  apples,  and  I
heard  him  swear  that  in  colour  and  smell  they  could  not  be
better,  except  that  they  have  a  milk  which  becomes  poison.
Other  roots  and  herbs  form  ingredients  of  this  juice,  and
when  they  want  to  make  it,  they  prepare  a  great  fire  in  a
place  far  from  their  houses,  and  take  some  slave  girl  whom
they  do  not  value,  and  make  her  watch  the  pots,  and  attend
to  the  brewing  of  the  poison ;  but  the  smell  kills  the  person
who  thus  makes  the  juice,  at  least  so  I  have  heard.


CHAPTER    YIII.


In  which  other  customs  of  the  Indians  subject  to  the  city  of   Ura]:)a
are  descrilaed.

With  this  evil  juice  the  Indians  anoint  the  points  of  their
arrows,  and  they  are  so  dexterous  in  the  use  of  these  arrows,
and  draw  their  bows  with  such  force,  that  it  has  often  hap-
pened that  they  have  transfixed  a  horse,  or  the  knight  who
is  riding,  the  arrow  entering  on  one  side  and  coming  out  on
the  other.  They  wear  cotton  for  defensive  armour,  the
moisture  of  that  country  not  being  suitable  for  cuirasses.
However,  with  all  these  difficulties,  and  in  spite  of  the
country  being  so  forbidding,  foot  soldiers  have  overrun  it
with  nothing  but  swords  and  shields,  and  ten  or  twelve
Spaniards  are  as  good  as  100  or  200  Indians.  These
Indians  have  no  temples  nor  any  form  of  worship,  and
nothing  has  been  discovered  concerning  their  religion  as
yet,  except  that  they  certainly  talk  with  the  devil,  and  do


40  THE    TRAVELS    OF

him  all  the  honour  they  can,  for  they  hold  him  in  great
veneration.  He  appears  to  them  (as  I  have  been  told  by
one  of  themselves)  in  frightful  and  terrible  visions,  which
cause  them  much  alarm.  The  sons  inherit  their  fathers'
property,  if  they  are  born  of  the  principal  wife,  and  they
marry  the  daughters  of  their  sisters.  Their  chiefs  have
many  wives.  When  a  chief  dies,  all  his  servants  and  friends
assemble  in  his  house  in  the  night,  without  any  light ;  but
they  have  a  great  quantity  of  their  wine  made  from  maize,
which  they  continue  drinking  while  they  mourn  for  the
dead.  After  they  have  completed  their  ceremonies  and
sorceries,  they  inter  the  body  with  its  arms  and  treasures,
plenty  of  food,  and  jugs  of  cliicha,  together  with  a  few  live
women.  The  devil  gives  them  to  understand  that,  in  the
place  to  which  they  go,  they  will  come  to  life  in  another
kingdom  which  he  has  prepared  for  them,  and  that  it  is
necessary  to  take  food  with  them  for  the  joui-ney.  As  if
hell  was  so  very  far  off !

This  city  of  San  Sebastian  was  founded  by  Alonzo  de
Heredia,  brother  of  the  Adelantado  Don  Pedro  de  Heredia,
governor  for  his  majesty  of  the  province  of  Carthagena,  as
1  have  said  before.


CHAPTER    IX.


Of  the  road  between  the  city  of  San  Sebastian  and  the  city  of  Antio-
qnia,  and  of  the  wild  beasts,  forests,  rivers,  and  other  tilings  in  the
way  ;  and  how  and  in  what  season  it  can  be  passed.

I  POUND  myself  in  this  city  of  San  Sebastian  de  Buena  Vista
in  the  year  1536,  and  in  1537  the  licentiate  Juan  de  Vadillo,
Juoz  de  Residencia,^  and  at  that  time  governor  of  Cartha-

1  For  an  account  of  the  office  and  duties  of  a  Juez  de  Residcncia,  see
a  note  at  page  86  of  my  translated  edition  of  "  Alonzo  Enriquez  de  Guz-
man," printed  for  the  Hakluyt  Socikty  in  18G2.


PEDKO    DE    C'lEZA    DK    LEON.  41

gena,  set  out  from  it  with  one  of  the  finest  annies  that  had
been  seen  in  Tierra  Firme.  We  were  the  first  Spaniards
who  opened  a  road  from  the  North  to  the  South  Sea.  I
journeyed  from  this  town  of  Uraba  as  far  as  the  town  of
Plata^  at  the  furthest  extremity  of  Peru,  and  made  a  point
of  seeing  all  the  provinces  on  my  road,  that  I  miglit  be
better  able  to  note  down  what  was  worthy  of  remark.  I
will,  therefoi-e,  relate  from  this  place  forward  all  that  I  saw,
without  desiring  to  exaggerate  or  depreciate  anything,  and
of  this  my  readers  may  receive  my  assurance.

I  say,  then,  that  on  leaving  San  Sebastian  de  Buena
Yista,  which  is  the  port  of  Uraba,  to  go  to  the  city  of
Antioquia,  the  road  runs  by  the  coast  for  five  leagues  as
far  as  the  banks  of  a  small  river  called  Eio  Verde,  whence
the  distance  to  the  city  of  Antioquia  is  forty-eight  leagues.
The  whole  country,  from  this  river  to  certain  mountains
called  Abibe,  of  which  I  shall  speak  presently,  is  flat,  but
covered  with  very  dense  forests,  and  traversed  by  many
rivers.  The  district  near  the  road  is  uninhabited,  as  the
natives  have  retired  to  a  distance  from  it.  After  reach-
ing Rio  Verde,  the  road  keeps  close  to  the  banks  of  the
river,  the  rest  of  the  country  being  very  densely  covered
with  forest ;  and  to  pass  safely,  it  is  necessary  to  travel  in
January,  February,  March,  or  April.  After  April  the  rains
set  in,  and  the  rivers  are  swollen  and  rapid,  so  that  even  if
it  is  possible  to  pass  at  all,  it  is  at  the  cost  of  much  danger
and  difiiculty.  At  all  times  those  who  travel  by  this  road
must  take  good  guides,  and  must  understand  how  to  cross
the  rivers.  In  all  these  forests  there  are  great  herds  of
pigs,  sometimes  more  than  a  thousand  together,  counting
their  young  ones,  and  they  make  a  great  noise,  so  that
those  who  travel  with  good  dogs  will  not  be  in  want  of  food.
There  are  also  great  tapirs,  Hons,  bears,  and  tigers.  In  the
trees  are  to  be  seen  the  most  beautifully  marked  wild  cats
that  can  be  found  in  the  Avorld,  and  large  monkeys,  that


42  THE    TRAVELS    OF

make  such  a  noise  tliat,  from  a  distance^  those  who  are  new
to  the  country  would  think  they  were  pigs.  When  the
Spaniards  pass  under  the  trees  where  the  monkeys  are,
these  creatures  break  off  branches,  and  throw  them  down,
making  faces  all  the  time.  The  rivers  are  so  full  of  fish
that  with  any  net  a  great  haul  may  be  drawn.  When  we
were  going  with  the  Captain  Jorge  Robledo  from  Antioquia
to  Carthagena,  we  saw  so  many  fish  that  we  could  kill  them
with  sticks.  On  the  trees  near  the  rivers,  there  is  a  crea-
ture called  yfjuana,  which  looks  like  a  serpent,  or  like  one
of  the  large  hzards  of  Spain,  except  that  it  has  a  larger
head  and  longer  tail,  but  in  colour  and  shape  it  is  exactly
like.  When  skinned  and  roasted  these  creatures  are  as  good
to  eat  as  rabbits ;  to  my  mind  they  are  even  better,  espe-
cially the  females,  which  have  many  eggs.  But  those  who
are  not  accustomed  to  them  would  be  so  frightened  at  the
sight  of  them,  that  they  would  have  no  desire  to  eat  them.
No  one  can  say  for  certain  whether  they  are  fish  or  flesh,
for  we  see  them  run  down  the  trees  into  the  water,  where
they  are  quite  at  home  ;  and  they  are  also  found  in  the  inte-
rior, where  there  are  no  rivers.  There  are  other  creatures
called  Hicotcas,^  like  turtles,  which  are  also  good  eating.
There  are  many  turkeys,  pheasants,  and  parrots  of  all
kinds,  as  well  as  Guacamayas,^  with  very  bright  plumage ;
some  small  eagles,  pigeons,  partridges,  doves,  besides  night-
birds  and  other  birds  of  prey.  In  these  forests  th-ere  are
very  large  snakes.  I  must  here  relate  a  circumstance
which  I  hold  to  be  certainly  true,  for  it  is  attested  by
many  men  who  are  worthy  of  behef.  It  is  that  when
the  Lieutenant  Juan  Greciano  was  travelling  by  this  road,
by  order  of  the  licentiate  Santa  Cruz,  in  search  of  the
licentiate  Juan  do  Vadillo,  in  company  with  certain  Spa-
niards, among  whom  were  Manuel  de  Peralta,  Pedro  de
Barros,  and  Pedro  Ximon,  they  met  with  a  snake  or  ser-
•  The  Emijs  decusmta  of  Bell.     It  is  a  land  tortoise.  ^  ]\[acaws.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  43

pent,  which  was  so  large  that  it  measured  more  than  twenty-
feet  in  length,  and  of  great  girth.  Its  head  was  a  clear
red,  its  eyes  green  and  protruding,  and,  when  they  saw  it,
it  levelled  its  head  to  strike  at  them,  and,  indeed,  gave
Pedro  Ximon  such  a  blow  that  he  died.  They  found  an
entire  deer  in  its  belly ;  and  I  heard  it  said  that  some  of  the
Spaniards,  owing  to  the  hunger  they  felt,  ate  the  deer  and
even  a  part  of  the  snake.  There  are  other  snakes,  not  so
large  as  this  one,  which  make  a  noise  when  they  walk  hke
the  sound  of  bells.  If  these  snakes  bite  a  man  they  kill
him.  The  Indians  say  that  there  are  many  other  kinds  of
serpents  and  wild  animals  in  these  forests,  which  I  do  not
describe  as  I  have  not  seen  them.  There  are  abundance  of
the  palm-trees  of  Uraba,  and  many  ■^^dld  fruits.


CHAPTER    X.


Of  the  gi'andeiir  of  the  mountains  of  Abibe,  and  of  the  admiralsle  and
useful  timber  which  grows  there.

Having  crossed  these  low  forest  covered  plains,  the  way
leads  up  a  broad  chain  of  mountains  called  Abibe.'  This
moimtain- chain  extends  to  the  west,  over  many  provinces
and  uninhabited  tracts.  Its  length  is  uncertain,  but  its
breadth  is  in  some  places  twenty  leagues:  in  others  much
more,  and  in  others  a  little  less.  The  roads  by  which  the  In-
dians crossed  this  wild  chain  of  mountains  (for  many  parts  of  it
are  inhabited)  were  so  bad  and  difficult,  that  horses  neither
can  nor  ever  will  be  able  to  pass  over  them.  The  Captain
Francisco  Cesar,  was  the  first  Spaniard  who  crossed  this

1  The  Abibe  mountains  are  a  branch  of  the  Andes,  extending  from  the
sliores  of  the  guU  of  Darien  to  the  village  of  the  cacique  Abibe,  whence
the  range  took  its  name.  They  are  covered  with  dense  forest,  and  the
only  paths  are  the  tortuous  beds  of  mountain  torrents,  flowing  on  one  side
to  the  Cauca  river,  and  on  the  other  to  the  gulf  of  Darien.


4i  THE    TEAVELS    OF

range  of  mountains,  and  with  mucli  trouble  he  came  to  the
valley  of  Guaco,  which  is  on  the  other  side.  The  roads  are
assuredly  most  difficult  and  wearisome,  for  they  are  full  of
evil  places  and  thickets,  while  the  roots  are  such  that  they
entangle  the  feet  of  both  men  and  horses.  At  the  highest
part  of  the  mountains  there  is  a  very  laborious  ascent,  and
a  still  more  dangerous  descent  on  the  other  side.  When  we
descended  with  the  licentiate  Juan  de  Vadillo,  there  being
several  very  steep  declivities,  we  made  a  sort  of  wall  with
ropes  and  stakes  filled  in  with  earth,  so  that  the  horses
might  be  able  to  pass  without  danger,  and  although  this
contrivance  was  of  some  use,  yet  inany  horses  fell  over  and
were  dashed  to  pieces.  Even  among  the  Spaniards  some
were  killed,  and  others  were  so  much  injured  that  they  were
unable  longer  to  proceed,  and  remained  in  the  forests,  await-
ing their  deaths  in  great  misery  concealed  by  the  brushwood,
so  that  those  who  remained  whole  might  not  see  them  and
carry  them  forward.  Some  of  the  horses,  too,  were  so  much
exhausted  that  they  could  not  go  on,  and  many  Negroes
either  fled  or  died.  Certainly,  we  who  passed  over  these
mountains  were  in  very  evil  case,  seeing  that  we  suflFered  the
hardships  that  I  have  just  described.  There  are  no  inhabi-
tants whatever  in  the  higher  parts  of  the  mountains,  or  if
there  are,  they  live  at  a  distance  from  the  road  by  which  we
traversed  them ;  but  in  the  valleys  which  run  up  into  these
mountains  there  are  many  Indians,  who  possess  much  gold.
The  rivers  which  descend  from  this  range  towards  the  west,
bring  down  great  store  of  gold.  Nearly  all  the  year  round
it  rains,  and  the  trees  are  always  dropping  water  from  their
leaves.  There  is  no  fodder  for  the  horses,  except  some
small  long  prickly  leaves,  inside  which  grow  small  'pahmtos,
which  are  very  bitter ;  and  I  have  been  myself  in  such
straits  with  weariness  and  hunger,  that  I  have  eaten  them.
As  it  is  always  raining,  and  the  Spanish  travellers  are  con-
stantly wet,  the  whole  of  them  would  certainly  die  if  they


TEDKO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  45

had  no  fire.  But  the  giver  of  blessings,  who  is  Christ  our
God  and  Lord,  displays  his  power  everywhere,  and  thinks  it
good  to  be  merciful  and  to  afford  us  a  remedy  for  all  our  ills.
Although  there  is  no  want  of  fire-wood  in  these  mountains,
yet  it  is  so  wet  that  if  the  fire  was  hghted  it  would  go  out.
To  provide  for  this  want  there  are  certain  tall  trees,  some-
thing hke  an  ash,  the  wood  of  which  is  white  and  very  dry  :
when  this  wood  is  cut  up  and  set  fire  to,  it  burns  Hke  candle-
wood,  and  does  not  go  out  until  it  is  consumed  by  the  flames.
We  owe  our  Kves  entirely  to  the  discovery  of  this  wood.
^^^lere  the  Indians  are  settled  there  are  plenty  of  supplies
of  fruit  and  fish,  besides  great  store  of  brightly  dyed  cotton
mantles.  Here  the  evil  root  of  Uraba  is  not  found,  and
the  Indians  have  no  other  arms  than  palm  lances,  clubs,  and
darts.  They  make  bridges  over  the  numerous  rivers  with
stout  creepers,  which  are  Hke  roots  growing  on  the  trees,
and  are  as  strong  as  hempen  ropes.  They  make  a  great
rope  by  twisting  several  of  these  together  and  throw  it
across  the  river,  fastening  each  end  securely  to  the  trees,  of
which  there  are  many  near  the  banks.  Several  more  are
secm'ed  in  the  same  way,  and  thus  a  bridge  is  formed.  The
Indians  and  their  wives  pass  across  ;  but  they  are  so  danger-
ous that  I  should  very  much  prefer  walking  over  the  bridge
of  Alcantara.  Notwithstanding  this,  and  in  spite  of  the
danger,  the  Indians,  as  I  have  said,  go  over  laden,  with  their
women  and  childi-en,  with  as  little  fear  as  if  they  were  on
firm  land.  All  these  Indians  of  the  mountains  are  subject
to  a  great  and  powerful  cacique,  called  Nutibara.  IIa\nng
passed  these  moimtains,  there  is  a  very  pretty  valley  where
there  is  no  forest,  but  naked  hills  :  and  the  Indians  have
their  roads  on  the  plain  and  sides  of  the  liills.


46  THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    XI.


Of  the  cacique  Xutibpa'a,  and  of  his  territory  :  and  of  other  caciques
subject  to  the  city  of  Aiitioquia.

Whe:n'  we  entered  this  valley  with  the  Licentiate  Juan  de
Vadillo,  it  was  scattered  over  with  very  large  houses  of  wood
thatched  with  straw,  and  the  fields  were  full  of  all  kinds  of
food.  In  the  hills  several  dehghtful  rivers  rise,  whose  banks
were  covered  with  many  kinds  of  fruit  trees,  with  very  tall
slender  palm  trees,  thorny,  with  a  bunch  of  fruit  called
Pixihaes  growing  at  the  top.  They  make  both  bread  and
wine  from  this  fruit,  and  when  the  tree  is  cut  down,  they
take  from  it  a  good-sized  pahniio,  which  is  both  sweet  and
wholesome.  There  are  also  many  trees  which  we  call
aguacates,  giiavas,  guayavas,  and  very  fragrant  pines.

The  lord  or  king  of  this  country  was  one  named  Nutibara,
son  of  Anunaybe.  He  had  a  brother  called  Quinuchu,  who
was  then  his  heutenant  over  the  Indians  that  lived  in  the
mountains  of  Abibe  (which  we  had  just  crossed)  and  in  other
parts.  This  lieutenant  supplied  his  lord  with  many  pigs,
fish,  birds,  and  other  things  from  that  land,  and  sent  him
gold  and  apparel  as  tribute.  When  the  lord  went  to  war,
he  was  followed  by  many  people  with  their  arms.  When  he
travelled  through  the  country,  he  sat  on  a  litter  inlaid  -^Aatli
gold,  which  was  borne  on  the  shoulders  of  his  principal  men.
He  had  many  wives.  Near  the  door  of  his  house,  and  the
same  thing  was  done  at  the  houses  of  his  captains,  there
were  many  heads  of  his  enemies  whom  he  had  eaten,  which
were  kept  there  as  trophies.  All  the  natives  of  this  country
eat  human  flesh.  There  are  many  large  burial  places  which
must  needs  be  very  rich.  They  had,  in  the  first  place,  a
great  house  or  temple  dedicated  to  the  Devil.  At  the  time
that  the  Captain  Francisco  Cesar  entered  the  valley,  the
natives  rose  in  arms  near  tliat  house  or  tcmjile,  thinking  that.


PKDi;0    DE    CIK/A    I)K    LKON.  47

as  his  followers  were  such  bad  christians  they  might  easily  kill
them.  Thus,  more  than  20,000  Indians  came  out  to  war  with
much  noise  ;  but,  although  the  Spanish  party  numbered  no
moi-e  than  twenty-nine  or  thirty  horse,  they  showed  so  bold
a  front  that  the  Indians  fled  after  the  battle  had  lasted  a
long  time,  leaving  the  field  in  possession  of  the  christians,
and  on  this  occasion  Cesar  certainly  showed  himself  to  be
worthy  of  so  great  a  name.  Those  who  may  write  respect-
ing- Carthagena  will  have  plenty  to  say  of  this  captain ;  but
it  will  not  behove  me  to  write  more  concerning  him  than  is
necessary  for  the  clearness  of  my  narrative.^  If  the  Spaniards
who  entered  this  valley  with  Cesar  were  not  numerous,  they

1  In  15;)7  Don  Pedro  de  Heredia  sent  his  lieutenant,  Don  Francisco
Cesar,  in  search  of  the  wealth  of  the  cacique  Dobaybe,  which  had  been
famous  ever  since  the  days  of  Vasco  Nuilez.  He  set  out  from  San  Sebas-
tian de  Uraba  with  a  hundred  men  and  some  horses,  and  crossed  the
mountains  of  Abibe,  a  barrier  which  had  proved  insurmountable  to  all
previous  explorers  diu-ing  twenty  years.  After  passing  over  these  moun-
tains he  descended  into  a  valley  ruled  by  the  cacique  Nutibara,  with  a
force  reduced  to  sixty-three  men.  The  cacique  attacked  him  with  an
array  of  thi-ee  thousand  Indians,  but  eventually  retreated  on  the  death  of
his  brother.  Nutibara  caused  the  body  to  be  placed  on  his  own  litter,
and  he  was  seen  by  the  Spaniards  to  run  by  the  side  on  foot  for  many
miles,  mourning  his  brother's  loss,  in  the  midst  of  the  retreating  host.
CJesar  fomid  forty  thousand  ducats  worth  of  gold  in  the  tombs,  in  this
valley.

Dm-ing  Cesar's  absence,  the  licentiate  Pedro  Vadillo,  sent  by  the
Audience  of  San  Domingo  to  examine  into  the  government  of  Carthagena,
liad  arrived  there  and  tlrrown  Heredia  into  prison.  On  his  return  the
faithful  lieutenant  went  first  to  the  prison  of  his  unfortunate  master,  and
supphed  him  with  funds  to  conduct  his  defence,  and  then  paid  his  respects
to  Vadillo.  The  harsh  conduct  of  Vadillo  was  disapproved  in  Spain,  and
it  was  resolved  that  a  la^^'yer  should  be  sent  out  to  sit  in  judgment  upon
liim.  The  licentiate,  who  was  a  bold  and  audacious  man,  detennined  to
attempt  some  new  discovery  in  anticipation  of  the  arrival  of  his  judge,  in
hopes  of  performing  a  service  the  importance  of  which  might  wijje  off  all
former  delinquencies.  He,  therefore,  organized  a  force  of  foiu-  hundred
Spaniards  at  San  Sebastian  de  Uraba,  and,  taking  the  gallant  Cesar  as
his  lieutenant,  set  out  early  in  l.i38.  Cieza  de  Leon,  then  nineteen  years
of  age,  accompanied  this  expedition.


■1-8  THE    TRAVELS    OF

certainly  all  became  ricli,  and  got  plenty  of  gold ;  but,
afterwards,  when  we  came,  the  Indians  concealed  their  gold
by  the  advice  of  the  devil,  as  they  themselves  affirm.  Be-
fore these  Indians  gave  battle  to  Captain  Cesar,  they  took
their  gold  to  the  temple  which  they  had  built  (according  to
their  own  account)  in  honour  of  the  devil ;  and,  when  the
Spaniards  came  there,  digging  in  a  certain  part,  they  found
a  vault  with  the  entrance  towards  the  setting  sun,  in  which
there  were  many  vases  full  of  very  fine  ornaments  of  gold,
altogether  more  than  21  quintals,^  worth  upwards  of  40,000
ducats.  They  related  that  further  on  there  was  another
house  that  contained  more  treasure,  and  they  also  stated
that  they  found  others  stiU  more  rich  in  the  valley.  After-
wards, when  we  arrived  with  Vadillo,  we  found  the  burial
places  opened,  and  the  house  or  temple  burnt.  An  Indian
woman,  who  belonged  to  one  Baptista  Zimbron,  said  to  me
that  after  Cesar  returned  to  Carthagena,  aU  the  lords  of
these  valleys  assembled  and  performed  sacrifices,  when  the
devil  appeared  in  the  form  of  a  very  fierce  tiger,  (which  in
their  language  is  called  guaca),  and  said  that  those  christians
had  come  from  the  other  side  of  the  sea,  and  that  soon  many
more  would  arrive  to  occupy  and  take  possession  of  the  land,
and  that  they  must  prepare  for  war.  He  then  disappeared,
and  the  Indians  began  to  prepare,  first  taking  a  great  quan-
tity of  treasure  out  of  the  burial  places.

1  A  quintal  is  ahout  a  hundredweight.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    I)E    LEON.  49


CHAPTER    XII.


of  the  customs  of  those  Indians,  of  their  anus,  and  of  the  ceremonies
they  i)erform  ;  and  who  the  founder  of  the  city  of  Antio<iuia  was.

The  inhabitants  of  these  valleys  are  brave  amongst  them-
selves, and  much  feared  by  their  neighbom-s.  The  men  go
naked  and  barefooted,  and  merely  wear  a  narrow  band
fastened  to  a  girdle  round  the  waist.  Their  hair  is  worn
very  long.  Their  arms  are  darts,  long  lances  of  black
palm,  slings,  and  two-handed  clubs,  called  Macanas}  The
women  wear  a  mantle  from  the  waist  downwards  of
bright  coloured  cotton  cloth.  The  lords,  when  they  marry,
make  a  sort  of  sacrifice  to  their  gods.  They  assemble  in
a  house  to  the  number  of  about  twelve,  where  the  pret-
tiest girls  have  already  been  assembled,  and  choose  those
they  desire  most.  The  son  of  the  chosen  woman  inherits
the  lordship,  and  if  there  is  no  son,  the  son  of  the  lord^s
sister  inherits.  These  people  border  on  a  province  called
Tatabe,  which  is  thickly  inhabited  by  rich  and  warlike
Indians,  whose  customs  are  the  same  as  those  of  their
neighbours.  Their  houses  are  built  over  very  large  trees,
and  are  made  of  many  stout  poles,  each  house  having  more
than  two  hundred  of  them,  and  the  coverings  of  these  great
houses  consist  of  palm  leaves.  Many  Indians  live  in  one
house,  with  their  wives  and  children.  These  nations  extend
to  the  westward  as  far  as  the  South  Sea,  and  to  the  east
they  border  on  the  great  river  of  Darien.  All  their  coimtry
is  mountainous,  very  rugged,  and  fearful  to  pass  through.
Near  this  country  they  say  there  is  that  grandeur  and  wealth
of  the  Dabaybe  which  is  so  celebrated  in  Terra  Firme.-     In

^  This  word,  as  well  as  the  word  huaca^  at  the  end  of  the  last  chapter,
are  Quichua ;  and  Cieza  de  Leon  must,  I  tliink,  have  confused  them  in  his
mind,  in  applying  them  to  the  language  of  the  Indians  of  the  Cauca  valley.

^  The  wealth  of  the  cacique  Dabaybe  is  the  theme  of  many  old  chroni-
clers.    He  seems  to  have  ruled  a  country  near  the  river  Ati-ato,  where


50  THE    TRAVELS    OF

another  part  of  the  country,  over  which  Nutibara  is  lord,
there  are  some  Indians  Hving  in  a  certain  valley  called  Nore,
which  is  very  fertile.  Near  this  valley  is  now  built  the
city  of  Antioquia.  In  ancient  times  there  was  a  large  popu-
lation in  these  vaUeys,  as  we  judged  from  the  edifices  and
burial  places,  of  which  there  are  many  well  worth  seeing,
being  so  large  as  to  appear  like  small  hills.

These  Indians,  though  they  speak  the  same  language  as
those  of  Gruaca,  were  always  engaged  in  wai-s  with  them,  so
that  the  number  of  both  nations  has  greatly  diminished,  for
they  eat  all  those  that  are  captured,  and  place  their  heads
before  the  doors  of  their  houses.  They  go  naked  like  the
others,  except  that  the  chiefs  sometimes  cover  themselves
with  a  long  mantle  of  coloured  cotton.  The  women  are
covered  with  small  mantles  of  the  same  material.  Before
passing  on,  I  wish  to  relate  a  truly  strange  and  wondrous
thing.  The  second  time  that  we  returned  through  these
valleys,  when  the  city  of  Antioquia  was  founded  near  the  hills
which  overhang  them,  I  heard  it  said  that  the  lords  or
caciques  of  the  valley  of  Nore  collected  all  the  women  they
could  find  from  the  land  of  their  enemies,  took  them  home,
and  used  them  as  if  they  had  been  their  own.  If  any
children  were  born,  they  were  reared  with  much  care  until
they  reached  the  age  of  twelve  or  thirteen,  and,  being  then
plump  and  healthy,  these  caciques  ate  them  vnth  much
fippetite,  not  considering  that  they  were  of  their  own  flesh
j'.nd  blood.  In  this  way  they  had  many  women  solely  to
bring  forth  children,  which  were  afterwards  to  be  eaten :
and  this  is  the  greatest  of  all  the  sins  that  these  people
commit.  I  saw  myself  what  occurred  between  one  of  these
chiefs  and  the  licentiate  Juan  de  Vadillo,  who  is  now  in
Spain,  and  if  he  is  asked  respecting  what  I  now  write,  he
will  say  that  it  is  true.    It  is  that,  when  I  and  my  comrades

yold  ornamonts  arc  frequently  found  at  tlio  ]iresent  day.  Vasco  Nuuez
de  Balboa  went  in  search  of  the  Dabayhe.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  61

entered  these  valleys,  a  chief  named  Nabonuco  came  to  us
peaceably,  and  brought  with  him  three  women.  When
night  came  on,  two  of  them  laid  down  on  a  mat,  and  the
other  across  it  to  serve  as  a  pillow.  The  Indian  then  made
his  bed  on  the  bodies  of  these  women,  and  took  another
pretty  woman  by  the  hand.  When  the  licentiate  Juan  de
Vadillo  saw  this  proceeding,  he  asked  the  Indian  chief  why
he  had  brought  that  other  woman  whom  he  held  by  the
hand.  The  chief  rephed,  in  a  gentle  voice,  looking  him  in
the  face,  that  he  was  going  to  eat  her.  On  hearing  this,
YadiUo  was  astonished,  and  said,  "  What  !  are  you  going  to
eat  3'our  own  wife  ?"  The  chief,  raising  his  voice,  repHed,
"  Yes,  truly ;  and  I  will  also  eat  the  child  she  bears  me.^^
This  happened  in  the  valley  of  Nore.  I  have  heard  this
Hcentiate  Juan  de  Vadillo  sometimes  say,  that  he  had  heard
from  some  old  Indians,  that  when  the  natives  of  Nore  go  to
war,  they  make  slaves  of  their  prisoners,  and  marry  them
to  their  own  relations  and  neighbours,  and  that  the  children
thus  born  are  eaten ;  and  that  afterwards,  when  these  slaves
are  too  old  to  have  any  more  children,  they  eat  them  also.
In  truth,  as  these  Indians  have  no  faith,  I  am  not  astonished
at  this.

Owing  to  these  wars,  when  we  discovered  the  valleys,
we  found  so  many  human  heads  at  the  doors  of  the  chiefs'
houses,  that  it  seemed  as  if  each  one  had  been  a  butcher's
shop.  AVhen  one  of  the  chiefs  dies,  the  people  mourn  for
many  days,  cut  oflF  the  hair  of  his  wives,  kiU  those  who
were  most  beloved,  and  raise  a  tomb  the  size  of  a  small  hill,
with  an  opening  towards  the  rising  Sim.  Within  this  great
tomb  they  make  a  large  vault,  and  here  they  put  the  body,
wrapped  ui  cloths,  and  the  gold  and  arms  the  dead  man  had
used  when  ahve.  They  then  take  the  most  beautiful  of  his
wives  and  some  servant  lads,  make  them  drunk  with  wine
made  with  maize,  and  bury  them  ahve  in  that  vault,  in
order  that  the  chief  may  go  down  to  hell  with  companions.

E  2


OZ  THE    TRAVELS    OF

This  city  of  Antioquia  is  situated  in  a  valley  between  the
famous^  notable,  and  rich  rivers  of  Darien  and  of  Santa
Martha,  for  these  valleys  are  between  the  two  Cordilleras.^
The  position  of  the  city  is  very  good,  with  Avide  plains,  near
a  small  river.  Many  other  rivers  flow  near  it,  which  rise  in
the  Cordilleras,  and  many  springs  of  sweet  and  limpid
water.  All  the  rivers  are  full  of  very  fine  gold,  and  their
banks  are  shaded  by  many  kinds  of  fruit-trees.  Antioquia
is  surrounded  by  extensive  provinces,  inhabited  by  Indians,
very  rich  in  gold,  who  use  small  scales  to  weigh  it ;  but
they  are  all  great  eaters  of  human  flesh,  and  when  they  take
each  other  prisoners,  they  show  no  mercy.  One  day  I  saw
in  Antioquia,  when  we  founded  it  in  some  hills  where  Cap-
tain Jorge  Robledo  first  fixed  the  site  (which  was  afterwards

'  The  pro\-ince  of  Antioquia,  in  New  Granada,  inclntling  the  lower
part  of  the  coiu-se  of  the  great  river  Cauca,  is  stiE  the  least  knowni  part
of  Spanisli  South  America.  Even  now  the  account  of  this  region  given
by  Cieza  de  Leon  in  this  and  the  following  chapters,  is  the  best  that  has
been  published.  Humboldt  was  never  there,  nor  is  this  coimtry  described
in  such  modern  books  of  travels  as  those  of  Captain  Coclu'ane,  jNIolUen,
or  Holton.  Some  of  these  travellers,  as  well  as  General  Mosquera  in  his
pamplilet,  give  accounts  of  Cartago,  Cali,  and  other  places  in  the  ujiper
part'  of  the  valley  of  the  Cauca  ;  but  none  of  them  visited  or  described  the
lower  part  of  the  course  of  that  river  nor  the  province  of  Antioquia.
Besides  that  of  Cieza  de  Leon,  I  only  know  of  one  account  of  this  pro-
\ance,  namely  that  MTitten  in  1809  by  Don  Jose  IVIanuel  Restrepo,  the
colleague  of  the  illustrious  Caldas,  which  was  published  in  the  '■'■  Semanario
ih  la  Nueva  Granada^'"  pp.  194-228.  ■*

Restrepo  says  that  the  proA^nce  of  Antioquia,  one  of  the  richest  and
most  fertile  in  New  Granada,  was  entirely  unknown  to  geographers  up  to
tlie  tune  when  he  wrote.  No  astronomical  or  other  observation  had  ever
been  taken  in  it,  and  its  rivers  and  other  featm-es  were  either  not  marked
at  all,  or  put  down  in  false  positions  on  the  maps.  The  first  map  of
Antioquia,  a  copy  of  which  is  m  the  map  room  of  the  Royal  Geographical
Society,  was  made  by  Restrepo  in  1807.  He  triangulated  the  whole  pro-
vince, corrected  his  bearings  by  sun's  azimuths,  took  meridian  altitudes
of  stars  for  his  latitudes,  and  deeply  regretted  that  he  had  no  instruments
to  enable  him  to  get  his  longitudes  by  observing  tlie  eclipses  of  rJupiter's
satellites.  In  the  Semanario  Rcstrejx)  gives  a  long  and  detailed  geo-
graphical description  of  the  valley  of  the  Cauca.


1


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  53

changed  by  Captain  Juan  Cabrera  to  the  site  whore  the  city
now  stands),  while  walking  in  a  field  of  maize,  four  Indians
close  to  me,  who  met  another,  and  killed  him  with  their  clubs.
They  then  drank  his  blood  and  eat  his  entrails  by  mouthfuls.
They  have  no  arrows,  nor  do  they  use  any  other  arms  than
the  above.  I  have  never  seen  any  temple  or  house  of  wor-
ship, except  that  which  was  burnt  in  the  valley  of  Guaca.
They  all  talk  with  the  devil ;  and  in  each  village  there  are
two  or  three  old  men  who  are  adepts  in  the  evil  art  of  con-
versing Avith  him,  and  they  announce  what  he  desires  to  be
done.  They  do  not  entirely  attain  to  a  belief  in  the  immor-
tality of  the  soul.  The  water  and  all  that  the  earth  pro-
duces is  referred  to  nature,  although  they  well  know  there
is  a  Creator,  but  their  belief  is  false,  as  I  shall  relate
presently.

The  city  of  Antioquia  was  founded  and  settled  by  the
Captain  Jorge  Robledo,  in  the  name  of  his  Majesty  the
Emperor  Charles,  King  of  Spain  and  of  the  Indies,  our
lord,  and  by  order  of  the  Adelantado  Don  Sebastian  de
Belalcazar,  his  governor  and  captain-general  of  the  province
of  Popayan,  in  the  year  of  the  nativity  of  our  Lord  1541.
This  city  is  in  7°of  the  equinoctial,^  on  the  north  side.^

1  In  latitude  6°  36'  N.  according  to  Restrepo.

-  It  wUl  be  as  well  here  to  give,  in  a  few  lines,  the  fate  of  YadUlo's
expedition.  He  led  his  men  up  the  left  bank  of  the  Cauca,  suffering
terribly  from  want  of  proper  food,  the  difficulties  of  the  road,  and  the
constant  attacks  of  the  Indians.  At  last  his  gallant  lieutenant  Francisco
Cesar  died.  His  death  filled  the  soldiers  with  consternation,  and  they
clamom-ed  for  a  retreat  to  the  coast.  This,  however,  did  not  at  all  suit
the  views  of  YadUlo,  who  knew  that  uuprisomnent  was  awaiting  liim  at
Carthagena  ;  and,  when  the  discontent  of  his  men  became  formidable,  he
di-ew  his  sword  and  rushed  alone  into  the  woods,  ciying  out  that,  let  who
woiUd  go  back,  he  should  press  on  till  he  met  with  better  fortune.  The
men  were  ashamed  and  followed  him,  and  eventually  reached  Cali.  Here
at  last  Yadillo  was  deserted  by  most  of  his  people,  lie  went  on  nearly  alone
to  Pojxiyan,  was  sent  by  sea  to  Panama,  and  thence  to  Sj)ain  for  tiial.
He  died  in  poverty  at  SeviEe,  before  the  termination  of  his  trial.  Tliis
soldierlike  lawyer  thus  completed  the  discovery  of  the  course  of  the  river


54  THE    TRAVELS    OP


CHAPTER    XIII.

Of  the  description  of  the  i^roviuce  of  Poijayau,  and  the  I'easoii  why  the
natives  of  it  are  so  wild,  and  those  of  Peru  so  gentle.

As  the  captains  from  Peru  discovered  and  settled  in  this
province  of  Popayan,  they  speak  of  it  as  a  part  of,  and  one
with,  that  land  of  Peru  ;  but  I  cannot  consider  it  in  that
light,  because  the  people,  the  land,  and  all  other  things  in
it  are  different.

This  province  was  called  Popayan  from  the  city  of
Popayan,  which  is  in  it.  It  is  200  leagues  long,  little  more
or  less,  and  thirty  or  forty  broad,  in  some  parts  more,  and
in  others,  less.  On  one  side  it  has  the  coast  of  the  South
Sea,  and  some  very  high  rugged  mountains  to  the  west-
ward. On  the  other  side  are  the  main  Cordilleras  of  the
Andes ;  and  between  these  mountains  rise  many  rivers,
some  of  them,  being  very  large,  forming  broad  valleys.
One  of  these,  which  is  the  largest  in  all  this  land,  is  the
great  river  of  Santa  Martha.  The  towns  of  Pasto,  Popayan,
and  Timana  are  included  in  this  government,  and  the  city  of

Cauca.  Though  harsh  and  obstinate,  he  was  a  bi-ave  commander,  and
cheerfully  shared  all  privations  with  his  men.

]\Ieanwhile  the  licentiate  Santa  Cruz,  who  had  arrived  at  Carthagena
with  orders  to  arrest  Vadillo,  sent  two  officers  in  chase  of  him  in  1538.
It  is  of  one  of  these  officers,  named  Juan  Greciano,  that  a  stoiy  is  told  at
p.  42.  Their  troops  met  those  of  the  captain  Don  Jorge  llobledo,  who
had  advanced  down  the  Cauca  from  Cali,  and  jomed  them.

The  expeditions  of  Cesar  and  Vadillo,  the  first  discoverers  of  the  valley
of  the  Cauca,  thus  came  to  an  end  without  a  foot  of  ground  ha\Tng  been
pennanently  conquered.  Tlie  same  fate  did  not  attend  the  next  invader,
Don  Jorge  Kol)ledo.  lie  had  accompanied  Belalcazar  from  Quito  to
Popayan,  and  in  l.")41  set  out  from  CaU  with  one  hundred  and  thirty  men,
for  the  conquest  of  iVntioquia.  Oiu-  young  author,  on  the  breaking  up
of  Vadillo's  expedition,  seems  to  have  joined  that  of  Robledo,  whose
fortunes  he  followed  for  some  tune;  and  he  witnessed  the  conquest  of
many  Indian  tribes,  and  the  foundation  and  settlement  of  several  Spanish
towns  in  this  valley  of  the  ( 'auca.


PEDUO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  55

Call,  near  the  port  of  Buenaventura ;  besides  the  towns  of
Anzerma,  Cartago,  Arma,  Antio(juia,  and  others  which
were  founded  after  I  left  the  country.  In  this  province
some  parts  are  cold  and  others  hot,  some  healthy  and  others
pestilential.  In  some  parts  it  rains  much,  in  others  little.
In  some  parts  the  Indians  are  cannibals,  in  others  not.  On
one  side  it  borders  on  the  new  kingdom  of  New  Granada,
on  the  other,  on  the  kingdom  of  Peru.  To  the  west,  it  is
bounded  by  the  government  of  the  river  of  San  Juan ;  to
the  north,  by  that  of  Carthagena.

Many  have  wondered  how  it  is  that  these  Indians,  having
their  dwellings  in  positions  exposed  to  invasion,  and,  except
in  Pasto,  the  country  being  neither  too  hot  nor  too  cold,
but  in  all  things  convenient  for  conquest,  should  be  so
untameable  and  obstinate  ;  while  those  in  Peru,  with  their
forest-covered  valleys,  snowy  mountains,  and  greater  num-
bers, are  so  gentle  and  submissive.  To  this  I  would  answer
that  the  Indians  of  the  government  of  Popayan  are,  and
always  have  been,  in  a  state  of  confusion,  and  they  have
never  been  ruled  by  a  chief  whom  they  feared.  They  are
lazy  and  idle,  and,  above  all,  they  detest  being  under  sub-
jection to  any  one,  which  is  a  sufficient  cause  for  resisting
the  yoke  of  strangers.  Another  reason  is  to  be  found  in
the  fertility  of  the  soil,  while  in  some  parts  there  are  dense
forests,  cane  brakes,  and  other  fastnesses  ;  so  that  when  the
Spaniards  press  on  these  Indians,  they  burn  their  houses,
which  are  of  wood  and  straw,  and  retreat  for  a  league  or
two,  making  other  dwellings  within  three  or  four  days,  and
sowing  as  much  maize  as  they  require,  which  they  reap
within  four  months.  If  the}^  are  still  pursued,  they  once
more  abandon  their  homes,  and  retreat ;  for  wherever  they
go  they  find  a  fertile  land  ready  to  supply  them  with  its
fruits,  so  that  war  or  peace  are  in  their  own  hands;  and
they  never  want  for  food.  The  Peruvians,  on  the  contrary,
are    docile    because    they  have   more   understanding,    and


56  THE    TRAVELS    OP

because  they  were  subject  to  the  Kings  Yncas,  to  whom  they
paid  tribute,  and  whom  they  always  served.  In  this  condition
they  were  born ;  and  if  any  did  not  wish  to  obey,  they  were
constrained  to  do  so,  for  the  land  of  Peru  is  full  of  mountain-
ous tracts  and  snowy  plains.  If,  therefore,  they  were  to  fly
from  their  homes  to  these  wilds,  they  could  not  hve,  for  the
land  does  not  yield  fruit,  so  that  they  must  serve  in  order  to
live,  which  is  quite  sufiicient  reason  to  resolve  the  doubt.

I  now  propose  to  pass  on,  giving  a  particular  account  of
the  provinces  of  this  government,  and  of  the  Spanish  cities
which  have  been  founded  in  it,  and  stating  who  were  the
founders.  From  the  city  of  Antioquia  there  are  two  roads,
one  to  go  to  the  town  of  Anzerma,  and  the  other  to  go  to
the  city  of  Cartago ;  and  before  I  relate  what  is  worthy  of
notice  on  the  road  to  Cartago  and  Arma,  I  will  give  an
account  of  the  town  of  Anzerma,  and  then  return  to  do  the
same  by  the  other  route.


CHAPTER    XIV.


Containing  an  account  of  the  road  between  the  city  of  Antioquia  and
the  town  of  Aiizerma,  and  of  the  region  which  lies  on  either  side
of  it.

Staeting  from  the  city  of  Antioquia  and  travelling  towards
the  town  of  Anzerma,  one  sees  the  rich  and  famous  hill  of
Buritica,  whence  such  a  vast  quantity  of  gold  has  been  taken
in  times  past.  The  distance  from  Antioquia  to  Anzerma  is
seventy  leagues,  and  the  road  is  very  rough,  with  naked  hills
and  few  trees.  The  greater  part  is  inhabited  by  Indians,  but
their  houses  are  a  long  way  from  the  road.  After  leaving
Antioquia  one  comes  to  a  small  hill  called  Corome,  which  is
in  a  h'ttle  valley  wlicre  tlicre  used  to  be  a  ])opulous  village  of


PEDEO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  57

Indians ;  but  since  the  Spaniards  came  as  conquerors,  the
Indians  have  greatly  diminished  in  numbers.  This  village  had
many  rich  gold  mines,  and  also  streams  whence  they  could  ob-
tain gold.  There  are  few  fruit  trees,  and  the  maize  pelds  small
crops.  The  Indians  are  the  same  as  those  we  had  already
met  with,  in  language  and  customs.  Further  on  there  is  a
settlement  on  the  top  of  a  great  hill,  where  there  used  to  be
a  village  of  large  houses  inhabited  by  miners,  who  became
very  rich  by  collecting  gold.  The  neighbouring  caciques
had  their  houses  here  also,  and  their  servants  obtained  a
great  quantity  of  gold.  From  this  hill  came  the  greater
part  of  the  riches  which  were  found  at  Genu  in  the  burial
places,  and  I  saw  very  fine  gold  in  abundance  taken  from
them,  before  we  went  to  the  discovery  of  Urute  with  the
Captain  Alonzo  de  Caceres.

When  we  discovered  this  village,  with  the  Licentiate  Juan
de  Vadillo,  I  remember  that  a  priest  who  accompanied  the
expedition,  named  Francisco  de  Frias,  found  a  Totuma,
which  is  a  sort  of  large  glazed  earthen  jug,  full  of  earth,
and  he  sorted  very  large  grains  of  gold  out  of  it.  We  also
saw  here  the  sources  whence  they  extract  the  gold,  and  the
tools  with  which  they  work.  When  the  Captain  Jorge  de
Robledo  founded  the  city  of  Antioquia,  he  went  to  see  these
gold  washings,  and  they  washed  a  lump  of  earth,  extracting
a  quantity  of  very  fine  grains  which  one  of  the  miners
affirmed  to  be  gold,  but  another  said  it  was  not  gold,  but
what  we  call  marcasite.  As  we  were  on  a  journey  we  could
not  stop  to  examine  further.  When  the  Spaniards  entered
this  village  the  Indians  burnt  it,  and  they  have  shown  no
desire  to  settle  there  again.  I  recollect  that  a  soldier  named
Toribio,  going  to  seek  for  food,  found  a  stone  in  a  river  as
big  as  a  man's  head,  covered  with  veins  of  gold  which  pene-
trated from  one  side  of  the  stone  to  the  other :  and  when  he
saw  it,  he  put  it  on  his  shoulders  to  carry  it  to  the  camp.  As
he  was  going  up  a  hill,  he  met  a  small  Indian  dog,  and  when


58  THE    TRAVELS    OF

lie  saw  it  he  turned  to  kill  it  for  food,  dropping  tlie  stone
wliicli  rolled  back  again  into  the  river.  Toribio  killed  the
dog,  thinking  it  worth  more  than  gold,  such  was  liis  hunger,
and  thus  the  stone  remained  in  the  river  where  it  was  before.
In  another  river  I  saw  a  negro,  belonging  to  the  Captain
Jorge  Robledo,  wash  large  grains  of  gold  out  of  a  lump  of
earth.  In  fine,  if  the  people  were  more  docile  and  better
conditioned,  and  not  such  eaters  of  human  food :  and  if  our
governors  and  captains  were  more  pious  and  had  not  ill-
treated  them,  this  province  would  be  very  rich.

Near  this  village,  which  is  on  the  top  of  a  hill  called  Buri-
tica,  a  small  river  rises  and  flows  through  a  valley  where  there
is  a  mining  establishment  formed  by  the  same  captain,  Jorge
Robledo,  and  called  Santa  Fe,  which  is  subject  to  the  city  of
Antioquia.  The  mines  have  been  found  to  be  very  rich  near
the  great  river  of  Santa  Martha,  which  flows  close  by  the
estabhshment,  and  during  the  summer  the  Indians  and  Ne-
groes get  much  wealth  from  the  banks,  and  hereafter,  when
there  are  more  Negroes,  they  will  procure  more  gold.  There
is  also  another  settlement  near  the  beforementioned  village,
called  Xundabe,  inhabited  by  Indians  with  the  same  lan-
guage and  customs.  Fm'ther  on  there  is  another  village  called
Caramanta,  the  name  of  the  cacique  or  lord  of  which  is
Cauroma.^

^  The  river  Cauca  is  still  noted  for  its  gold  washings,  and  mines.
Boritica,  the  very  place  alluded  to  by  our  author,  is  also  mentioned  by
Restrepo  as  having  once  yielded  great  treasure,  though  now  exhausted.
The  gold  of  the  Cauca  valley  is  mentioned  as  one  of  the  resources  of  New
Granada  in  a  letter  to  the  Connnittee  of  Spanish  American  Bondholders
{New  Granada  and  its  Internal  Resources,  p.  27.)  In  the  beginning  of
the  present  century,  the  Viccroyalty  of  New  Granada  yielded  20,505  marcs
of  gold,  worth  2,990,000  dollars,  according  to  Hmnboldt.  In  1850  the
produce  of  gold  in  New  Granada  was  worth  £252,407.


PEURO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  59


CHAPTER    XV.

Of  the  customs  of  the  Indians  of  this  land,  and  of  tlie  forests  tluit  must
be  traversed  in  order  to  reach  the  town  of  Anzerma.

The  people  of  this  pro\ance  are  warlike,  and  their  language
is  difi'erent  from  the  others  we  had  met  with.  The  countiy
is  covered  in  all  parts  by  dense  forests,  and  a  broad  river
tlows  through  it,  swelled  by  many  streams  and  fountains
where  they  make  salt — a  ti'uly  \V^3nderful  and  prodigious
fact :  and  of  it,  as  well  as  of  many  other  things  in  this
province,  I  will  speak  presently,  when  the  narrative  affords
a  suitable  place.  There  is  a  small  lake  in  the  valley  where
they  make  very  white  salt.  The  Lords  or  Caciques  and
their  Captains  have  very  large  houses,  and  near  the  doors
there  are  stout  canes  that  grow  in  these  parts,  on  the  tops
of  which  are  placed  many  heads  of  their  enemies.  When
they  go  to  war,  they  take  sharp  knives  made  of  reeds  or
flint,  or  of  the  bark  of  canes,  which  they  can  also  make  very
sharp,  and  with  these  they  cut  off  the  heads  of  their  cap-
tives. To  others  they  give  most  terrible  deaths,  cutting  off
their  limbs,  eating  them,  and  placing  their  heads  on  the
tops  of  canes.  Amongst  these  canes  they  place  certain
boards  on  which  they  carve  the  figure  of  a  devil,  very
fierce,  and  in  human  form,  "with  other  idols  and  figures  of
cats  which  they  worship.  When  they  requii-e  water  or  sun-
shine for  their  crops,  they  seek  aid  from  these  idols.  Those
who  are  set  apart  for  that  purpose  talk  with  the  devil,  and  are
great  sorcerers  and  magicians.  They  believe  in  and  watch
for  signs  and  prodigies,  and  presei-ve  those  superstitions
which  the  devil  suggests  :  such  is  the  power  he  has  over
these  Indians — God  our  Lord  permitting  it  for  their  sins,  or
for  some  other  reason  known  to  himself.  They  said,  when
we  first  discovered  the  country  with  the  Licentiate  Juan  de
Vadillo,  that  their  chief,  named  Cauroma,  had  many  idols  of


60  THE    TRAVELS    OF

veiy  fine  gold  :  and  they  say  that  there  is  such  abundance  of
that  metalj  that  the  chief  can  get  as  much  as  he  hkes  from  a
certain  river.

These  Indians  are  great  butchers  in  the  matter  of  eating
human  flesh.  Near  the  doors  of  their  houses  there  are  small
open  spaces  where  they  have  their  places  of  sepulture,  accord-
ing to  the  custom  of  their  country,  consisting  of  very  deep
vaults,  with  their  openings  facing  the  east.  When  a  chief
dies,  they  place  him  in  one  of  these  vaults  with  much
mourning,  putting  his  arms  and  clothes,  the  gold  he  pos-
sessed, and  some  food,  with  the  body.  From  this  circum-
stance we  conjecture  that  the  Indians  certainly  gave  some
credit  to  the  thought  that  the  soul  leaves  the  body.

The  country  is  well  sujaplied  with  provisions,  and  fertile,
yielding  crops  of  maize  and  edible  roots.  There  are  scarcely
any  fruit  trees.

To  the  eastward  of  this  province  there  is  another  called
Cartama,  which  is  the  limit  of  the  discoveries  of  Sebastian
de  Belalcazar.  The  Indians  are  rich  in  gold,  have  small
houses,  and  all  go  naked  and  barefooted,  without  anything
more  than  a  small  band,  with  which  they  cover  their  shame.
The  women  wear  small  mantles  of  cotton  from  the  waist
downwards,  but  are  otherwise  uncovered.

Beyond  the  pro\ance  of  Cartama  there  is  a  forest,  extend-
ing more  than  seven  leagues,  and  very  dense  ;  and  here  we
sufiered  much  from  hunger  and  cold  when  we  went  with
Vadillo  ;  and  I  may  truly  affirm  that  in  all  my  life  I  never
suffered  such  hunger  as  during  that  journey,  although  I  have
sei'ved  in  some  expeditions  of  discovery  in  which  we  under-
went great  hardships.  We  found  om'selves  in  so  sad  a  plight
in  these  dense  forests,  where  the  sun  could  not  penetrate,
without  roads,  or  guides,  nor  any  one  to  tell  us  whether  we
were  far  from  or  near  any  inhabited  part,  that  we  were
inclined  to  return  to  Carthagena.  It  was  a  great  thing  for
us  to  find  that  wood  which  I  described  as  g'rowinof  in  the


i


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  61

mountains  of  Abibc,  for  with  it  we  could  make  a  fire,  as  it
will  always  burn  whenever  it  is  required  to  do  so.  By  the
help  of  God,  and  with  the  aid  of  our  own  arms,  with  which
we  forced  a  way,  we  got  through  these  forests,  in  which  we
left  several  Spaniards  dead  from  hunger,  and  many  horses.
Beyond,  there  is  a  small  valley  clear  of  trees,  and  a  little
farther  on  we  came  to  a  large  and  beautiful  valley,  very-
populous,  with  the  houses  all  new,  and  close  to  each  other.
Some  of  them  were  very  large,  and  the  fields  were  full  of
maize  crops  and  edible  roots.  Afterwards,  the  inhabitants
of  this  valley  left  their  old  home,  fleeing  from  the  cruelties
of  the  Spaniards,  and  took  refuge  in  some  wild  and  lofty
mountains,  which  overhang  the  valley  called  Cima.  Two
leagues  and  a  half  beyond  this  valley,  there  is  another  small
one,  formed  by  a  spur  which  runs  out  from  the  Cordillera ;
and  here  the  town  of  Anzerma  is  founded,  which  was  first
called  the  city  of  Santa  Ana  de  los  Cavalleros.  It  is  built
between  two  small  rivers,  on  a  rising  ground,  which  is
covered  with  beautiful  trees,  and  fruit  trees  both  of  Europe
and  of  the  country,  and  excellent  crops  of  beans.  The  city
overlooks  all  the  district,  being  the  highest  part  of  the
rising  ground,  and  no  people  can  approach  without  being
first  seen  from  the  town.  On  all  sides  it  is  surrounded  by
great  villages,  ruled  over  by  many  caciques  or  lords,  who
are  all  friendly  to  each  other.  The  villages  are  close  toge-
ther, and  the  houses  are  divided  from  each  other  by  short
spaces.


62  THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    XVI.


Of  the  customs  of  the  Caciques  and  Indians  in  the  neighbourhood  of
the  town  of  Anzerma,  of  the  founding  of  that  town,  and  who  its
founder  was.

The  place  on  wliich  tlie  town  of  Anzerma  is  built  is  called
by  the  natives  Umbra,  and  when  the  Adelantado  Sebastian
de  Belalcazar  entered  this  province,  as  he  had  no  inter-
preter, he  could  understand  none  of  its  secrets.  He  heard
the  Indians,  when  they  saw  salt,  call  it  Anzer,  and  this  is
true,  for  among  them  it  has  no  other  namej  and  this  is
the  reason  that  from  that  time,  in  speaking  of  the  place,
they  have  called  it  Anzerma,  and  have  given  this  name  to
the  town.  Four  leagues  to  the  westward,  there  is  a  village
which,  though  not  very  large,  is  inhabited  by  many  Indians.
as  it  has  large  houses  and  broad  lands.  In  the  road  to  it
there  is  a  small  river,  and  it  is  a  league  from  the  great  and
rich  river  of  Santa  Martha.  These  Indians  had  for  their
captain  and  chief  a  well-disposed  man  named  Ciricha.  He
has,  or  had  when  I  saw  the  place,  a  very  large  house  at  the
entrance  of  the  village,  and  many  others  in  different  parts.
Near  the  large  house  there  is  a  small  court  sm-rounded  by
the  canes  I  have  abeady  described  as  having  seen  in  Cara-
manta,  and  on  the  top  of  each  was  the  head  of  an  Indian  who
had  been  eaten.  The  chief  had  many  wives.  These  Indians
have  the  same  language  and  customs  as  those  of  Caramanta,
but  are  even  greater  butchers  and  eaters  of  hmnan  flesh.

That  the  difficulties  of  the  discovery  of  this  coimtry  may
be  known,  I  desire  to  relate  what  happened  in  this  village,
at  the  time  when  we  entered  it  with  the  licentiate  Juan  de
Vadillo.  As  the  stores  of  maize  had  been  carried  off,  we
neither  found  that  nor  anything  else  to  eat,  and  it  was  more
than  a  year  since  wc  had  eaten  meat,  except  that  of  the
horses  that  had  died,  and  of  a  few  dogs.     We  even  had  no


PEDRO    1)K    CIKZA    DK    F.KON.  63

salt,  such  was  the  misery  we  endured.  At  this  time  twenty-
five  or  thirty  soldiers  set  out  to  procure,  or,  to  speak  more
plainl}^,  to  rob  whatever  they  could  find,  and,  near  the  great
river  they  came  upon  some  people  who  fled,  for  fear  of  being
seen  and  taken  prisoners  by  us.  Here  the  soldiers  found  a
great  pot  full  of  cooked  flesh,  and  they  were  so  hungry  that
they  thought  of  nothing  but  eating  it,  supposing  it  was  the
flesh  of  creatures  called  cnis,^  because  some  came  out  of  the
pot.  As  soon  as  they  had  well  eaten,  one  of  them  took  out
of  the  pot  a  hand  with  its  fingers  and  nails,  and  they  also
found  pieces  of  the  feet  and  other  parts  of  a  man.  When
the  Spaniards  saw  these  things,  they  were  troubled  at
having  eaten  of  such  meat,  and  the  sight  of  the  fingers  and
hands  caused  them  much  sorrow ;  but  they  returned  to  the
camp,  from  which  they  had  set  out  half  dead  with  hunger.

Many  small  rivers  rise  in  the  mountains  near  tliis  village,
where  much  very  rich  gold  has  been  taken  by  these  Indians
and  by  Negroes.  These  Indians  are  friends  and  allies  of  those
of  Caramanta,  but  they  were  always  at  war  with  their  other
neighbours.  There  is  a  strong  position  in  the  village,  which
they  garrison  in  time  of  war.  They  go  naked  and  bare-
footed, and  the  women  wear  small  mantles,  and  are  good
looking — some  of  them  beautiful.  Further  on  is  the  district
of  Sopia,  and  between  these  two  places  there  flows  a  river
rich  in  gold,  where  the  Spaniards  have  estabhshed  some
farms.  The  people  of  the  last  named  district  also  go  naked.
The  houses  are  like  those  of  other  Indians,  and  within  them
there  are  great  sepulchres  where  they  bury  their  dead.  They
have  no  idols  nor  house  of  worship  that  we  saw.  They  talk
with  the  devil.     They  marry  their  nieces,  and  sometimes

1  Citi,  according  to  Velasco.  is  the  smallest  kind  of  rabbit  in  the  country.
From  most  ancient  times  the  Indians  have  bred  great  quantities  of  these
Cnis  or  Ccot/s  (guinea  pigs)  in  their  houses.  He  describes  them  as  under
five  or  six  dedos,  but  very  broad  and  thick,  with  roimd  ears,  great  variety
in  coloiu-,  and  very  fat  delicate  flesh.     Hist,  de  Quito,  i,  p.  89.


64  THE    TRAVELS    OF

their  sisters,  and  the  sou  of  the  principal  wife  inherits  the
lordship ;  for  all  these  Indians,  if  they  are  chiefs,  have  many
wives.  If  a  chief  has  no  son,  the  son  of  his  sister  succeeds.
This  district  borders  on  the  province  of  Cartama,  in  going
to  which  the  great  river  is  crossed.  On  the  other  side  is
the  province  of  Pozo,  of  which  we  shaU  have  to  treat  further
on.  To  the  east  of  Anzerma  there  are  other  large  villages,
full  of  fruit  gardens  and  cultivated  fields,  whose  chiefs  are
friendly.  They  are  aU  allies,  although  at  times  there  is
enmity  and  war  amongst  them.  They  are  not  such  butchers
and  eaters  of  human  flesh  as  the  others  whom  I  have  de-
scribed. The  caciques  are  very  rich,  and  before  the  Span-
iards came,  they  went  about  in  hammocks  and  htters.  They
have  many  wives,  who,  considering  that  they  are  Indians,
are  beautiful.  They  wear  handsome  coloured  mantles  of
cotton.

The  men  go  naked,  but  the  principal  chiefs  cover  them-
selves with  a  large  mantle.  The  women  are  dressed  as  I
have  before  said,  they  comb  out  their  hair,  and  wear  very
beautiful  necklaces  made  of  pieces  of  fine  gold,  and  earrings.
They  also  sKt  their  nostrils  and  insert  pieces  of  gold  in  the
opening,  some  large  and  others  small.  The  chiefs  had  many
drinking  cups  of  gold,  and  mantles,  both  for  themselves  and
their  wives,  garnished  with  pieces  of  gold,  some  round  and
others  in  the  shape  of  stars.  They  caU  the  devil  Xisarama,
and  the  Spaniards  Tamaraca.  Some  of  them  are  great
sorcerers  and  herb  doctors.  Thc^r  daughters  are  married
after  they  have  ceased  to  be  virgins,  and  they  do  not  hold
virginity  to  be  a  thing  of  any  estimation.  When  they  marry
they  use  no  kind  of  ceremony.  When  their  chiefs  die  in  a
part  of  this  province  called  Tauya,  they  place  their  bodies  in
hammocks  and  light  fires  all  round.  Holes  are  dug  beneath,
into  which  the  melted  fat  drops,  and  when  the  body  is  half
burnt,  the  relations  come  and  make  great  lamentations,
di-inking  their  wine,   and  reciting  their  songs  of  praise  to


PEDRO    OK    CIK/.A    DK    I.KON.  65

their  gods  according  to  their  custom,  and  as  they  have  been
taught  by  their  elders.  This  being  done,  they  Avrap  the
bodies  in  shrouds,  and  keep  them  for  several  years  unin-
terred.  When  they  are  thoroughly  dried  up,  they  put  them
into  sepulchres  which  they  make  in  their  houses.  In  the
other  provinces,  when  a  chief  dies,  they  make  a  very  deep
sepulchre  in  the  lofty  parts  of  the  mountains,  and,  after
much  lamentation,  they  put  the  body  in  it,  wrapped  in  many
rich  cloths,  with  arms  on  one  side  and  plenty  of  food  on  the
other,  great  jars  of  wine,  plumes,  and  gold  ornaments.  At
his  feet  they  bury  some  of  his  most  beloved  and  beautiful
women  ahve ;  holding  it  for  certain  that  he  will  come  to  life,
and  make  use  of  what  they  have  placed  round  him.

These  Indians  use  darts,  lances,  and  clubs,  some  of  black
palm  wood,  and  others  of  a  white  wood  which  grows  in
those  parts.  We  did  not  see  any  house  of  worship  in  their
country.  When  they  talk  with  the  devil,  they  say  that  it
becomes  dark,  and  that  one  who  is  chosen  from  the  rest
speaks  for  the  others.  The  country,  where  these  people  have
their  villages,  consists  of  very  lofty  mountains  without  any
trees.  To  the  westward  there  is  a  vast  forest  called  Cima,
and  further  on,  towards  the  South  Sea,  there  are  many
Indians  and  large  villages  ;  and  it  seems  certain  that  the
great  river  of  Darien^  rises  there.

This  town  of  Anzerma  was  founded  by  the  captain  Jorge
Eobledo  in  the  name  of  his  Majesty,  the  Adelantado  Don
Francisco  Pizarro  being  governor  and  captain-general  of  all
these  provinces  :  although  it  is  true  that  Lorenzo  de  Aldana,
the  lieutenant-general  for  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  in  the  city
of  Cali,  named  the  municipahty,  and  appointed  as  alcaldes
Suer  de  Nava  and  Martin  de  Amoroto,  and  as  alguazil-
mayor  Ruy  Yenegas,  and  sent  Robledo  to  people  this  city,
now  called  a  town,  ordering  him  to  call  it  Santa  Anna  de  los
Caballeros.  Thus  some  credit  for  the  foundation  of  Anzerma
may,  for  these  reasons,  be  given  to  Lorenzo  de  Aldana.
1  Tlio  Atrato.  F


THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    XVII.

Concerning  the  provinces  and  towns  between  the  city  of  Antiochia  ami
the  town  of  Arma  ;  and  of  the  customs  of  the  natives.

Here  I  will  cease  from  following  tlie  road  whicli  I  had  cora-
menced,  and,  returning  to  tlie  city  of  Antiochia,  I  will  give
an  account  of  the  road  which  leads  thence  to  the  town  of
Arma,  and  even  as  far  as  the  city  of  Cartage.  After  setting
out  from  the  city  of  Antiochia  to  go  to  the  town  of  Arma,
the  great  river  of  Santa  Martha  is  reached,  a  joui-ney  of
twelve  leagues.^  To  cross  the  river  there  is  a  boat,  or  at
least  there  is  no  want  of  materials  for  making  one.  There
are  few  Indians  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  and  the  villages
are  small,  for  the  inhabitants  have  retired  to  a  distance  from
the  road.  After  travelling  for  some  leagues  a  village  is
reached,  which  used  to  be  very  large.  It  was  called  the
"  Pueblo  llano,"  but  when  the  Spaniards  entered  the  coun-
try, the  natives  fled  to  certain  mountains  which  were  little
more  than  two  leagues  distant.  The  Indians  are  small,  and
they  use  arrows,  which  must  have  been  brought  from  the
other  side  of  the  Andes,  for  the  natives  of  those  parts  have
them.  They  are  great  traders,  and  their  principal  article  of
trade  is  salt.  They  go  naked,  the  women  wearing  very
small  cloths  from  the  belly  to  the  thighs.  They  are  rich  in
gold,  and  their  rivers  contain  abundance  of  that  metal.
Their  habits  and  customs  are  like  those  of  the  neighbouring
tribes.  Beyond  this  village  there  is  another  called  Mugia,
where  there  is  a  great  quantity  of  salt,  and  many  traders
carry  it  over  the  mountains  and  obtain  in  exchange  great
sums  of  gold,  cotton  cloths,  and  other  things  which  they

1  Cieza  de  Leon  calls  the  Cauca,  the  river  of  Santa  INIartha.  In  tliis
part  of  its  course  it  flows  between  two  chains  of  mountains,  wliich  only
leave  a  space  of  one  hundred  or  two  hundred  yards  between  them  and  tlie
river.  The  stream  is  full  of  hu^e  blocks  of  rock  causing  numerous  raj)ids,
and  impeding  navigation.


PEDRO    DE    CIE'/A    1)1':    LEON.  67

require.  Further  on  I  shall  treat  of  this  salt,  how  it  is  ob-
tained, and  how  they  carry  it.

Beyond  ]\Iugia,  towards  the  east,  is  the  valley  of  Aburra,
to  go  to  which  it  is  necessary  to  cross  the  Andes,  which  is
done  very  easily  as  there  is  little  forest,  and  the  journey  only
takes  one  day.  We  discovered  this  valley  with  captain
Jorge  Robledo,  but  we  only  saw  a  few  small  villages,  dif-
ferent from  those  we  had  already  passed,  and  not  so  rich.
AVTien  we  entered  this  valley  of  Aburra,  the  detestation  we
conceived  for  the  natives  was  such  that  we  hung  them  and
their  women  to  the  boughs  of  trees  by  their  hair,  and,  amidst
grievous  moans,  we  left  their  bodies  there,  while  their  souls
went  down  to  hell.  The  land  is  very  fertile  in  this  valley  of
Aburra,  and  several  rivers  flow  through  it.  Further  on
there  is  a  very  large  ancient  road,  and  others  by  which  the
people  communicate  with  those  to  the  eastward,  which  are
numerous  and  great,  but  we  heard  of  them  by  common
report,  and  did  not  know  them  from  personal  inspection.
We  next  arrived  at  a  village  called  Cenasura,  which  is  rich,
and  it  is  believed  that  there  are  here  some  very  rich  burial
places.  The  Indians  are  fine  men ;  they  go  naked  like  the
others,  and  resemble  them  in  their  habits.  At  the  village  of
Blanco,  some  distance  beyond  Cenasura,  we  left  the  great
river  on  the  right  hand,  in  order  to  go  to  the  town  of  Arma.

There  are  many  other  rivers  on  this  route,  which  I  do
not  enumerate,  because  they  have  not  all  got  names.  Near
Cenasura  there  is  a  river  flowing  over  a  very  stony  bed,
and  nearly  a  day^s  journey  along  its  banks,  on  the  left  hand,
there  is  a  large  and  very  populous  district  concerning  which
I  shall  presently  write.  These  districts  were  at  first  placed
under  the  city  of  Cartago  (the  great  river  forming  the
boundary)  by  Captain  Jorge  Robledo,  who  discovered
them ;  but  as  the  Indians  were  so  untameable,  and  opposed
to  service  at  Cartago,  the  adelantado  Belalcazar,  governor
for  his  IMajesty,  oi'dered  that  these  villages  should  be  sepa-

f2


68  THE    TRAVELS    OF

rated  from  Cartago,  and  tliat  a  town  of  Spaniards  should  be
founded  in  the  midst  of  them.  This  was  done,  and  the
town  was  formed  by  Miguel  Muiioz,  in  the  name  of  his
Majesty,  the  adelantado  Don  Sebastian  de  Belalcazar  being-
governor  of  the  province,  in  the  year  1542.  It  was  first
founded  on  a  hill  at  the  entrance  of  the  province  of  Arma,
but  the  war  which  the  natives  carried  on  against  the
Spaniards  was  so  fierce  that,  for  this  reason,  and  because
there  was  little  room  to  sow  crops  and  establish  farms,  it
was  removed  a  little  more  than  two  leagues  nearer  the
great  river.  The  site  is  twenty-three  leagues  from  the  city
of  Cartago,  twelve  from  the  town  of  Anzerma,  and  one  from
the  great  river,  on  a  plain  between  two  small  rivers,  and
is  surrounded  by  great  palm  trees,  which  are  different  from
those  I  have  already  described,  though  more  useful,  for  very
savoury  jpalmitos  are  taken  from  them,  and  their  fruit  is
also  savoury,  for  when  it  is  broken  with  stones,  milk  flows
out,  and  they  even  make  a  kind  of  cream  and  butter  from  it,
which  they  use  for  fighting  lamps. ^  I  have  seen  that  which
I  now  relate,  and  it  all  comes  within  my  own  experience.
The  site  of  this  town  is  considered  rather  unhealthy,  but
the  land  is  very  fertile.  AfciHec/a  of  maize  yields  a  hundred-
fold and  more,  and  they  sow  the  maize  twice  a  year,  and
other  produce  yields  in  the  same  proportion.  Up  to  the
present  time  no  wheat  has  been  sown,  so  that  I  cannot
affirm  whether  it  will  yield  a  harvest  or  not.  The  mines  are
richer  on  the  great  river,  which  is  a  league  from  this  town,
than  in  other  parts,  for  if  Negroes  are  set  to  work,  a  day
will  not  pass  without  each  man  giving  two  or  three  ducats
to  his  master.  As  time  wears  on,  this  will  come  to  be  among
the  richest  districts  of  the  Indies.

The  repurfiiiiieiito'  of  Indians  which  I   received  for  my

'  Prol);il)ly  tlu"  Veroxijlon  andicola.

"  A  repartimiento  was  a  grant  of   Indians,  who  were  bound  to  pay
tribute  and  to  render  personal  service.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  09

services  was  in  the  neig-libourliood  of  this  city.  I  could
wish  to  use  my  pen  at  more  length  on  this  subject  (but  the
state  of  affairs  will  not  permit  it),  principally  because  many
of  my  companions,  the  discoverers  and  conquerors  who  set
out  with  me  from  Carthagena,  are  without  Indians,  or  only
possess  those  which  they  have  had  to  pay  for,  which  is
certainly  no  small  grievance.


CHAPTER    XVIII.

Of  the  province  of  Arma,  of  the  customs  of  the  natives,  and  of  other
notable  things.

This  province  of  Arma,  whence  the  town  took  its  name,  is
very  large  and  populous,  and  the  I'ichest  in  this  part  of  the
country;  it  contains  twenty  thousand  Indians  capable  of
bearing  arms,  not  counting  women  and  children,  or  did  so
when  I  wrote  this,  which  was  at  the  time  when  Christian
Spaniards  first  entered  the  country.  Their  houses  are  large
and  round,  made  of  long  poles  and  beams,  which  curve
upwards  from  the  ground,  and  the  roof  is  of  straw.  In
these  houses  there  are  several  divisions,  partitioned  off  by
reeds,  and  many  people  live  in  them.  The  province  is  about
ten  leagues  long,  by  six  or  seven  broad,  a  little  more  or
less,  broken  up  into  rugged  mountain  ranges  without  forest.
The  valleys  are  like  orchards,  being  full  of  all  kinds  of
fruit  trees,  such  as  are  found  in  this  country,  besides  a
very  delicious  fruit  of  a  brown  colour,  csdled  pitahaija.^  This
fruit  has  the  pecuharity  of  making  the  urine  of  those  who
eat  it,  even  though  it  be  only  one,  of  the  colour  of  blood.
In  the  hills  there  is  another  fruit  which  I  take  to  be  very
curious,  called  vuillas.^  It  is  small,  and  has  a  pleasant  smell.

'  Or  Pitajaya  {Cereus  Pitajaya,  De  Cand.),  a  cactus  used  for  making
fences.  -    Vanilla  ?


70  THE    TRAVELS    OF

Some  rivers  rise  in  tlie  mountains,  and  one  of  tliem,
called  the  river  of  Arma,  is  troublesome  to  cross  in  tlie
winter.  The  others  are  not  large,  but,  from  their  appear-
ance I  certainly  think  that  in  time  they  will  get  as  much
gold  from  them  as  they  do  iron  out  of  Biscay.  Those  who
may  read  this,  and  have,  hke  me,  visited  the  country,  will
not  consider  this  statement  fabulous.  The  Indians  have
their  workshops  on  the  banks  of  the  rivers,  and  they  are
continually  waging  cruel  wars  against  each  other.  The
languages  of  the  Indians  differ  in  many  parts,  and  almost
in  every  hamlet  there  is  a  distinct  language.  They  were,
and  are,  marvellously  rich  in  gold,  and  if  these  natives  of
the  province  of  Arma  were  as  intelligent  and  docile  as  those
of  Peru,  I  will  be  bound  to  say  that  their  mines  would  not
fail  to  yield  more  than  500,000  fesos  de  oro.  They  have,  or
once  had,  many  rich  ornaments  of  this  metal,  which  is  so
fine  as  to  reach  to  at  least  nineteen  c£uilates}  When  they
go  to  war  they  wear  crowns  with  beautiful  plumes,  with
plates  on  their  breasts,  armlets,  and  many  other  ornaments.

When  we  discovered  them,  the  first  time  we  entered  the
province  with  the  captain  Jorge  Robledo,  I  remember
we  saw  armed  Indians  covered  with  gold  from  head  to  foot,
and  the  place  where  we  first  saw  them  is  called  to  this  day
"  Loma  de  los  Armados."  Their  houses  are  built  on  the
level  places  at  the  foot  of  the  hills,  which  are  very  rugged.
They  have  large  fortresses  built  of  stout  canes  pulled  up  by
the  roots,  which  are  placed  in  rows  by  twenties,  like  a
sti-eet,  and  in  the  centre  they  have,  or  had,  when  I  saw  the
place,  a  high  platform,  well  built  of  the  same  canes,  with
steps  up  to  it,  where  they  ofiered  sacrifices.

•  Or  carats,  a  small  weight  used  for  gold  and  silver.  It  was  the  twenty-
fourth  part  of  a  marc,  so  that  nineteen  carats  would  mean  nineteen  parts
of  pure  gold  and  five  of  alloy,  in  the  marc.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  71


CHAPTER    XIX.

The  sacrifices  offered  up  by  these  Indians,  and  what  great  butchers  they
are  in  the  matter  of  eating  human  flesh.

The  arms  used  by  these  Indians  are  darts,  lances,  slings,
and  blow-pipes.  They  are  great  lovers  of  noise,  and  when
they  go  to  war  they  take  drums,  flutes,  and  other  instru-
ments. They  are  deceitful  and  word  breakers,  nor  will
they  keep  the  peace  they  have  promised.  Of  the  war  they
waged  with  the  Spaniards  I  will  treat  in  its  proper  place.
Veiy  great  is  the  dominion  that  the  devil,  enemy  of  the
human  race,  is  allowed  by  God  to  have  over  this  people,  by
reason  of  their  sins,  and  often  is  he  visibly  amongst  them.
On  the  above-mentioned  platform  they  have  many  cords
fastened  in  the  manner  of  a  net,  each  forty  hrazas  long,  and
we  made  use  of  these  ropes  for  sandals.  On  the  top  of  the
platform  they  fastened  the  Indians  whom  they  took  in  war
by  the  shoulders,  and  cut  out  their  hearts,  which  they
ofiered  to  their  gods  or  to  the  devil,  in  whose  honour  they
made  these  sacrifices.  Presently,  without  any  long  delay,
they  eat  those  whom  they  had  thus  killed.  I  saw  no  house
of  worship,  but  in  the  houses  of  the  chiefs  there  were
chambers  well  covered  with  mats  and  much  ornamented.
I  saw  one  of  these  chapels  in  Paucora,  as  wiU  be  mentioned
further  on.  In  the  furthest  end  of  it  there  was  a  recess
containing  many  clay  vessels  for  incense,  in  which  they
burnt  certain  small  herbs  instead  of  incense.  I  saw  these
plants  in  the  land  of  a  lord  of  this  province  named  Yayo,
and  they  were  so  small  as  hardly  to  rise  above  the  ground ;
some  had  a  very  black,  and  others  a  white  flower;  their
smell  resembled  that  of  verbena.  These,  with  other  resins,
they  burnt  before  their  idols.  After  they  have  performed
these  and  other  superstitious  rites,  the  devil  comes.  They
relate  that  he  appears  in  the  form  of  an  Indian,  with  very


rL  THE    TRAVELS    OF

bright  eyes,  and  gives  replies  to  the  priests  or  ministers,  to
questions  they  ask  him,  concerning  what  they  wish  to  know.
Up  to  this  time  there  are  no  clergymen  or  friars  in  any  of
these  provinces,  for  the  Indians  are  so  evil  disposed,  and
such  butchers,  that  many  of  them  have  eaten  the  knights
who  possessed  eiicomiendas^  amongst  them;  yet,  when  they
go  to  the  Spanish  settlements,  they  put  aside  their  Gentile
customs  and  vanities,  and  conform  to  our  religion,  receiving
the  water  of  baptism.  And,  God  permitting,  some  chiefs  of
the  provinces  of  this  government  have  turned  Christians,
and  abhor  the  devil,  eschewing  their  former  evil  works.

The  people  of  this  province  of  Arma  are  of  middle  height,
and  all  dark  coloured,  insomuch  that  in  colour  all  the  Indian
men  and  women  of  these  parts  (where  there  is  such  a
multitude  of  people  as  scarcely  to  be  numbered,  and  so  wide
an  extent  of  country)  appear  as  if  they  were  all  children  of
one  father  and  mother.  The  women  of  these  Indians  are
the  ughest  and  dirtiest  that  I  have  seen  in  all  these  parts.
Both  men  and  women  go  naked,  except  that,  to  conceal
their  shame,  they  put  a  bit  of  cloth  in  front,  a  ^almo  broad,
and  a  pahno  and  a  half  long,  with  which  they  cover  them-
selves in  front ;  for  the  rest  they  go  quite  naked.  Some  of
the  women  go  shorn,  as  do  their  husbands.

The  fruits  and  other  provisions  they  have  are  maize  and

»  Encomiendas  were  estates  gTanted  to  the  Spanish  conquerors,  the
inhabitants  of  which  were  bound  to  pay  tribute  and  to  render  personal
service  to  the  holders  of  the  grants.  Pizarro  was  empowered  to  grant
encomiendas  to  his  followere  in  1529,  and  in  15;36  these  grants  were
extended  to  two  Hves ;  but  by  the  "  Xew  Laws,"  enacted  in  1542,  the
encomiendm  were  to  pass  immediately  to  the  crown  after  the  death  of
the  actual  holders,  and  a  fixed  smu  was  to  be  settled  as  tribute  to  be  paid
by  the  Indians.  All  forced  laboiu'  was  also  absolutely  forbidden.  The
conquerors  were  furious  at  the  promulgation  of  these  humane  laws,  and,
it  being  considered  unsafe  to  enforce  them,  they  were  revoked  in  1545.
The  president  Gasca  redistributed  the  encomiendas  in  Peru  in  1550,  and
they  were  gi-anted  for  three  lives  in  1629.  For  further  information  on
this  subject  see  my  Travels  in  Peru  and  India,  chap.  viii.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  73

yucas,^  besides  many  other  nourishing  roots,  some  guaijavnn,^
2)altas,^  and  pahns  of  the  Pixiuaes.  The  chiefs  marry  those
women  they  most  fancy,  keeping  one  of  them  as  the  prin-
cipal wife.  The  other  Indians  marry  daughters  and  sisters
of  their  neighbours  without  any  order,  and  few  find  their
wives  to  be  virgins.  The  chiefs  may  have  many  wives,
other  men  have  one,  two,  or  three,  according  to  their  means.
WTien  they  die,  the  chiefs  are  buried  in  their  houses,  or  on
the  heights  of  the  mountains  with  the  usual  ceremonies
and  mourning.  The  sons  succeed  their  fathers  in  the
chieftainship,  and  in  their  houses  and  lands.  Failing  a  son,
the  heir  is  the  son  of  the  sister,  and  not  of  the  brother.
Further  on  I  will  relate  the  reason  of  this  custom  of  the
nephew  who  is  son  of  the  sister,  and  not  he  who  is  son  of
the  brother,  inheriting,  in  the  greater  part  of  these  pro-
vinces, according  to  what  I  have  heard  from  many  of  the
natives.  The  Indians  are  so  fond  of  eating  human  flesh,
that  they  have  been  seen  to  take  women  on  the  point  of
bringing  forth,  quickly  open  their  bellies  with  knives  of
stone  or  cane,  and  take  out  the  child ;  then,  having  made  a
great  fire,  they  toast  and  eat  it,  together  with  the  mother,
and  all  is  done  with  such  rapidity  that  it  is  a  thing  to
marvel  at.  For  these  sins,  and  for  others  that  these  Indians
commit.  Divine  Providence  has  ordained  that,  though  they
are  so  widely  separated  from  our  region  of  Spain  as  to  make
it  appear  almost  impossible  to  go  from  the  one  place  to  the
other,  yet  that  roads  and  ways  over  the  mighty  ocean  should
be  opened  to  these  lands,  where  only  ten  or  fifteen  Chris-
tians together  conquer  and  subdue  one  thousand  to  ten  thou-
sand of  these  Indians.  I  do  not  believe,  however,  that  this
arises  from  oui'  merits,  for  we  are  indeed  great  sinners ;  but
because  Grod  chooses  to  punish  these  people  by  our  means,
and  therefore  permits  these  events  to  happen  as  they  do.

'  Jatropha  Manikot,  Lin.,  an  excellent  edible  root.

^  Psidium  Giuiijavi  Radrli.  ^  Persea  gmtissima.  IX.V.


74  THE    TRAVELS    OF

But  to  return  to  our  narrative :  these  Indians  liave  no
belief,  so  far  as  I  can  make  out^  nor  do  they  understand
more  of  God's  will  than  the  devil  tells  them.  The  command
which  the  chiefs  have  over  their  people  extends  no  further
than  that  the  Indians  build  the  houses  for  the  chiefs,  till
their  fields,  give  them  as  many  of  their  women  as  they  want,
and  wash  gold  out  of  the  rivers  for  them,  with  which  they
trade  with  their  neighbours.  The  chiefs  select  their  cap-
tains in  the  wars,  and  accompany  them  in  battle.  In  all
things  these  Indians  show  little  constancy.  They  are
ashamed  of  nothing,  nor  do  they  know  what  virtue  is,
while  in  malice  they  are  very  cunning  one  against  the  other.

Beyond  this  province,  to  the  eastward,  are  the  mountains
which  are  called  Andes,  broken  up  into  rugged  peaks.  On
the  other  side  the  Indians  say  there  is  a  beautiful  valley
through  which  a  river  flows,  and  where  (according  to  the
stories  of  these  natives  of  Arma)  there  are  great  riches  and
many  Indians.  In  all  these  parts  the  women  bring  forth
without  the  assistance  of  midwives,  and  after  bringing  forth
they  go  to  wash  in  a  river,  doing  the  same  to  their  offspring,
nor  do  they  suffer  any  evil  consequence  from  so  doing ;  and
fifty  of  these  women  suffer  less  pain  in  bringing  forth  than
one  of  our  nation.


CHAPTEE    XX.


Of  tlie  province  of  Paucura,  and  of  the  mannei-s  and  customs  of  the
natives.

Beyond  the  great  province  of  Arma  there  is  another,
called  Paucura,  which  contained  five  or  six  thousand
Indians  when  we  first  entered  it  with  the  Captain  Jorge
Robledo.  The  language  of  the  Indians  in  this  province
differs  from  tluit  of  Arma.     The  customs  of  the  people  are


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  75

the  same^  except  that  these  are  a  better  disposed  race,  and
that  the  women  wear  a  small  mantle  to  cover  a  certain  part
of  their  bodies,  and  the  men  do  the  same.  This  province  is
very  fertile  for  the  growth  of  maize  and  other  products.
They  are  not  so  rich  in  gold  as  those  in  their  rear,  nor  are
their  houses  so  large,  nor  is  the  country  so  rough.  A  river
flows  through  the  province,  but  it  has  few  tributary  streams.
Close  to  the  house  of  the  principal  chief,  whose  name  was
Pimana,  there  was  a  wooden  idol,  the  size  of  a  tall  man.
Its  face  was  turned  towards  the  rising  sun,  and  its  arms
were  spread  out.  Every  Tuesday  the  Indians  sacrificed  to
the  devil  in  this  province  of  Paucura,  and  the  same  was
done  in  that  of  Arma,  according  to  what  the  Indians  told
us ;  but  I  was  unable  to  learn  whether  the  victims  were
their  own  countrymen,  or  prisoners  taken  in  war.  Among
the  houses  of  the  chiefs  they  have  stout  canes  planted  in  a
circle  so  as  to  form  a  cage,  from  which  those  who  are  put  in
cannot  possibly  escape.  The  captives  taken  in  war  are  put
into  this  cage  and  very  well  fed,  and  when  they  are  fat,  they
are  taken  out  on  days  of  festivity,  kiUed  with  great  cruelty,
and  eaten.  I  saw  several  of  these  cages,  or  prisons,  in  the
province  of  Arma.  It  is  worthy  of  note,  that  when  they
wish  to  kill  any  of  these  unfortunates,  with  the  intention  of
eating  them,  they  make  them  kneel  down  and  bow  their
heads,  and  then  give  them  a  blow  on  the  back  of  the  neck
with  such  effect  that  they  never  speak  again.  I  have  seen
what  I  describe,  and  the  victim  never  speaks,  even  to  ask
for  mercy ;  nay,  some  even  laugh  when  they  are  killed,
which  is  a  very  marvellous  thing,  but  it  proceeds  more  from
bestiahty  than  from  courage.  The  heads  of  those  who  are
eaten  are  stuck  on  the  points  of  the  canes.  Passing  this
province,  we  reached  a  lofty  plain,  which  is  well  peopled
and  covered  with  large  houses.  This  district  is  called  Pozo,
and  the  people  speak  the  same  language,  and  have  the  same
customs  as  those  of  Arma.


76  THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER   XXI.


Of  the  Indians  of  Pozo,  and  how  vaUant  they  are,  and  how  dreaded  by
the  neighbonring  tribes.

There  were  three  chiefs  in  this  province  when  we  entered
it  with  the  Captain  Jorge  Robledo.  These,  with  their  fol-
lowers, were  and  are  the  most  valiant  and  bold  Indians  in
all  these  provinces.  Their  territory  is  bounded  on  one  side
by  the  great  river,  on  another  by  the  provinces  of  Carapa
and  Picara,  concerning  which  I  will  speak  presently,  and  on
a  third  by  Paucura,  of  which  I  have  already  treated.  These
Indians  of  Pozo  are  not  on  friendly  terms  with  any  of  their
neighbours.  Their  origin  is  derived,  according  to  their
own  account,  from  certain  Indians  who  in  ancient  times
came  from  the  province  of  Arma,  and,  seeing  how  fertile
the  soil  of  this  country  of  Pozo  was,  settled  there.  Their
language  and  customs  are  the  same  as  those  of  Arma.  The
chiefs  have  very  lai-ge  and  lofty  circular  houses,  and  ten  or
fifteen  persons  live  in  them,  according  to  the  number  of  the
family.  At  the  doors  of  the  houses  there  are  great  palli-
sades  and  other  defences,  made  of  stout  canes,  between
which  there  are  large  boards  covered  with  reeds,  so  that
none  of  the  mounted  Spaniards  could  pass  them.  From
the  summit  of  the  table  land  these  Indians  watched  all  the
roads  to  see  who  was  coming.  The  men  are  better  disposed
than  those  of  Arma,  and  the  women  are  large  and  ugly,
although  there  are  some  who  are  pretty.  But  in  truth  I  saw
very  few  such.  Within  the  houses  of  the  chiefs,  near  the
entrances,  there  was  a  row  of  idols,  about  fifteen  or
twenty  in  number,  and  each  the  size  of  a  man.  Their  faces
were  made  of  wax,  and  moulded  into  the  form  and  shape  of
that  of  the  devil.  They  say  that  sometimes,  when  they
called  him,  the  devil  entered  into  the  bodies  of  these  wooden
idols,  and  answered  them  from  within.     The  heads  are  like


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    I)E    LEON.  77

the  skulls  of  corpses.  When  the  chiefs  die  they  bury  them
within  the  houses,,  in  great  sejiulchres,  and  place  by  the
bodies  great  vases  of  wine  made  from  maize,  with  their
arms  and  gold,  and  the  ornaments  they  valued  most.  They
also  bury  many  women  alive  with  them,  according  to  the
manner  of  those  tribes  whose  countries  we  had  already
passed  through.  I  remember  that,  in  the  province  of  Arma,
the  second  time  that  Captain  Jorge  Robledo  passed  through
it,  we  went,  by  his  order — one  Antonio  Pimentel  and  myself
— to  examine  a  burial  place  in  the  village  of  a  chief  named
Tayo,  in  which  we  found  more  than  two  hundred  small
pieces  of  gold,  which  in  that  country  they  call  chcujualetas,
but  as  a  horrible  smell  came  from  the  bodies,  we  went  away
without  getting  all  that  was  there.

If  all  the  gold  that  is  buried  in  Peru,  and  in  these  coun-
tries, was  collected,  it  would  be  impossible  to  count  it,  so
great  would  be  the  quantity,  and  the  Spaniards  have  yet
got  little  compared  with  what  remains.  When  I  was  in
Cuzco,  receiving  an  account  of  the  Yncas  from  the  principal
natives,  I  heard  it  said  by  PauUu  Tnca  and  others,  that  if  all
the  treasure  in  the  huacas,  which  are  their  burial  places,  was
collected  together,  that  which  the  Spaniards  had  already
taken  would  look  very  small,  and  they  compared  it  to  a
drop  taken  out  of  a  great  vase  of  water.  In  order  to  make
the  comparison  more  striking,  they  took  a  large  measure  of
maize,  and,  dropping  one  grain  out  of  it,  they  said,  "  The
Christians  have  found  that ;  the  rest  is  so  concealed,  that
we  ourselves  do  not  know  the  place  of  it.^^  So  vast  are  the
treasures  that  are  lost  in  these  parts.  If  the  Spaniards  had
not  come,  all  the  gold  in  the  country  would  certainly  have
been  offered  to  the  devil,  or  buried  with  the  dead,  for  the
Indians  neither  want  it,  nor  seek  it  for  any  other  purpose.
They  do  not  pay  any  wages  with  it  to  their  men  of  war,  nor
do  they  want  it  except  as  ornaments  when  alive,  and  to  be
placed  by  their  sides  when  dead.  Therefore,  it  seems  to  me
that  we  are  bound  to  bring  them  to  a  knowledge  of  our  holy


/8  THE    TRAVELS    OP

Catholic  faith,  without  showing  them  that  our  only  wish  is
to  fill  our  pockets.^

These  Indians  and  their  women  go  naked  like  all  the  rest.
They  are  very  laborious,  and  when  they  sow  or  dig  the  land,
they  hold  the  club  for  hoeing  in  one  hand,  and  the  lance  for
fighting  in  the  other.  The  chiefs  are  more  respected  by  the
Indians  than  in  other  parts.  The  sons  inherit  the  chieftain-
ship, and  in  their  default  the  nephews.

The  province  of  Picara  is  distant  two  leagues,  that  of
Paucura  a  league  and  a  half,  and  that  of  Carrapa  about  the
same.  All  these  provinces  had  three  times  as  many  Indians,
yet  the  Indians  of  Pozo  waged  cruel  war  upon  them  one
after  the  other,  and  all  feared  them  and  desired  their  friend-
ship. A  large  body  went  forth  from  their  villages,  leaving
sufl&cient  for  their  defence,  and  carried  many  musical  in-
struments, such  as  drums  and  flutes.  Thus  they  marched
against  their  enemies,  taking  cords  with  them  to  bind  their
prisoners.  Arriving  at  the  place  where  the  enemy  awaited
them,  they  set  up  loud  shouts,  and  closed  upon  them,  kilhng,
taking  prisoners,  and  burning  houses.  In  all  these  wars  the
Indians  of  Pozo  were  always  the  most  valiant,  and  so  their
neighbours  confess.  But  they  are  as  great  butchers  in
eating  human  food  as  those  of  Arma,  for  one  day  I  saw
them  eat  more  than  a  hundred  men  and  women  whom  they
had  taken  in  war.  They  marched  with  us,  when  the  adelan-
tado  Don  Sebastian  de  Belalcazar  was  subduing  the  pro-
vinces of  Picara  and  Paucura,  which  had  rebelled,  and  at
that  time  the  name  of  the  chief  of  this  town  of  Pozo  was
Perequito.  In  the  inroads  which  we  made,  these  Indians  of
Pozo  killed  the  other  Indians  as  if  they  were  rabbits,  and
hunted  out  those  who  were  concealed  near  the  banks  of  the
river,  without  letting  one  escape.

One  Rodrigo  Alonzo,  I,  and  two  other  Christians,  being

1  That  is,  "As  the  Indians  tliemselvos  have  no  greed  after  gold,  it
behoves  the  SjDaniards  to  show  them  tliat  avarice  is  not  tlie  only  motive
Avliieh  influoiioes  the  rondnet  of  their  conquerors."


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  79

in  the  province  of  Paucura,  wont  in  chase  of  certain  Indians,
and  on  entering  a  village  there  came  out  the  freshest  and
prettiest  Indian  girl  I  have  ever  seen  in  all  these  provinces.
When  we  saw  her  we  called  her,  but  as  soon  as  she  heard
us,  she  shrieked  as  if  she  had  seen  the  devil,  and  ran
towards  the  Indians  of  Pozo,  thinking  it  better  to  be  killed
and  eaten  by  them  than  to  fall  into  our  hands.  And  so  it
was  that  one  of  those  Indians,  who  were  our  allies,  before
we  could  prevent  him,  gave  her  a  cruel  blow  on  her  head,
while  another  came  up  and  beheaded  her  with  a  stone  knife.
The  girl,  when  they  approached  her,  knelt  down  and  awaited
her  doom,  which  they  gave  her.  They  then  drank  her
blood,  and  ate  her  heart  and  entrails  raw,  carrying  off  the
head  and  limbs  to  eat  on  the  following  night.

I  saw  two  other  Indians,  who  killed  those  of  Paucura,
and  the  victims  laughed  pleasantly,  just  as  if  they  had  not
been  the  men  who  were  to  die.  In  fine,  all  the  Indians  of  these
parts  have  the  custom  of  eating  human  flesh.  The  Indians
of  Pozo  are  very  rich  in  gold,  and  near  their  village  there
are  mines  on  the  banks  of  the  great  river  which  passes  near.

In  this  place  the  adelantado  Don  Sebastian  de  Belalcazar
and  his  captain  and  lieutenant-general  Francisco  Hernandez
Giron^  captured  the  marshal  Don  Jorge  Eobledo,  and  cut
off  his  head,  besides  putting  others  to  death.  And  that
they  might  not  have  to  carry  the  bodies  of  the  marshal  and
the  others  to  Arma,  the  Indians  ate  them.  Nevertheless
they  burnt  a  house  over  the  remains  of  the  bodies.-

^  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron  was  afterwards  famous  as  the  leader  of
the  final  rebeUion  in  Peru.  The  anger  of  the  Spanish  soldiers  at  a
law  proliibiting  the  use  of  Indians  as  beasts  of  biu-den  enabled  him  to
assemble  a  number  of  discontented  spii-its  at  Cuzco  in  November  1553.
He  routed  the  royal  army  at  Chuqiiinga,  but  was  finally  defeated  at
Pucara,  and  publicly  beheaded  in  the  great  square  of  Lima.  His  head  was
hung  up  in  an  iron  cage,  besides  those  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro  and  Carbajal.

-  ^Mien  VadiUo's  expedition  came  to  an  end,  our  yoimg  author  trans-
ferred his  ser^dces  to  Don  Jorge  Robledo.

Robledo  was  one  of  the  followers  of  Sebastian  de  Belalcazar,  the  dis-


80  THE    TRAVELS    OF

CHAPTER    XXII.

Of  the  province  of  Picara,  and  of  the  chiefs  of  it.

Leaving  Pozo^  and  travelling  to  the  eastward^  tlie  great  and
very  populous  province  of  Picara  is  reached.  The  names  of
the  principal  chiefs  of  this  province,  when  we  discovered
it,  were  Picara,  Chusquruqua,  Sanguitama,  Chambiriqua,
Ancora,  Aupirimi,  and  others.  Their  language  and  customs
resemble  those  of  Paucura.  This  province  extends  to  cer-
tain mountains  which  give  rise  to  rivers  of  very  limpid
and  sweet  water.  The  rivers  are  said  to  be  rich  in  gold.
The  country  is  broken  up  into  rugged  mountains,  like  that
which  we  had  already  passed  ;  but  it  is  so  populous  that  all
the  hills  and  valleys  are  under  cultivation,  in  so  much
that  the  sight  of  so  many  crops  causes  pleasure  and  content-
ment. In  aU  parts  there  are  plantations  of  fruit  trees.  The
people  have  few  houses,  because  they  have  been  burnt  in
their  wars.  The  province  contained  more  than  ten  or  twelve
thousand  Indians  capable  of  bearing  arms  when  we  first
entered  it ;  and  they  go  naked,  for  neither  they  nor  their
women  wear  more  than  a  small  cloth  between  the  legs ;  and

coverer  of  Quito  and  Popayan,  and  was  detached  by  liiin  for  the  conquest
of  the  Cauca  valley.  After  Robledo  had  founded  the  city  of  Antioquia
in  1541,  he  determined  to  go  to  Spain  by  way  of  Carthagena,  and  soUcit
the  formation  of  a  separate  government  for  liimself ,  to  be  carved  out  of
the  grant  fonnerly  made  to  Belalcazar.  On  arriving  at  San  Sebastian
de  Uraba,  he  was  arrested  by  Don  Pedro  de  Heredia,  who  had  retm-ned
from  Spain  with  renewed  titles  and  privileges,  accused  of  an  attempt  to
upset  his  government,  and  sent  to  Spain  for  trial.  In  1546  Robledo
returned  from  Spain  with  the  title  of  marshal,  and,  landing  at  San
Sebastian,  marched  once  more  up  the  valley  of  the  Cauca.  Belalcazar
demanded  that  he  should  retire  from  the  territory  Avhicli  he  had  invaded,
and,  by  forced  marches,  surprised  him  on  the  1st  of  October  1546,  and
took  him  prisoner.  The  unfortunate  Robledo  was  reviled  by  his  captor
as  a  deserter,  traitor,  and  usurper,  and  finally  hung,  although  he  en-
treated to  be  beheaded  as  became  a  knight.


PEDRO    BE    CIEZA    DE    LEON,  81

in  all  other  matters,  whether  of  eating,  drinking,  or  marry-
ing, they  have  the  same  customs  as  those  whom  we  had
already  seen.

Thus,  when  the  chiefs  die,  their  bodies  are  placed  in  largo
and  deep  tombs,  accompanied  by  many  live  women,  and
adorned  by  all  they  possessed  of  most  value  when  living,
according  to  the  general  custom  of  the  other  Indians  of  these
parts.  At  the  entrances  of  the  houses  of  the  caciques  there
are  small  platforms  surrounded  by  stout  canes,  on  the  tops
of  which  are  stuck  the  heads  of  their  enemies ;  and  this  is  a
horrid  thing  to  see,  as  there  are  many  of  them,  looking
fierce  with  long  hair,  and  their  faces  painted  in  such  sort  as
to  appear  like  those  of  devils.  In  the  lower  part  of  the
canes  there  are  holes  through  which  the  wind  can  pass,  and
when  it  blows,  there  is  a  noise  which  sounds  like  the  music
of  devils.  Nor  is  human  flesh  distasteful  to  these  Indians,
any  more  than  to  those  of  Pozo,  for  when  we  first  entered
their  country  with  the  captain  Don  Jorge  Robledo,  more
than  four  thousand  of  these  natives  of  Picara  marched  with
us,  and  killed  and  ate  as  many  as  three  hundred  hostile
Indians.  They  aflSrm  that,  on  the  other  side  of  the  moun-
tains to  the  eastward  of  this  province,  which  are  the  Cordil-
leras of  the  Andes,  there  is  a  great,  rich,  and  populous  valley
called  Arbi.  I  do  not  know  whether  it  has  been  discovered,  nor
did  I  hear  more  than  this  rumour  concerning  it.  The  Indians
of  Picara  have  great  stakes,  as  sharp  as  if  they  were  of  iron,
made  of  a  black  palm  wood,  which  they  fix  in  holes  along  the
roads,  and  subtilely  cover  with  straw  and  grass.  When  they
are  at  war  with  the  Spaniards  they  fix  so  many  of  these
stakes  that  it  is  very  troublesome  to  get  through  the  coun-
try, and  many  soldiers  have  been  staked  in  the  legs  and
feet.  Some  of  these  Indians  have  bows  and  arrows,  but
they  are  not  dexterous  in  their  use,  and  do  little  harm  with
them.    They  have  shngs  with  which  they  throw  stones  with

G


82  THE    TRAVELS    OP

great  force.  The  men  are  of  middle  height,  the  women  the
same,  and  some  of  them  good  looking.  Leaving  this  pro-
vince, in  the  direction  of  the  city  of  Cartage,  we  next  came
to  the  province  of  Carrapa,  which  is  not  very  distant,  and  is
rich  and  populous.


CHAPTER    XXIII.


Of  the  province  of  Carrapa,  and  of  what  tliere  is  to  be  said  concern-
ing it.

The  province  of  Carrapa  is  twelve  leagues  from  the  city  of
Cartage,  situated  in  a  very  rugged  mountainous  couniry,
and  the  Cordillera  of  the  Andes  rises  above  it.  The  houses
of  the  natives  are  small  and  very  low,  made  of  canes,  and
thatched  with  other  small  and  delicate  canes,  of  which  there
are  many  in  these  parts.  Some  of  the  houses  of  the  chiefs
are  large,  but  others  not.  When  the  Christian  Spaniards
first  entered  the  country  there  were  five  of  these  chiefs.
The  principal  amongst  them  was  called  Yrrua,  who,  in  former
years,  had  entered  the  country  by  force,  and  ruled  over  all
men  like  a  powerful  tyrant.  Among  the  mountains  there
are  some  little  valleys  and  open  spaces  well  watered  by
numerous  rivers  and  springs,  but  the  water  is  not  so  whole-
some as  that  of  the  rivers  we  had  passed.  The  men  are
very  large,  with  long  visages,  and  the  women  are  robust.
These  people  are  very  rich  in  gold,  for  they  had  very  large
pieces,  and  beautiful  vases,  out  of  which  they  drank  their
wine  made  of  maize.  Those  who  drink  this  liquor  soon
lose  their  senses,  yet  the  Indians  are  so  vicious  that  they
will  sometimes  di-ink  an  arroba  at  one  sitting,  not  at  one
draught,  but  by  taking  many  pulls.     Their  bellies  being  full


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LKON.  83

of  this  beverage,  it  provokes  vomiting,  and  they  throw  up
as  much  as  they  Hke,  Many  of  them  hold  the  cup  out  of
which  to  drink  in  one  hand,  and^  .  .  .  They  are  not  great
eaters,  but  all  the  Indians  we  met  with  are  generally  ad-
dicted to  excessive  drinking.

When  a  chief  dies  without  children,  his  principal  wife
succeeds,  and  when  she  dies  the  nephew  of  the  deceased
chief  inherits  ;  if  he  is  the  son  of  a  sister."-  They  have  no
temples  nor  houses  of  worship  ;  but  the  devil  talks  to  some
of  them  occasionally,  as  he  does  with  Indians  of  other
tribes.

They  bury  their  dead  within  their  houses,  in  great  vaults,
accompanied  by  living  women,  food,  and  many  valuables

'  Mnchos  tienen  con  la  una  mano  la  vasija  con  que  estan  behiendo^  y
con  la  otra  el  miembro  con  que  orinan.

^  The  tendency  to  the  partial  adoption  of  the  rule  of  female  succession
amongst  these  Indians  is  worthy  of  note.  Wlien  a  claief  had  no  son,  the
son  of  his  sister  succeeded,  to  the  exclusion  of  brothers'  sons.  It  appears
that  this  was  the  general  practice  amongst  the  Indians  of  the  valley  of
the  Cauca.  The  Indians  of  Anzerma  (see  p.  64),  of  Anna  (see  p.  73),
and  of  Carrapa,  all  adopted  it ;  and  Yelasco  says  that  the  same  custom
prevailed  in  the  family  of  the  Scyris  or  ancient  kings  of  Quito.  (Hist,
de  Quito.,  i,  p.  8.)  It  is  well  knowai  that  with  the  Nairs  of  Malabar  the
rule  of  female  succession  is  absolute,  and  that  the  son  of  a  sister  succeeds
to  the  exclusion  of  the  possessor's  son.  The  heirs  apparent  in  these  South
American  tribes  seem  to  have  had  sufficient  influence  to  ensure  their  own
succession,  although  the  sister's  son  came  next,  even  to  the  exclusion,  as
Velasco  teEs  us,  of  daughters.  Friar  Jordanus  gives  us  the  reason  for
tliis  rule  amongst  the  people  of  INIalabar  : — "  AMiatever  man  may  be  the
father  of  their  sister  they  are  certain  that  the  offspring  is  from  the  womb
of  their  sister,  and  is  consequently  thus  truly  of  their  blood."  Colonel
Yule,  in  a  note  to  his  edition  of  Friar  Jordanus  (Hakluyt  Society's
volume  for  1863,  p.  32),  has  given  a  list  of  all  the  people  amongst  whom
this  custom  of  female  succession  has  prevailed.  They  are  the  Xairs  of
Malabar,  the  people  of  Canara,  the  aborigines  of  Hispaniola,  the  tribes  of
Xew  Granada,  the  royal  family  of  Quito,  the  negro  tribes  of  the  Niger,
certain  sections  of  the  ^Malays  of  Sumatra,  the  royal  family  of  Tipura,
the  Kasias  of  the  Sylhet  mountains,  the  people  of  a  district  in  Ceylon
adjoining  Bintenne,  in  Madagascar,  the  Fiji  Islanders,  and  the  Hurons
and  Natchez  Indians  of  North  America.


84  THE    TRAVELS    OF

possessed  by  the  deceased,  as  is  the  custom  with  their
neighbours.

When  any  of  these  Indians  feel  ill,  they  make  great  sacri-
fices for  their  health  in  the  manner  which  they  have  learnt
from  their  ancestors,  all  in  honour  of  the  accursed  devil.
He,  God  permitting  it,  lets  them  know  that  all  things  are
in  his  hands,  and  that  he  is  superior  to  all  others.  Not  but
that  they  are  aware  of  a  God,  sole  creator  of  the  whole
world,  for  the  Almighty  does  not  permit  the  devil  to  assume
this  dignity,  from  which  he  is  so  widely  separated.  Yet
they  believe  many  evil  things,  although  I  learned  from  them-
selves that  they  are  sometimes  at  issue  with  the  devil,  when
they  hate  him,  and  see  through  his  lies  and  falseness.  For
their  sins,  however,  they  are  so  subject  to  his  will  that  they
are  unable  to  escape  from  the  prisons  of  deceitfulness.  They
are  blind,  like  other  gentile  people  of  more  knowledge  and
understanding,  until  the  light  of  the  sacred  Evangelist's
words  enters  into  their  hearts.  The  Christians  who  settle
in  these  Indies  should  never  fail  to  instruct  the  natives  in
true  doctrine,  otherwise  I  know  not  how  they  will  fare  when
they  and  the  Indians  appear  before  the  Divine  throne,  on
the  day  of  judgment.

The  principal  chiefs  marry  their  nieces,  and  sometimes
their  sisters,  and  they  have  many  wives.  They  eat  the
Indians  whom  they  capture,  like  all  the  other  tribes.  When
they  go  to  war,  they  wear  very  rich  pieces  of  gold,  with
great  crowns,  and  large  bracelets  of  gold  on  their  wrists.
Great  and  valuable  banners  are  carried  before  them.  I  saAv
one  which  was  given  as  a  present  to  the  captain  Don  Jorge
Robledo,  the  first  time  we  entered  this  province,  which
weighed  upwards  of  three  thousand  pesos,  and  a  golden  vase
worth  two  hundred  and  ninety  pesos,  besides  two  other
loads  of  this  metal,  consisting  of  ornaments  of  many  shapes.
The  banner  was  a  long  narrow  cloth  fastened  to  a  wand,
and  covered  with  small  pieces  of  gold  to  imitate  stars.     In


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  85

tins  province  there  are  also  many  fruit  trees^  and  some
deer,  (juadiujuinajes,  and  other  game,  besides  many  edible
roots.

Leaving  this  province,  we  came  to  that  of  Quinbaya,  in
which  the  city  of  Cartago  is  situated.  Cartago  is  twenty-
two  leagues  from  the  town  of  Arma.  Between  the  province
of  Carrapa  and  that  of  Quinbaya,  there  is  a  very  large  and
desert  valley,  of  which  the  tyrant  I  have  just  spoken  of  was
lord ;  he  whose  name  was  Urrua,  and  who  ruled  in  Carrapa.
The  war  between  him  and  the  natives  of  Quinbaya  was  very
fierce ;  and  he  also  forced  many  in  Carrapa  to  leave  their
country  when  he  took  possession  of  it.  It  is  rumoured
that  there  are  great  sepulchres  in  this  valley,  of  chiefs  who
are  buried  there.


CHAPTER    XXIV.


Of  the  province  of  Quinbaya,  and  of  the  customs  of  the  chiefs.  Also
concerning-  the  foundation  of  the  city  of  Cartago,  and  who  was
its  founder.

The  province  of  Quinbaya  is  fifteen  leagues  long  by  ten
broad,  from  the  Rio  Crande  to  the  snowy  mountains  of  the
Andes.  It  is  populous  throughout  its  whole  extent,  and
the  country  is  not  so  rugged  as  that  through  which  we  had
passed.  It  contains  extensive  and  dense  cane  brakes,  which
cannot  be  penetrated  without  great  labour,  and  this  pro-
vince, with  its  rivers,  is  full  of  these  cane  brakes.  In  no
part  of  the  Indies  have  I  seen  or  heard  of  any  place  where
there  are  so  many  canes  as  in  this  province,  but  it  pleased
God,  our  Lord,  that  this  country  should  have  a  superabund-
ance of  canes,  that  the  people  might  not  have  much  trouble
in  making  their  houses.     The  snowy  mountains,  which  are


Ob  THE    TRAVELS    OF

a  part  of  the  great  cliain  of  the  Andes,  are  seven  leagues
from  the  villages  of  this  province.  In  the  highest  parts  of
them  there  is  a  volcano  which,  on  a  clear  day,  may  be  seen
to  send  forth  great  quantities  of  smoke,  and  many  rivers
rise  in  these  mountains,  which  irrigate  the  land.  The  chief
rivers  are  the  Tacurumbi,  the  Cegue,  which  passes  close  to
the  city,  and  there  are  many  others  which  cannot  be  counted
for  number.  When  the  freshes  come  down  in  the  winter
season,  the  Indians  have  bridges  of  canes  fastened  together
with  reeds,  and  strongly  secured  to  trees  on  either  side.
All  the  rivers  are  veiy  full  of  gold.  When  I  was  there  in  the
year  1547  they  got  more  than  fifteen  thousand  j^esos  worth  in
three  months,  and  the  largest  gang  of  labourers  consists
of  three  or  four  Negroes  and  some  Indians.  Valleys  are
formed  along  the  courses  of  the  rivers,  and  though  the
banks  are  densely  lined  with  canes,  there  are  many  fruit
trees  of  the  country,  and  large  plantations  of  Pixiuare
palms.

In  these  rivers  there  are  fountains  of  healing  water,  and
it  is  a  marvellous  thing  to  see  their  manner  of  rising  in  the
midst  of  the  rivers,  for  which  thanks  be  to  God  our  Lord.
Further  on  I  will  devote  a  chapter  to  these  fountains,  for  it
is  a  matter  well  worthy  of  note.  The  men  of  this  province
are  well  disposed,  and  of  good  countenances ;  the  women
the  same,  and  very  amorous.  Their  houses  are  small,  and
roofed  with  the  leaves  of  canes.  There  are  now  many  fruit
trees  and  other  plants  which  the  Spaniards  cultivate,  both
from  Spain,  and  of  the  country.  The  chiefs  are  very  liberal ;
they  have  many  wives,  and  are  all  friendly,  and  in  alliance
with  each  other.  They  do  not  eat  human  flesh,  except  on
veiy  great  occasions,  and  the  chiefs  alone  were  very  rich  in
gold.  Of  all  the  things  that  were  to  be  seen,  the  most
notable  were  their  jewels  of  gold  and  great  vases  out  of  which
they  drink  their  wine.  I  saw  one,  which  a  cacique  named
Tacuruml)!  gave  to  the  captain  Don  Jorge  Robledo,  which


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  87

would  contain  two  azumhres,^  of  water.  The  same  cacique
gave  another  to  Miguel  Muiioz  which  was  still  larger  and
more  valuable.  The  arms  of  these  Indians  are  lances  and
darts,  and  certain  estolicas,^  which  they  throw  with  great
force,  a  mischievous  weapon.  They  are  intelligent  and
observant,  and  some  of  them  are  great  magicians.  They
assemble  to  make  feasts  for  their  pleasure,  and  when  they
have  drunk,  a  squadron  of  women  is  placed  on  one  side,  and
another  on  the  other ;  the  men  are  placed  in  the  same  way,
and  they  pass  backwards  and  foi-wards,  chanting  the  word
Batatabafi,  Batatahati,  which  means  ^^we  play.^^  Thus,
with  darts  and  wands,  the  game  begins,  which  ends  in  the
wounding  of  many,  and  the  death  of  some.  They  twist
their  hair  into  great  wheels,  and  thus  they  wear  it  when
they  go  to  war.  They  have  been  a  fierce  and  encroaching
people,  until  justice  was  executed  upon  the  old  chiefs.
"When  they  assembled  for  their  feasts  and  games  in  an  open
space,  all  the  Indians  gathered  together,  and  two  of  them
made  a  noise  with  drums.  One  then  began  to  dance,  and
all  the  rest  followed,  each  with  his  cup  of  wine  in  his  hand,
for  they  drank,  danced,  and  sang  all  at  the  same  time.
Their  songs  consisted  of  a  recitation  of  their  deeds,  and
of  the  deeds  of  their  ancestors.  They  have  no  creed,
and  they  converse  with  the  devil,  like  all  the  rest  of  the
Indians.

Wlien  they  are  ill  they  bathe  many  times,  at  which  times
they  themselves  relate  that  they  see  awful  visions.  And,  in
treating  of  this  subject,  I  Avill  here  relate  what  happened
in  this  pro\'ince  of  Quinbaya  in  the  year  1547.  At  the  time
when  the  viceroy,  Blasco  Nunez  Yela,  was  embarrassed  by

^  About  half  a  gallon.

-  The  estolica,  used  by  South  American  Indians,  consists  of  flattened
pieces  of  Avood  about  a  yard  long,  in  the  upper  end  of  -wliich  a  bone  is
fixed.  A  long  dart  is  fastened  on  the  bone,  and  hiu-led  wath  tremendous
force  and  sure  aim.


88  THE    TRAVELS    OP

the  movements  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro  and  his  followers^  a  great
pestilence  spread  over  the  whole  kingdom  of  Peru,  which
began  on  the  other  side  of  Cuzco,  and  pervaded  the  whole
country.  People  without  number  died.  The  illness  con-
sisted of  a  headache  accompanied  by  raging  fever,  and
presently  the  pain  passed  from  the  head  to  the  left  ear,
when  it  became  so  great  that  the  patient  did  not  last  more
than  two  or  three  days.  The  pestilence  reached  this  pro-
vince. Now  there  is  a  river,  about  half  a  league  from  the
city  of  Cartago,  called  Consota,  and  near  it  there  is  a  small
lake  where  they  make  salt  from  the  water  of  a  spring.  Many
Indian  women  were  one  day  assembled  there,  making  salt
for  the  households  of  their  lords,  when  they  saw  a  tall  man
with  his  belly  open  and  bowels  hanging  out,  holding  two
boys  by  the  hand.  When  he  came  to  the  women,  he  said,
"  I  promise  you  that  I  have  to  kill  all  the  women  of  the
Christians,  and  all  those  of  your  people,  and  it  shall  be  done
presently."  As  it  was  day  time  the  Indian  women  showed
no  fear,  but  related  the  occurrence  in  a  laughing  way  when
they  went  to  their  homes.  In  another  village  of  the  neigh-
bourhood, called  Giraldo  Gilestopina,  they  saw  the  same
figure  on  horseback,  galloping  over  all  the  hills  and  moun-
tains like  the  wind.  In  a  few  days  the  pestilence  and
ear-ache  came  on  in  such  a  manner,  that  most  of  the  people
died,  the  Spaniards  losing  their  Indians  bound  to  service,
so  that  few  or  none  were  left ;  in  addition  to  which  such
terror  prevailed  that  the  very  Spaniards  seemed  to  be
fearful  and  afraid.  Many  women  and  boys  affirmed  that
they  saw  the  dead  with  their  own  eyes  walking  again.
These  people  well  understand  that  there  is  something  in
man  besides  the  mortal  body,  though  they  do  not  hold  that
it  is  a  soul,  but  rather  some  kind  of  transfiguration.  They
also  think  that  all  bodies  will  rise  again ;  but  the  devil  has
given  them  to  understand  that  it  will  be  in  a  place  where
there  will  be  great  case  and  pleasure,  and  this  is  the  reason


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    UE    LEON,  89

that  they  place  great  quantities  of  wine  and  maize,  fish,  and
other  things  in  their  sepulchres,  together  with  the  arms  of
the  deceased,  as  if  these  could  free  him  from  the  pains  of
hell.  The  custom  among  them  is  that  the  son  succeeds  the
father,  and,  ftiiling  sons,  the  nephew  being  the  son  of  a
sister.  In  ancient  times  these  Indians  were  not  natives
of  Quinbaya,  but  they  invaded  the  coimtry  many  times,
killing  the  inhabitants,  who  could  not  have  been  few,  judg-
ing from  the  remains  of  their  works,  for  all  the  dense  cane
brakes  seem  once  to  have  been  peopled  and  tilled,  as  well  as
the  mountainous  parts,  where  there  are  trees  as  big  round  as
two  bullocks.  From  these  facts  I  conjecture  that  a  very  long
period  of  time  has  elapsed  since  these  Indians  first  peopled
the  Indies.^  The  climate  of  the  province  is  very  salubrious,
so  that  the  Spaniards,  who  have  settled  in  it,  neither  suffer
from  heat  nor  from  cold.

1  Truly !  so  long  ago  that  it  is  the  merest  waste  of  time  to  make  con-
jectures or  siu-mises  as  to  whence  they  came.  The  testimony  given  by
Cieza  de  Leon  that,  even  in  his  time,  there  was  evidence  of  the  country
having  once  been  far  more  densely  peopled,  is  very  interesting.


90  THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    XXV.


In  which  the  subject  of  the  preceding  chapter  is  continued ;  respecting
what  relates  to  the  city  of  Cartago,  and  its  foundation  ;  and  respect-
ing the  animal  called  chucha.

These  cane  brakes,  of  wliicli  I  liave  already  spoken,  are  so
close  and  thick,  that  if  a  man  is  not  well  acquainted  with  the
country,  he  would  lose  himself,  and  be  unable  to  get  out  of
them.  Amongst  the  canes  there  are  many  tall  ceyhas,  with
many  wide-spreading  branches,  and  other  trees  of  different
sorts  which,  as  I  do  not  know  their  names,  I  am  unable  to
give  them  here.  In  the  depths  of  these  cane  brakes  there
are  great  caves  or  cavities  where  bees  make  their  hives,  and
make  honeycombs  which  are  as  good  as  those  of  Spain.
There  are  some  bees  which  are  little  bigger  than  mosquitos,
and  at  the  entrance  of  their  hives,  after  they  have  been  well
closed,  they  insert  a  tube  apparently  of  wax,  and  half  a
finger  long,  by  which  they  enter  to  do  their  work,  their
little  wings  laden  with  what  they  have  collected  from  the
flowers.  The  honey  of  this  kind  of  bees  is  a  little  sour,  and
they  do  not  get  more  than  a  quartillo  of  honey  from  each
hive.  There  is  another  species  of  bees,  which  are  black
and  rather  larger,  those  just  mentioned  being  white.  The
opening  which  the  black  bees  make  to  get  into  the  tree,  is
of  wax  wrapped  round  with  a  mixture  that  becomes  harder
than  stone.  Their  honey  is,  without  comparison,  better
than  that  of  the  white  bees,  and  each  hive  contains  more
than  three  azumhres}  There  are  other  bees  larger  than
those  of  Spain,  but  none  of  them  sting.  When,  however,
they  take  the  hive,  the  bees  surround  the  man  who  is
cutting  the  tree  down,  and  stick  to  his  hair  and  beard.  Of
the  large  hives  of  the  last-named  bees,  there  are  some
weighing  half  an  arroha,"  and  their  honey  is  much  the  best

1  Half  a  gallon.  "  One  aiToba=25  11)S.


PEDRO    DE    CIKZA    DE    LEON.  91

of  all.  I  got  some  of  these,  and  I  saw  more  taken  by  Pedro
do  Velasco,  a  settler  at  Cartago.

Besides  the  above  products,  there  is  a  fruit  in  this  pro-
vince called  Gaymito,'^  as  large  as  a  nectarine.  It  is  black
inside,  and  has  some  very  small  pips,  and  a  milk  which
sticks  so  closely  to  the  beard  and  hands  that  it  takes  some
time  to  get  it  off.  There  is  another  fruit  like  very  savoury
cherries,  besides  aguacates,"  guavas,^  and  guayavas,^  and
some  as  sour  as  lemons,  with  a  good  smell  and  flavour.

The  cane  brakes,  being  very  dense,  become  the  haunts  of
many  animals.  There  are  great  lions,  and  an  animal  like  a
small  fox,  with  a  long  tail  and  short  feet  of  a  grey  colour,
and  the  head  of  a  fox.  I  once  saw  one  of  these  creatures
which  had  seven  young  ones  near  it.  Directly  it  was
frightened,  or  heard  a  noise,  it  opened  a  bag  which  nature
has  placed  on  its  belly,  put  its  young  inside,  and  fled  so
swiftly  that  I  was  astonished  at  its  agihty,  being  so  small,
and  running  so  rapidly  with  such  a  weight.  They  call  this
creature  chiicha.^  There  are  also  small  and  very  poisonous
serpents,  many  deer,  and  some  rabbits,  besides  guada-
quinajes,^  which  are  a  Httle  larger  than  hares,  and  whose
flesh  is  very  good  and  savoury.  There  are  many  other
things  to  relate,  but  I  desist  because  they  would  appear
trifling.

The  city  of  Cartago  is  situated  on  a  smooth  plain,  be-

^  Chrysophylhtm  Caimito,  Linn.,  or  star  apple.

^  Alligator  pear.     Persea  gratissima  R.  P.

3  Inga  spectabilis.  *  Psidium  Guayavn^  Raddi.

^  Velasco  says  that  the  chucha^  tututu^  or  guanchaca,  is  a  sort  of
domestic  fox,  rather  larger  than  a  cat,  mth  a  very  long  tail,  generally
without  hair ;  it  is  very  cunning,  is  seldom  seen  in  the  daytime,  and
carries  its  young  in  a  bag  which  opens  and  shuts  on  its  beUy,  within
which  are  the  two  nipples  of  its  teats.  Hist,  de  Quito.,  i,  p.  92.  Pro-
bably this  is  the  small  opossum  of  the  genus  Didelphys.

6  Yelasco  describes  the  guadaqninaje  as  about  the  size  of  a  hare,  with
no  tail,  and  very  good  for  food.  Found  in  the  warm  parts  of  the  pro-
vince of  Popayan.     i,  p.  89.


92  THE    TRAVELS    OF

tween  two  small  streams,  seven  leagues  from  the  great  river
of  Santa  Martha,  and  near  another  small  stream,  the  water
of  which  is  drunk  by  the  Spaniards.

This  river  is  always  crossed  by  a  bridge  of  those  canes
which  I  have  already  mentioned.  The  city  has  very  dif-
ficult approaches  on  both  sides,  and  bad  roads,  for  in  the
winter  time  the  mud  is  deep.  It  rains  all  the  year  round,
and  the  hghtning  is  great,  thunderbolts  sometimes  falhng.
This  city  is  so  well  guarded,  that  the  inhabitants  cannot
easily  be  robbed.

The  founder  of  the  city  was  the  same  captain  Don  Jorge
Eobledo  who  peopled  the  others  which  we  had  passed,  in
the  name  of  the  majesty  of  the  Emperor  Don  Carlos,  our
lord,  the  Adelantado  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  being  governor
of  all  these  provinces,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1540.  It  is
called  Cartago,  because  all  the  settlers  and  conquerors  who
accompanied  Robledo  had  set  out  from  Carthagena,  and
this  is  the  reason  that  this  name  was  adopted.

Now  that  I  have  arrived  at  this  city  of  Cartago,  I  will  go
on  to  give  an  account  of  the  great  and  spacious  valley  where
the  city  of  Call  is  seated,  and  that  of  Popayan,  towards
which  we  journeyed  through  the  cane  brakes  until  we
reached  a  plain  traversed  by  a  great  river  called  La  Vieja.
This  river  is  crossed  with  much  difficulty  in  the  winter
time ;  it  is  four  leagues  from  the  city.  After  crossing  the
river  in  balsas  and  canoes,  the  two  roads  unite,  one  coming
from  Cartago,  and  the  other  from  Anzerma.  From  Anzerma
to  Cali  the  distance  is  fifty  leagues,  and  from  Cartago  to  Cali
a  little  more  than  forty-five  leagues.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  93


CHAPTER    XXVI.

^\^lich  touches  upon  the  provinces  in  this  great  and  beautiful  valley,  up
to  the  city  of  C'ali.

From  the  city  of  Popayan  this  valley  begins  to  spread  out
like  a  level  plain  between  the  chains  of  mountains^  and  is
twelve  leagues  broad,  more  or  less.  In  some  parts  it  is
narrower,  and  in  others  broader,  and  the  river  which  flows
through  it  becomes  so  narrow  that  neither  boat,  nor  balsa,
nor  anything  else  can  pass,  by  reason  of  the  fury  of  the
stream,  and  of  the  stones  which  come  down  in  it.  Boats  are
upset  and  go  to  the  bottom,  and  thus  many  Spaniards  and
Indians  have  been  drowned  and  much  merchandise  lost,  for
the  rapidity  of  the  stream  is  such  that  they  have  no  time  to
get  on  land.

All  this  valley,  from  the  city  of  Cali  to  these  rapids,  was
formerly  very  populous,  and  covered  with  very  large  and
beautiful  villages,  the  houses  being  close  together  and  of
great  size.  These  villages  of  Indians  have  wasted  away
and  been  destroyed  by  time  and  war;  for,  when  the
Captain  Don  Sebastian  de  Belalcazar,  who  was  the  first
captain  to  discover  and  conquer  this  valley,  made  his
entry,  the  Indians  were  bent  on  war,  and  fought  with  the
Spaniards  many  times  to  defend  their  land,  and  escape  from
slavery.  Owing  to  these  wars,  and  to  the  famine  which
arose  on  account  of  the  seeds  not  having  been  sown,  nearly
all  the  Indians  died.  There  was  another  reason  which  led  to
their  rapid  extermination.  The  Captain  Belalcazar  founded,
in  the  midst  of  the  Indian  villages  in  this  plain,  the  city  of
Cali,  which  he  afterwards  rebuilt  on  its  present  site.  The
natives  were  so  determined  not  to  hold  any  friendship  with
the  Spaniards  (beheving  their  yoke  to  be  heavy)  that  they
would  neither  sow  nor  cultivate  the  land ;  and  from  this
cause  there  was  such  scarcity  that  the  greater  part  of  the


94  THE    TRAVELS    OF

inhabitants  died.  When  the  Spaniards  abandoned  the  first
site^  the  hill  tribes  came  down  in  great  numbers,  and,  fall-
ing upon  the  unfortunates  who  were  sick  and  dying  of
hunger,  soon  killed  and  ate  all  those  who  survived.  These
are  the  reasons  why  the  people  of  this  valley  are  so  reduced
that  scarcely  any  are  left.  On  one  side  of  the  river,
towards  the  east,  is  the  Cordillera  of  the  Andes,  and  on  the
other  side  there  is  a  larger  and  more  beautiful  valley  called
Neyva,  through  which  flows  the  other  branch  of  the  great
river  of  Santa  Martha.^

In  the  skirts  of  the  mountains  there  are  many  villages  of
Indians  of  different  nations  and  customs,  who  are  very  bar-
barous, and  who  aU  eat  human  flesh,  which  they  hold  to  be
very  deHcious.  On  the  highest  parts  of  the  mountains  there
are  some  small  valleys  which  form  the  province  of  Buga.
The  natives  of  these  valleys  are  brave  warriors  ;  and  they
watched  the  Spaniards  who  came  to  their  country,  and  killed
Cristoval  de  Ayala,  without  any  fear.

When  he,  of  whom  I  have  spoken,  was  killed,  his  goods
were  sold  in  the  market  at  excessive  prices.  A  sow  was
sold  for  1600  pesos,  together  with  a  small  pig.  Sucking
pigs  went  for  500  pesos,  and  a  Peruvian  sheep  (llama)  for
280  pesos.  I  saw  these  sums  paid  to  one  Andres  Gomez,
now  a  citizen  of  Cartago,  by  Pedro  Romero  of  Anzerma.
The  IGOO  pesos  for  the  sow  and  the  pig  were  paid  by  the
Adelantado  Don  Sebastian  de  Belalcazar,  out  of  the  goods
of  the  Marshal  Don  Jorge  Robledo.  I  even  saw  that
very  sow  eaten  at  a  banquet  which  was  given  on  the
day  we  arrived  at  the  city  of  Cali  with  Vadillo.  Juan
Pacheco,  a  conqueror  who  is  now  in  Spain,  bought  a  pig
for  220  p)esos,  and  knives  were  sold  for  15  pesos.  I  heard
Jeronimo  Luis  Texelo  say  that,  when  he  went  on  the  expe-
dition with  the  Captain  Miguel  Muiioz,  which  is  known  as
that  of  La  Vieja,  he  bought  a  shoemaker^s  knife  for  30
'  The  IVIasrlalona.


PEURO    I)E    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  05

jyesos,  and  shoes  went  for  8  2'>csos  of  gold.  A  sheet  of  paper
was  sold  in  Cali  for  30  pesos.  I  might  relate  other  facts  of
this  kind  to  the  glory  of  the  Spaniards,  as  showing  how
cheap  they  held  money,  for  if  they  required  anything  they
thought  nothing  of  it.  They  bought  pigs  in  the  sow's  belly,
before  they  were  born,  for  100  jyesos  and  more.

I  would  now  request  the  judicious  reader  to  reflect  on  and
wonder  at  what  countries  were  discovered  and  settled  be-
tween the  year  1526  and  the  present  year  1547  :  and,  think-
ing upon  this,  he  will  see  how  great  are  the  deserts  of  the
discoverers  and  conquerors  who  have  laboured  so  greatly  in
this  work  ;  and  what  reason  his  Majesty  has  to  give  thanks
to  those  who  passed  through  those  labours,  and  served
loyally  without  butchering  the  Indians.  Those,  however,
who  have  been  butchers  are  deserving  of  punishment,  in  my
opinion.  When  this  province  was  discovered  they  bought  a
horse  for  3000  or  4000  pesos,  and  even  now  there  are  those
who  have  not  yet  paid  their  old  debts,  and  who,  covered
with  wounds  received  in  the  service,  are  shut  up  in  prison
until  they  can  pay  the  debts  demanded  by  their  creditors.

On  the  other  side  of  the  Cordillera  is  the  other  valley
which  I  have  already  mentioned,  where  the  town  of  Neyva
was  founded.  Towards  the  west  there  are  still  more  villages
and  Indians  in  the  mountains,  but  I  have  already  given  the
reason  why  those  in  the  plains  nearly  all  died.  The  villages
of  the  mountains  extend  to  the  shores  of  the  South  Sea,  and
stretch  away  far  to  the  south.  Their  houses,  like  those  I
described  in  Tatabe,  are  built  on  trees  like  granaries  ;  they
are  large,  and  contain  many  inhabitants.  The  land  of  these
Indians  is  very  fertile  and  prohfic,  and  well  supplied  with
swine  and  tapirs,  and  other  game,  such  as  turkeys,  parrots,
pheasants,  and  abundance  of  fish.  The  rivers  are  not  poor
in  gold,  indeed  we  can  affirm  that  they  are  very  rich  in  that
metal.  Near  these  villages  flows  the  great  river  of  Darien,^
1  The  Atrato.


96  THE    TRAVELS    OF

very  famous  on  account  of  the  city  whicli  was  founded  near
it.  All  these  Indians  also  eat  human  flesh.  Some  of  them
use  bows  and  arrows,  and  others  staves,  clubs,  darts,  and
lonsr  lances.  Towards  the  north  of  Cali  there  is  another
province,  bordering  on  that  of  Anzerma,  the  natives  of
which  are  called  Chancos.  They  are  so  big  that  they  look
like  small  giants,  with  broad  shoulders,  robust  frames,  and
great  strength.  Their  faces  are  large  and  heads  narrow ;
for  in  this  province,  in  that  of  Quinbaya,  and  in  other  parts
of  the  Indies,  when  a  baby  is  born,  they  force  the  head  into
the  shape  they  may  choose ;  thus  some  grow  up  without  an
occiput,  others  with  a  raised  forehead,  and  others  with  a
very  long  head.  This  is  done  when  the  child  is  just  born,
by  means  of  certain  small  boards  fastened  with  ligatures.
The  women  are  treated  in  the  same  way.  The  Chancos,  both
men  and  women,  go  naked  and  barefooted,  with  only  a  cloth
between  the  legs,  made,  not  of  cotton,  but  of  bark,  taken
from  a  tree  and  made  very  fine  and  soft,  about  a  yard  long,
and  two  palmos  broad.  They  fight  with  great  lances  and
darts;  and  occasionally  they  leave  their  province  to  wage
war  with  their  neighbours  of  Anzerma.  When  the  Marshal
Eobledo  entered  Cartago  for  the  last  time  (which  he  ought
not  to  have  done),  that  he  might  be  received  as  the  lieuten-
ant of  the  Judge  Miguel  Diaz  Armendariz,  certain  Spaniards
were  sent  to  guard  the  road  between  Anzerma  and  the  city
of  Cali.  These  men  encountered  certain  of  these  Chancos,
who  had  come  down  to  kill  a  Christian  who  was  going  to
take  some  goats  to  Cali,  and  one  or  two  of  the  Indians  were
killed.     The  Spaniards  were  astonished  at  their  great  size.

In  the  hills  and  valleys  which  sweep  down  from  the  Cor-
dillera to  the  westward,  there  are  many  Indian  villages,
extending  to  the  vicinity  of  the  city  of  Cah,  and  bordering
on  the  district  of  the  Barbacoas.  The  natives  have  their  vil-
lages scattered  over  the  hills,  the  houses  being  grouped  in
tens  and  fifteens,  sometimes  more,  sometimes  less.  They  call


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  97

these  Indians  Gorroncs,  because,  when  the  city  of  Cali  was
founded  in  the  valley,  they  called  the  fish  gorron,  and  these
Indians  came  in  laden  with  them,  calling  out,  "  gorron  !
(jorron !"  Not  knowing-  their  correct  name,  the  Spaniards
named  them  after  the  fish  they  carried,  Gorrones  :  just  in
the  same  way  as  they  named  the  Indians  of  Anzerma  after
the  salt,  which  in  their  language  is  anzer.  The  houses  of
these  Indians  are  large  and  round,  and  roofed  with  straw.
They  have  few  fruit  trees,  but  plenty  of  gold  of  four  or  five
quilates,  though  little  of  the  finer  sort.  Some  rivers  of  fresh
water  flow  near  their  villages.  Near  the  doors  of  their
houses  they  keep,  from  motives  of  pride,  many  feet  of  the
Indians  whom  they  have  killed,  and  many  hands.  They
preserve  the  insides,  that  they  may  lose  nothing,  and  hang
them  up  in  rows  like  sausages  in  great  quantities,  and  the
heads  and  entire  quarters  are  also  kept.  When  we  came  to
these  villages  with  the  Licentiate  Juan  de  Vadillo,  a  negro
belonging  to  Juan  de  Cespedes,  seeing  these  bowels,  and
thinking  they  were  really  sausages,  would  have  eaten  them
if  they  had  not  been  hard  and  dry  from  time  and  smoke.
Outside  the  houses  they  have  many  heads  placed  in  rows,
entire  legs,  arms,  and  other  parts  of  bodies,  in  such  abund-
ance as  to  be  hardly  credible.  If  I  had  not  myself  seen
what  I  write,  and  did  not  know  that  there  are  now  many
people  in  Spain  who  have  also  seen  it,  I  would  not  venture
to  state  that  these  men  are  such  butchers  of  other  men  for
the  sole  purpose  of  eating  them  ;  but  we  know  for  certain
that  these  Gorrones  are  great  butchers  in  the  matter  of
eating  human  flesh.  They  have  no  idols,  nor  did  I  see  any
house  of  worship,  but  it  is  publicly  known  that  some  of  them
converse  with  the  devil.  Neither  priests  nor  friars  have
gone  amongst  them,  as  they  have  in  Peru  and  other  parts
of  the  Indies,  for  fear  of  being  killed.

These  Indians  are  separated  from  the  valley  of  the  great
river  by  a  distance  of  two  or  three  leagues,  but  they  go


98  THE    TRAVELS    OP

down  to  fish  in  the  great  river  and  in  the  lagoons,  return-
ing with  great  store  of  fish.  They  are  of  middling  stature,
and  fit  for  httle  work.  I  only  saw  the  men  wearing  cloths,
but  the  women  are  dressed  in  large  cotton  mantles.  Their
dead  are  wrapped  in  many  of  these  mantles,  which  are
about  three  yards  long  and  two  broad,  and  fastened  by
cords.  Between  the  mantles  they  put  golden  ornaments,
and  then  bury  the  bodies  in  deep  tombs.  This  province  is
within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  city  of  Cali.  In  the  ravine  of
the  river  there  is  a  village,  which  is  not  very  large,  owing
to  the  wars  which  have  destroyed  the  population.  Near  it
there  is  a  great  lake  formed  by  the  overflow  of  the  river,
but  which  is  drained  when  the  river  is  low.  In  this  lake
the  Indians  kiU  a  vast  quantity  of  very  savouiy  fish,  which
they  give  to  travellers,  and  with  which  they  trade  in  the  cities
of  Cartage  and  Cali,  and  in  other  parts.  Besides  the
quantity  they  thus  dispose  of,  or  eat  themselves,  they  have
great  deposits  for  sale  to  the  Indians  of  the  mountains,  and
great  jars  of  grease  taken  from  the  fish.  When  we  were
engaged  in  exploring  with  the  hcentiate  Juan  de  Vadillo,
we  arrived  at  this  village  very  short  of  food,  and  found  some
fish.  Afterwards,  when  we  came  to  foimd  the  town  of
Anzerma  with  captain  Robledo,  we  found  enough  fish  here
to  load  two  ships.

This  province  of  the  Gorrones  is  very  fertile,  and  yields
plenty  of  maize  and  other  things.  There  are  many  deer,
guadaquinajes,  other  wild  beasts,  and  birds  in  the  woods.
But  the  great  valley  of  Cah,  once  so  fertile,  is  now  a  desert
of  grassy  land,  yielding  no  profit  to  any  but  the  deer  and
other  animals  who  graze  in  it,  for  the  Christians  are  not  in
sufficient  numbers  to  occupy  such  extensive  tracts.


PEDKO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  99


CHAPTER    XXVII.


I


Of  tlio  situation  of  the  city  of  Call,  of  the  Indians  iu  its  vicinity,  and
concerning  the  founder.

To  reach  tlie  city  of  CaM  it  is  necessary  to  cross  a  small  river
called  the  Rio  Frio,  which  is  full  of  weeds  and  flags.  This
river  is  very  cold,  because  it  comes  down  from  the  moun-
tains, and,  flowing  through  a  part  of  the  valley,  loses  itself
in  the  great  river.  Beyond  this  river  the  road  leads  over
extensive  plains,  where  there  are  many  small  and  very  fleet
deer.  The  Spaniards  have  their  grazing  farms  in  the  plains,
where  their  servants  live,  and  look  after  the  estates.  The
Indians  come  from  their  villages  in  the  mountains  to  sow
and  reap  the  maize  in  the  plains.  Near  the  farms  many
very  pretty  water-courses  flow  through  and  irrigate  the
fields,  besides  some  small  rivers  of  good  water.  Many
orange,  lime,  lemon,  pomegranate  and  banana  trees  have
been  planted  along  these  rivers  and  water-courses,  besides
excellent  sugar-canes.  There  are  also  pine-apples,  guayavas,^
(juavas,^  guanavanas,^  ^paltas,'^  and  other  fruits  in  great
abundance.  There  are  Spanish  melons  and  legumes,  but
wheat  has  not  yet  been  introduced,  though  I  am  told  they
have  it  in  the  valley  of  Lile,  which  is  five  leagues  from  the
city;  neither  have  they  planted  vines  as  yet,  though  the
land  is  as  weU  adapted  for  them  as  that  of  Spain.

The  city  of  CaH  is  situated  a  league  from  the  great  river,
near  a  small  river  of  particularly  good  water,  which  rises  in
the  overhanging  mountains.  Its  banks  are  bordered  with
pleasant  gardens,  where  there  are  plenty  of  the  fruits  and
vegetables  just  mentioned.  The  city  is  built  on  a  level
platform ;  and,  if  it  was  not  for  the  heat,  it  would  be  one  of

1  Psidium  Guai/ava  T\.add[.  -  Inga  sjiectahilis 'WiWd.

^  Anona  muricata  Linn.

*  Persea  gratissima  R.  P.  In  other  places  he  calls  it  Aguacate.  Palta
is  the  Quichiia  word.

h2


100  THE   TRAVELS    OF

the  best  sites  I  have  seen  in  any  part  of  the  Indies^  for  it
wants  nothing  to  make  it  excellent.  The  Indians  and
caciques  who  serve  the  Spaniards  holding  encomiendas,^  live
in  the  mountains.  When  I  left  the  place  there  were  twenty-
three  citizens  who  had  Indians^  and  there  are  never  wanting
Spaniards  who  are  travelling  from  one  part  to  the  other,
looking  after  their  affairs.  This  city  of  Cali  was  founded
by  captain  Miguel  Mmloz  in  the  name  of  his  Majesty,  the
Adelantado  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  being  governor  of  Peru,
in  the  year  1537;  though,  as  I  said  before,  it  was  first
founded  by  the  captain  Sebastian  de  Belalcazar  in  the
country  of  the  Gorrones.  And  some  say  that  the  munici-
pahty  of  the  city  obliged  Miguel  Munoz  to  remove  the
settlement  to  its  present  site,  whence  it  appears  that  the
honour  of  founding  the  city  is  in  dispute  between  Belalcazar
and  the  municipality,  for  the  conquerors,  who  composed
the  citizens,  declare  that  it  was  not  known  whether  Miguel
Munoz  acted  of  his  own  accord  or  not.


CHAPTER    XXVIII.


Of  the  villages  and  chiefs  of  Indians  who  are  within  the  jurisdiction  of
this  city  of  Cali.

On  the  western  side  of  this  city,  towards  the  mountains,
there  are  many  villages  of  Indians,  who  are  very  docile,  a
simple  people  void  of  mahce.  Amongst  these  villages  there
is  a  small  valley  closed  in  by  mountains.  The  valley  is
level,  and  is  always  sown  with  maize  and  yucas,  besides
having  plantations  of  fruit  trees,  and  of  the  palms  called
pixiuares.  The  houses  in  this  valley  are  very  large,  round,
lofty,  and  supported  on  straight  poles.  There  were  six
chiefs  when  I  entered  this  valley,  who  were  held  in  small
^  See  note  at  page  72.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  10]

estimation  by  the  Indians,  many  of  whom  are  always  in
the  houses  of  Spaniards.  Through  the  centre  of  this  valley,
which  is  called  Lile,  a  river  flows,  and  is  fed  by  many
streams  coming  from  the  mountains.  The  banks  of  this
river  are  well  covered  with  fruit  trees,  amongst  which
there  is  one  which  is  very  delicious  and  fragrant  called
granadiUa.^

Near  this  valley  there  was  a  village,  the  chief  of  which
was  the  most  powerful  and  respected  of  all  the  chiefs  of  the
neighbourhood.  His  name  was  Petecuy.  In  the  centre  of
his  village  there  was  a  great  and  lofty  round  wooden  house,
with  a  door  in  the  centre.  The  light  was  admitted  by  four
windows  in  the  upper  part,  and  the  roof  was  of  straw.  As
one  entered  through  the  door,  there  was  a  long  board
stretching  from  one  end  of  the  house  to  the  other,  on  which
many  human  bodies  were  placed  in  rows,  being  those  of
men  who  had  been  defeated  and  taken  in  war.  They  were
all  cut  open,  and  this  is  done  with  stone  knives,  after  which
they  eat  the  flesh,  stuff  the  skins  with  ashes,  and  place
them  on  the  board  in  such  sort  as  to  appear  like  living  men.
In  the  hands  of  some  they  placed  lances,  and  in  those  of
others  darts  or  clubs.  Besides  these  bodies,  there  is  a
great  abundance  of  arms  and  legs  collected  together  in  the
great  house,  insomuch  that  it  was  fearful  to  see  them,  thus
contemplating  so  sad  a  spectacle,  and  reflecting  that  all
had  been  kiUed  and  eaten  by  their  neighbours  as  if  they  had
been  beasts  of  the  field.  But  these  Indians  gloried  in  the
sight,  saying  that  their  fathers  and  ancestors  taught  them
to  act  thus.  Not  content  with  natural  food,  they  turned
their  bellies  into  the  tombs  of  their  neighbours.  But  now
they  do  not  eat  human  flesh  as  they  used  to  do  ;  the  Spirit
of  heaven  has  shone  upon  them ;  they  have  come  to  a
knowledge  of  their  blindness,  and  many  of  them  have
become  Christians.  There  is  hope  that  more  will  turn  to
^  The  fruit  of  the  passion  flower.


102  THE    TRAVELS    OP

our  holy  faith  day  by  day,  with  the  help  and  mediation
of  God  our  Eedeemer  and  Lord.

An  Indian,  native  of  a  village  called  Veache  (in  this
province),  formerly  in  the  reiDartimiento  of  the  captain  Don
Jorge  Robledo,  when  I  asked  him  why  they  had  such  a
number  of  dead  bodies  in  this  house,  replied  that  it  was  to
show  the  grandeur  of  the  lord  of  the  valley,  and  that  not
only  was  it  the  custom  to  preserve  the  bodies,  but  also  to
collect  the  arms  of  enemies,  and  hang  them  to  the  beams
of  the  house  as  memorials.  He  also  said  that  when  the
people  were  asleep  the  devil  often  entered  into  the  bodies
which  were  stuffed  with  ashes,  and  assumed  so  fearful  and
terrible  a  form  that  some  persons  died  of  mere  terror.

The  dead  Indians,  whose  bodies  this  lord  preserved  as
trophies,  in  the  manner  already  described,  were  mostly
natives  of  the  wide  valley  of  Cali,  for,  as  I  have  stated
before,  there  were  villages  containing  thousands  of  Indians
in  that  valley,  who  never  ceased  to  wage  war  with  those  of
the  mountains,  nor,  during  most  of  their  time,  did  they  ever
think  of  anything  else.

These  Indians  have  no  other  arms  than  those  which  are
used  by  their  neighbours.  They  generally  go  naked,  though
now  most  of  them  have  shirts  and  mantles  of  cotton,  and
their  women  also  wear  cotton  clothes.  Both  men  and
women  have  their  noses  pierced,  and  wear  a  sort  of  twisted
nails  in  them  of  gold,  about  the  thickness  of  a  finger,  called
carictiris.  They  also  wear  necklaces  of  fine  gold,  rarely
worked,  and  ear-rings  of  twisted  gold.  Their  former  dress
consisted  of  a  small  cloth  in  front,  and  another  over  the
shoulders,  the  women  covering  themselves  from  the  waist
downwards  with  a  cotton  mantle.  When  their  chiefs  die,
they  make  large  and  deep  tombs  inside  their  houses,  into
which  they  put  a  good  supply  of  food,  arms,  and  gold,  with
the  bodies.  They  have  no  religion  whatever,  so  far  as  we
could  understand,   nor  did  we   see  any  house  of  worship.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  103

When  any  of  them  fell  sick,  they  bathed,  and  for  some
illnesses  they  used  certain  herbs,  the  virtue  whereof  cures
them.  It  is  a  public  and  well-known  fact  that  those  who
are  chosen  by  the  devil  converse  with  him.  I  have  not
heard  that  either  these  Indians,  or  those  we  have  left
behind,  practise  the  abominable  crime,  but  if,  by  the  advice
of  the  devil,  any  Indian  commits  this  crime,  it  is  thought
little  of,  and  they  call  him  a  woman.  They  marry  their
nieces,  and  some  chiefs  marry  their  sisters.  The  son  of  the
principal  wife  inherits  the  chiefship  and  property  of  the
father.  Some  of  them  are  magicians,  and  above  all  they  are
very  dirty.

Beyond  this  village,  of  which  Petecuy  was  chief,  there  are
many  others,  the  natives  of  which  are  all  friends  and  allies.
These  villages  are  short  distances  from  each  other.  The
houses  are  large  and  round,  with  roofs  of  straw.  Their
customs  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  Indians  I  have  already
described.  At  first  they  entered  into  a  war  with  the
Spaniards,  and  underwent  severe  punishment,  insomuch
that  they  have  never  rebelled  since.  They  have  now  taken
more  to  Christianity  than  any  of  the  other  tribes ;  go  dressed
in  shirts,  and  serve  those  who  have  become  their  masters
with  good  will.

Beyond  this  province,  towards  the  south,  there  is  another
called  Timbas,  in  which  there  are  three  or  four  chiefs.  It
is  situated  amongst  rugged  mountains  containing  some
valleys  where  they  have  their  villages,  and  the  land  is  well
covered  with  crops,  fruit  trees,  palms,  and  other  things.
Their  arms  are  darts  and  lances.  They  have  been  much
addicted  to  the  invasion  and  subjection  of  their  neighbom's,
and  they  are  not  yet  entirely  tamed,  being  estabhshed  in  a
very  inaccessible  country.  Being  warlike  and  valiant,  they
have  killed  many  Spaniards,  and  done  much  harm.  Their
customs  and  language  differ  but  sUghtly  from  the  others.
Further  on  there  are  other  tribes  which  extend  as  far  as  the
sea,  all  having  the  same  language  and  customs.


J04  THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    XXIX.

In  which  the  matter  relating  to  the  city  of  Call  is  couchided  ;  and
concerning  other  Indians  inhabiting  the  mountains  near  the  port
which  they  call  Buenaventura.

Besides  these  provinces,  tliere  are  many  other  Indian  tribes
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  city  of  Cah,  who  dwell  in  the
most  rugged  and  inaccessible  mountains  in  the  world.
Amongst  these  wilds  there  are  some  valleys  which  are  very
fertile,  and  which  yield  all  manner  of  fruit.  There  are  also
many  wild  animals,  especially  great  tigers,  which  kill  many
Indians  and  Spaniards  who  go  to,  and  come  from  the  sea
coast,  every  day.  The  houses  of  the  Indians  in  these  moun-
tains are  rather  small,  and  roofed  with  leaves  of  palm  trees,
of  which  there  are  many  in  the  forests.  These  houses  are
surrounded  by  stout  and  very  long  poles  forming  a  wall,
which  are  put  up  as  a  defence  against  the  tigers.  The
arms,  dress,  and  customs  of  these  Indians  are  neither  more
nor  less  than  those  of  the  valley  of  Lile,  and  their  language
leaves  me  under  the  impression  that  they  are  the  same
people.  They  are  strong  and  powerful  men.  They  have
always  been  at  peace  from  the  time  that  they  declared  their
allegiance  to  his  Majesty,  and  are  very  friendly  to  the
Spaniards,  so  that,  although  Christians  are  always  passing-
through  their  villages,  they  have  not  killed  nor  harmed  any
up  to  the  present  time ;  on  the  contraiy,  as  soon  as  they  see
them,  they  give  them  food  to  eat.  The  port  of  Buenaventura
is  three  days'  journey  from  the  villages  of  these  Indians,  aU
the  way  through  thickets  of  palm  trees,  and  rocky  broken-
up  country,  and  is  thirty  leagues  from  the  city  of  Cali.  I
shaU  not  give  a  chapter  on  this  port,  because  I  have  nothing
more  to  say  of  it  than  that  it  was  founded  by  Juan  Ladrillo
under  the  direction  of  the  Adelantado  Don  Pascual  do
Andagoya,  and  that  afterwards  it  was  abandoned,  owing  to


PEDRO    UK    CIEZA    1)K    LEON.  105

the  absence  of  this  Andagoya,  arising  from  disputes  between
him  and  the  A.delantado  Belalcazar  respecting  the  boundaries
of  their  governments.  Finally,  Belalcazar  took  Andagoya/
and  sent  him  prisoner  to  Spain.  Then  the  Cah'ddo  of  Call
arranged  that  six  or  seven  of  the  citizens  should  always  reside
in  the  port,  in  order  that,  when  the  ships  arrived  from  New
Spain  and  Nicaragua,  they  might  see  that  the  merchandise
was  landed,  and  provide  houses  to  receive  it.  These  resi-
dents are  paid  at  the  cost  of  the  merchants,  and  among  them
there  is  a  captain  who  has  no  power  to  pronounce  judgments,
but  only  to  hear  cases  and  forward  them  to  the  city  of  Cali  for
decision.  These  remarks  seem  sufficient  to  give  the  reader
a  knowledge  of  how  the  port  of  Buenaventura  was  first
established."  The  only  means  of  conveying  merchandise
from  the  port  to  the  city  of  Cali  is  by  the  aid  of  the  Indians
of  the  intervening  mountains,  whose  ordinary  work  is  to
carry  it  on  their  backs,  for  it  is  impossible  to  transport  it  in
any  other  way.  If  it  was  desired  to  make  a  road,  I  beheve
that  laden  beasts  could  not  pass  over  it  on  account  of  the

It   is    true   that   there  is

1  The  licentiate  Pascual  de  Andagoya  came  to  the  Indies  in  the  train
of  Pedrarias,  governor  of  Panama,  and  was  appointed  governor  of  San
Juan,  inchiding  the  coast  of  the  Pacific  between  the  gulf  of  San  jMiguel
and  the  river  of  San  Juan,  in  1539.  He  landed  at  the  mouth  of  the  river
Dagua,  and  marched  inland  mitil  he  came  to  the  town  of  Cali,  which  he
claimed  as  coming  witliin  the  limits  of  his  jurisdiction.  At  tliis  time
Belalcazar  was  in  Spain,  petitioning  for  the  government  of  Popayan.
When  he  received  it,  with  the  title  of  Adelantado,  he  came  out  by  way  of
Panama,  landed  at  Buenaventura,  and  marched  to  Cali.  Here  the  peojile
received  him  as  their  governor,  and  he  arrested  Andagoya  as  an  intruder,
and  sent  him  prisoner  to  Spain.  Andagoya  was  a  learned  man,  and  wrote
a  Relacion  of  his  expedition,  which  occupies  sixty  pages  of  Xavarrete's
work.

2  Molhen  describes  Buenaventiu-a  as  consisting  of  a  dozen  huts  inha-
bited by  negroes,  a  barrack  with  eleven  soldiers,  a  battery  of  three  guns,
and  the  residence  of  the  governor  built  of  straw  and  bamboo,  on  an  island
called  Kascakral,  covered  with  grass,  brambles,  mud,  serpents  and  toads.
Travels  in  Colombia,  1824,  p.  299.


106  THE    TRAVELS    OF

another  way^  practicable  for  horses  and  cattle^  by  tlie  river
of  Dagua,  but  they  pass  it  in  constant  peril,  and  many  die
by  the  way,  while  the  rest  arrive  in  such  sorry  condition
that  they  are  of  no  use  for  many  days.

AVhen  a  ship  arrives  at  the  port,  the  chiefs  presently  send
down  as  many  Indians  as  they  can,  according  to  the  capa-
city of  their  villages,  and  these  porters  come  up  by  roads
and  passes  with  loads  weighing  three  arrohas  and  more,  and
some  of  them  carry  men  or  women,  even  when  they  are
stout,  in  chairs  made  of  the  bark  of  trees.  In  this  way
they  journey  with  their  loads,  without  showing  fatigue,  and
without  being  overworked.  If  they  should  receive  any  pay,
they  would  go  off  to  their  homes,  but  all  that  these  poor
fellows  gain  is  taken  by  the  encomenderos,  though,  in  truth,
they  pay  little  tribute.  It  is  said  that  they  come  and  go
willingly,  but  they  in  reality  undergo  great  labour.  When
they  come  into  the  plain,  and  approach  the  city  of  Cali,  they
go  along  painfully.  I  have  heard  the  Indians  of  New  Spain
highly  praised  for  the  great  loads  they  carry,  but  these
people  between  Cali  and  Buenaventura  astonish  me ;  and  if
I  had  not  seen  it,  and  traversed  the  mountains  where  they
have  their  villages,  I  could  neither  believe  nor  affirm  it.

Beyond  these  Indians  there  are  other  lands  inhabited  by
warlike  tribes,  and  the  river  of  San  Juan,  which  is  mar-
vellously rich,  flows  through  them.  These  people  have
their  houses  fastened  in  trees.  There  are  many  other  rivers,
all  rich  in  gold,  the  banks  of  which  are  inhabited  by  Indians,
but  they  cannot  be  conquered  because  the  land  is  covered
with  forests  which  are  impenetrable,  nor  can  the  rivers  be
crossed  without  boats.  The  houses  are  veiy  large,  for  each
one  contains  twenty  or  thirty  inhabitants.

Amidst  these  rivers  there  was  a  Christian  settlement
founded,  but  I  will  say  little  concerning  it  because  it  lasted
only  a  short  time.  The  natives  killed  one  Payo  Romero,
who  was  there  as  the  lieutenant  of  the  Adelantado  Anda-


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  107

goya,  for  lie  had  received  all  these  rivers  from  his  Majesty,
with  the  title  of  governor  of  the  river  of  San  Juan.  The
Indians  deceitfully  enticed  Payo  Romero,  and  other  Chris-
tians, on  to  a  river  in  canoes,  saying  that  they  wjinted  to
give  them  plenty  of  gold,  and  soon  so  many  Indians
assembled  that  they  killed  all  the  Spaniards,  but  they
took  Payo  Romero  alive,  inflicting  cruel  torments  upon
him,  and  slicing  off  his  members  till  he  died.  They  also
took  two  or  three  women  ahve,  and  dealt  very  cruelly  with
them.  Some  of  the  Christians,  by  great  good  luck,  escaped
from  the  cruelty  of  the  Indians.  No  further  attempt  was
made  to  establish  this  village,  for  that  land  is  evil.

I  wiU  now  relate  what  there  is  between  this  city  of  Cali
and  that  of  Popayan.


CHAPTER    XXX.


In  which  the  road  is  described  from  the  city  of  Cali  to  that  of  Popayan,
and  concerning  the  villages  of  Indians  that  lie  between  them.

The  distance  from  the  city  of  Cali  to  the  city  of  Popayan  is
twenty-two  leagues,  over  a  good  level  road  without  any
forest,  although  there  are  some  zigzag  ascents,  but  they  are
not  rugged  nor  difficult,  like  those  we  have  left  behind.
Leaving,  then,  the  city  of  Cali,  the  road  passes  through
meadows  and  plains  watered  by  rivers,  until  one  is  reached,
which  is  not  very  large,  called  Xamundi,^  spanned  by  a
bridge  of  stout  canes.  He  who  has  a  horse  crosses  by  a
ford  without  any  danger.

Near  the  source   of  this   river  there  are  Indians  whose

district,   also   called  Xamundi,  extends  over  three  or  four

leagues.     The  district  and  river  take  their  name  from  that

of  a  chief.     These  Indians  trade  with  those  of  the  pro\nnce

'  Or  Jamondi.


108  THE    TRAVELS    OP

of  Timbas,  and  they  collect  much  gold,  whicli  they  have
suppHed  in  great  quantity  to  those  who  hold  them  in
encomienda}

Five  leagues  further  on,  in  the  same  road  to  Popayan,  is
the  great  river  of  Santa  Martha,  where  there  are  always
balsas  and  canoes,  so  that  it  can  be  crossed  without  danger,
and  thus  the  Indian  inhabitants  go  and  come  from  one  city
to  the  other.  The  banks  of  this  river  were  once  very
populous,  but  the  people  have  been  extirpated  by  time  and
by  the  war  which  they  waged  with  the  captain  Belalcazar,
who  was  the  first  to  discover  and  conquer  them.  Although
he  was  one  cause  of  their  rapid  destruction,  yet  another
cause  of  it  was  their  evil  custom  and  accursed  vice  of  eating
each  other.  The  remains  of  these  tribes  and  nations  consist
of  a  diminished  race  on  both  banks  of  the  river,  who  are
called  Aguales,  and  who  are  subject  to  the  city  of  Cali.
There  are,  however,  many  Indians  in  the  mountains  on
each  side,  who,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  in  penetrat-
ing their  country,  and  of  the  troubles  in  Peru,  have  not  yet
been  subjugated.  Concealed  and  isolated  as  they  are,  they
have  yet  been  seen  by  the  invincible  Spaniards,  and  defeated
many  times.  They  all  go  naked,  and  have  the  same  customs
as  their  neighbours.

After  crossing  the  great  river,  which  is  fourteen  leagues
from  the  city  of  Popayan,  there  is  a  morass  about  a  quarter
of  a  league  in  extent,  and  beyond  it  the  road  is  very  good,
until  the  river  called  Ovejas  is  reached.  There  is  much
risk  to  him  who  attempts  to  cross  this  river  in  the  winter
time,  for  it  is  very  deep,  and  the  ford  is  near  its  mouth,
where  it  falls  into  the  great  river.  Many  Spaniards  and
Indians  have  been  drowned  here.  On  the  other  side  of
this  river  there  is  a  smooth  plain,  six  leagues  in  extent,  and
very  good  for  travelling,  and  at  the  end  of  it  a  river  called
Piandomo  is  crossed.  Its  banks,  and  the  whole  of  this
'  Sec  note  to  page  72.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  109

plain,  were  once  well  peopled,  but  those  whom  the  fnry  of
the  war  has  spared,  have  retired  to  a  distance  from  the
road,  where  they  think  they  are  safer.  To  the  eastward  is
the  province  of  Guambia,  and  many  other  chiefs  and  vil-
lages. Beyond  the  river  of  Piandomo,  there  is  another
called  Plaza,  the  banks  of  which  are  well  peopled,  both  at
its  sources,  and  all  along-  its  course.  Then  the  great  river
is  again  crossed  by  a  ford,  and  from  this  point  to  Popayan
the  whole  country  is  covered  with  beautiful  farms,  such
as  in  Spain  we  call  alcarias  or  cortijos,^  and  here  the
Spaniards  have  their  flocks.  These  plains  are  also  sown
with  maize,  and  it  is  here  that  they  have  begun  to  sow
wheat.  The  land  will  yield  great  quantities,  for  it  is  well
suited  to  its  growths.  In  other  parts  of  this  country  they
reap  the  maize  in  five  or  six  months,  so  that  they  have  two
crops  in  the  year.  They,  however,  only  sow  it  once  in  the
year  on  this  plain,  and  their  harvest  is  in  May  and  June ;
that  of  wheat  in  July  and  August,  as  in  Spain.  All  these
meadows  and  plains  were  once  very  populous,  and  subject
to  the  lord  whose  name  was  Popayan,  one  of  the  principal
chiefs  in  these  provinces.  Now  there  are  few  Indians,
owing  to  the  war  with  the  Spaniards,  and  to  their  custom
of  eating  each  other,  and  also  to  the  great  famine,  which
was  caused  by  their  not  sowing  the  crops,  with  the  hope
that,  there  being  no  food,  the  Spaniards  would  leave  their
country.  There  are  many  fruit  trees,  especially  aguacatcs
or  pears,  which  are  abundant  and  savoury.  The  rivers
rising  in  the  Cordillera  of  the  Andes  flow  through  these
plains,  and  the  water  is  very  limpid  and  sweet.  In  some  of
them  there  are  signs  of  gold.

The  site  of  the  city  is  on  a  high  table  land,  in  an  excel-
lent situation,  being  the  healthiest  and  most  temperate  of
any  in  the  government  of  Popayan,  and  even  in  the  greater
part  of  the  kingdom  of  Peru.     Truly  the  climate  is  more
1  Grange  or  farm.


110  THE    TRAVELS    OF

like  Spain  than  tlie  Andes.  There  are  large  houses  of
straw  in  the  city.  This  city  of  Popayan  is  the  chief  and
head  of  all  the  cities  I  have  described,  except  that  of  Uraba,
which  belongs  to  the  government  of  Carthagena.  All  the
rest  are  under  Popayan,  which  contains  a  cathedral  church,
and,  as  this  is  the  principal  and  most  central  city,  the
government  is  entitled  Popayan.  To  the  east  is  the  long
chain  of  the  Andes ;  to  the  west  are  other  mountains  which
overhang  the  South  Sea,  and  on  the  other  side  are  the
plains  which  I  have  described.  The  city  of  Popayan  was
founded  by  the  captain  Don  Sebastian  de  Belalcazar,^  in  the

1  After  the  fall  of  Robledo,  our  author  attached  his  fortunes  to  those
of  Belalcazar.

Sebastian  de  Belalcazar  was  born  in  a  village  called  Belalcazar,  on  the
borders  of  Estremadura  and  Andalucia.  He  was  the  child  of  a  peasant,
and  one  day,  having  killed  the  only  donkey  possessed  by  his  family  because
it  was  slow  in  getting  over  a  miry  road,  the  ill-conditioned  young  rascal
run  away,  fearing  to  return  home,  and  reached  Seville  in  1514.  At  that
time  Pedi-arias  was  enlisting  men  for  his  expedition  to  the  isthmus  of
Darien,  and  the  fugitive  took  service  as  a  soldier  in  one  of  the  sliips.  He
knew  not  of  any  other  name  by  wliich  he  was  called,  save  Sebastian,  and
to  it  was  added  the  name  of  his  birthplace.  It  is  said  that  his  father's
name  was  jMoyano.  On  one  occasion  his  sagacity  saved  the  governor
Pedrarias  when  he  was  nearly  lost  in  the  woods  near  Darien,  and  from
that  time  his  fortune  was  made.  Pedrarias  sent  liim  in  the  expedition  to
Nicaragua,  where  he  assisted  in  the  founding  of  the  city  of  Leon,  and  he
afterwards  followed  Pizarro  to  Peru.  Pizarro  appointed  hun  governor  of
San  Miguel,  whence  he  marched,  with  a  force  of  one  hundred  and  forty
well-armed  soldiers,  to  the  city  of  Quito  in  1533.  In  1536  he  set  out
from  Quito,  discovered  Popayan  and  Pasto,  and  the  valley  of  the  Cauca,
and  reached  Bogota  in  1538.  Thence  he  descended  the  INIagdalena  and
retiirned  to  Spain,  where,  to  check  the  ambition  of  the  Pizarros,  Charles  V
granted  him  the  government  of  Popayan,  with  the  title  of  adelantado.
He  went  out  again  by  way  of  Panama,  landed  at  Buenaventura  on  the
Pacific  coast,  and  marched  to  Call,  where  he  seized  Andagoya  and  esta-
blished his  own  authority.  Afterwards  he  was  wounded  fighting  on  the
side  of  the  Viceroy  Vela  against  Gonzalo  Pizarro  at  Anaquito,  he  treated
Robledo  with  harsh  cruelty,  and  he  marched  to  the  assistance  of  the  Pre-
sident Gasca  against  Gonzalo  PizaiTO,  on  which  occasion  he  was  accom-
panied by  our  author.  Briceuo,  a  judge,  who  had  married  the  widow  of
Robledo,  was  sent  to  examine  into  the  conduct  of  Belalcazar,  and,  urged


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  1  1  1

name  of  the  Emperor  Charles,  our  lord,  by  authoritj'  of  the
Adelantado  Don  Francisco  Pizarro,  governor  of  all  Peru,
for  his  Majesty,  in  the  year  of  the  Lord  1 53G.


CHAPTER    XXXI.


Concerning  the  river  of  Santa  ]Martha,i  and  of  the  things  wliich  arc  met
with  on  its  banks.

Now  that  I  have  reached  the  city  of  Popayan,  and  described
its  site,  neighbourhood,  founding,  and  people,  it  seems  well
that  I  should  give  an  account  of  the  river  which  flows  near
it,  and  which  is  one  of  the  two  branches  which  form  the
great  river  of  Santa  Martha.  Before  treating  of  this  river,
however,  I  will  relate  what  I  find  in  the  Scriptures  con-
cerning the  four  principal  rivers  mentioned  there,  which
are,  first,  the  Ganges,  flowing  through  the  East  Indies ;
second,  the  Nile,  separating  Asia  from  Africa,  and  watering
the  land  of  Egypt ;  third  and  fourth,  the  Tigris  and  Eu-
phrates, which  encircle  the  two  regions  of  Mesopotamia  ,and
Cappadocia.  These  are  the  four  which  are  said,  in  the
Holy  Scriptures,  to  issue  out  of  the  earthly  paradise.  I
also  find  that  mention  is  made  of  three  others,  which  are  the
river  Indus,  whence  India  takes  its  name ;  the  river  Danube,
being  the  principal  in  Europe ;  and  the  river  Tanais,  divid-
ing Europe  from  Asia.  Of  all  these,  the  greatest  is  the
Ganges,  concerning  which  Ptolemy  says,  in  his  book  of
geography,  that  the  naiTOwest  part  is  eight  thousand  paces,

by  his  wTfe,  was  not  veiy  favourably  disposed  towards  liim.  Indeed  he
condemned  him  to  death  for  the  murder  of  Robledo.  Belalcazar  appealed,
and  set  out  for  Spain  with  a  hea^-j^  heart.  He  died  at  Carthagena  on  his
way  home  in  the  year  1.550.

'  The  Magdalena.     By  the  two  branches  he  means  the  Magdalena  and
the  Cauca.


112  THE    TRAVELS    OF

and  the  broadest  twenty  thousand  paces  across.  According  to
this,  the  broadest  part  of  the  Ganges  is  seven  leagues  across.
This  is  the  exti-eme  breadth  of  the  largest  river  in  the  world,
that  was  known  before  the  discovery  of  these  Indies.  But
now  they  have  found  rivers  of  such  strange  bigness,  that
they  appear  more  like  gulfs  of  the  sea,  than  rivers  which
flow  through  the  land.  This  appears  from  what  is  stated
by  many  of  the  Spaniards  who  went  with  the  Adelantado
Orellana.  They  declare  that  the  river  which  flows  from
Peru  into  the  North  Sea  (commonly  called  the  Amazons  or
Marailon)  is  more  than  a  thousand  leagues  long,  and  in
some  parts  twenty-five  broad;  and  the  Rio  de  la  Plata
is  said  by  many  who  have  been  there  to  be  so  broad  that,  in
many  places,  the  banks  on  either  side  are  not  visible  from
the  centre  of  the  stream,  being*  more  than  eight  leagues
across.  The  river  of  Darien,  too,  is  great,  and  that  of
Urapa  is  no  smaller,  and  there  are  many  others  of  great
size  in  these  Indies,  amongst  which  is  this  river  of  Santa
Martha.

The  river  of  Santa  Martha  is  formed  by  two  branches.
One  of  these,  which  flows  by  the  city  of  Popayan,  rises  in
the  great  Cordillera  of  the  Andes,  in  some  valleys  formed
by  the  mountains  five  or  six  leagues  from  the  city.  These
valleys  were  well  peopled  in  former  times,  and  are  so  to  this
day,  though  not  so  thickly,  by  certain  Indians  whom  they
call  Coconucos,  and  among  these,  near  a  village  called
Cotara,  this  river  has  its  source,  which,  as  I  have  before
said,  is  one  of  the  branches  of  the  great  and  rich  river  of
Santa  Martha.

The  sources  of  the  two  branches  are  forty  leagues  from
each  other,  and  the  river  is  so  lai'ge  at  the  place  where  they
unite,  that  it  has  a  breadth  of  one  league,  while,  where  it
enters  into  the  North  Sea,  near  the  city  of  Santa  Martha,  it
is  seven  leagues  broad,  and  its  force  is  so  great  that  its
waters  enter  into  the  waves  at  last  to  be  converted  into  a


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    I-EON.  113

part  of  the  sea.  Many  ships  have  taken  in  good  fresh
water  from  it  out  at  sea,  for  its  force  is  so  mighty  that  it
passes  for  more  than  four  leagues  into  the  sea  before  it
mingles  with  the  salt  water.  It  enters  the  sea  by  many
mouths  and  openings.  In  the  mountain  of  the  Coconucos
(which  I  have  already  said  is  the  birth-place  of  one  of  the
branches)  it  is  like  a  little  brook,  but  it  flows  on  to  the
broad  valley  of  Cali,  receiving  streams  from  mountains  on
both  sides,  so  that,  when  it  reaches  the  city  of  Cali,  it  is  so
great  and  powerful  that  to  me  it  seemed  to  have  as  much
water  as  the  Guadalquivir  at  Seville.  Lower  down,  when
it  reaches  Buritica,  near  the  city  of  Antiochia,  having  re-
ceived many  more  streams,  it  is  still  larger.  There  are
provinces  and  villages  of  Indians  from  the  source  of  this
river  to  the  point  where  it  enters  the  ocean,  and  such  wealth
of  gold,  both  in  mines  and  in  the  possession  of  the  Indians,
that  it  cannot  be  exaggerated,  it  being  so  groat.  The
natives  of  these  regions  are  not  very  intelligent,  and  they
have  so  many  languages  that,  in  going  amongst  them,  it  was
necessary  to  take  many  interpreters.

All  the  wealth  of  the  province  of  Santa  Martha,  most  of
that  of  Carthagena,  of  Nueva  Granada,  and  of  the  province
of  Popayan,  is  near  this  river;  and,  besides  the  country
which  has  been  discovered  near  its  banks,  there  are  rumours
of  populous  districts  between  the  two  branches,  which  have
yet  to  be  explored.  The  Indians  say  that  in  these  districts
there  is  great  store  of  riches,  and  that  the  Indians  who  are
natives  possess  the  mortal  herb  of  Uraba.  The  Adelantado
Don  Pedro  de  Heredia  passed  by  the  bridge  of  Bronuco,
where,  the  river  flowing  in  great  strength,  the  Indians
had  made  a  bridge  with  trees  and  strong  creepers,  after
the  fashion  of  the  bridges  I  have  described  already.  He
went  some  days  march  by  land,  but  returned,  having  few
horses  and  Spaniards  with  him.  The  Adelantado  Don
Sebastian  de  Belalcazar  also  wished  to  send  another  captain

I


114  THE    TRAVELS    OF

by  a  route  more  to  the  eastward^  wliicli  is  less  dangerous,
called  the  valley  of  Aburra,  to  explore  the  country  tho-
roughly between  the  two  branches  of  this  great  river.  But
when  he  was  on  the  road  the  enterprise  was  abandoned,  in
order  to  send  the  troops  to  the  viceroy  Blasco  Nunez  Vela,
at  the  time  when  he  was  at  war  with  Gonzalo  Pizarro  and
his  followers.

Returning  to  the  subject  of  this  river  of  Santa  Martha,  I
would  observe  that,  where  the  two  branches  unite,  a  number
of  islands  are  formed,  some  of  which  are  inhabited.  Near
the  sea  there  are  many  very  fierce  alligators  and  other  great
fish,  called  manatee,'^  which  are  as  large  as  a  calf,  and  are
born  on  the  beaches  and  islands.  They  come  out  to  browse
when  they  can  do  so  without  danger,  and  presently  return
to  their  haunts.  About  one  hundred  and  twenty  leagues
below  the  city  of  Antiochia,  that  of  Mompox  has  been
founded,  within  the  jurisdiction  of  Carthagena,  and  here
they  call  this  river  the  Cauca.  The  length  of  the  river  from
its  source  to  the  sea  is  more  than  four  hundred  leagues.


CHAPTER    XXXII.


In  which  the  account  of  the  villages  and  chiefs  subject  to  the  city  of
Popayan  is  concluded ;  and  what  there  is  to  be  said  until  the
boundary  of  Popayan  is  passed.

This  city  of  Popayan  has  many  large  villages  within  the
boundaries  of  its  jurisdiction.     Towards  the  east  it  has  the

'  Manatus  Americanus.  Tliey  are  also  called  by  the  Spaniards  Vaca
Marina^  and  by  the  Portuguese  Pegebuey^  and  they  abound  in  tlie  great
South  American  rivers,  especially  in  the  Amazon.  The  manatee  is  a  sort
of  poiijoise,  often  eight  feet  long.  See  the  very  interesting  account  of  it
given  by  Acuua,  at  page  68  of  my  translation  of  that  author.  (Hakluyt
Society's  Vol.  for  1859.)


y


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  115

populous  province  of  Guambia,  and  others  called  Guanza,
Maluasa,  Polindara,  Palace,  Tembio,  and  Colaza,  all
thickly  peopled.  The  Indians  of  these  districts  have
much  gold  of  seven  quilates,  more  or  less.  They  also
have  some  fine  gold,  of  which  they  make  ornaments,
but  the  quantity  is  small  in  proportion  to  the  baser  kind.
They  are  warhke,  and  as  great  butchers  as  those  of  the
provinces  of  Arma,  Pozo,  and  Antiochia.  But  as  these
nations  have  no  knowledge  of  our  true  God  Jesus  Christ,  it
seems  that  little  account  should  be  taken  of  their  life  and
customs.  Not  that  they  fail  to  understand  all  that  pleases
them  and  is  good  in  their  eyes,  living  cunningly,  and  com-
passing the  death  of  each  other  in  their  wars.  And  they
also  had  great  wars  with  the  Spaniards,  without  caring  to
keep  the  peace  which  they  had  promised,  until  at  last  they
were  conquered.  Before  they  would  yield,  they  preferred
to  die  rather  than  be  subjected,  such  was  their  hardihood,
and  they  behoved  that  the  want  of  provisions  would  force
the  Spaniards  to  leave  the  country.  In  truth  the  Spaniards
suffered  much  misery  from  famine,  before  they  could  fully
establish  their  new  settlement.  The  natives  were  the  cause
of  the  loss  of  thousands  of  lives,  eating  each  others^  bodies,
and  sending  their  souls  to  hell.  At  first  some  care  was
taken  for  the  conversion  of  these  Indians,  but  they  were
not  suppHed  with  complete  knowledge  of  our  holy  religion,
owing  to  the  want  of  priests.  At  present  things  are  in
better  order,  both  as  to  their  treatment  and  conversion ;  for
his  Majesty,  with  great  zeal  for  Christianity,  has  ordered
that  they  shall  be  preached  to.  And  the  lords  of  the
high  council  of  the  Indies  take  great  care  that  this  order
is  comphed  with,  and  have  sent  out  learned  friars  of  holy
life  and  manners,  so  that,  by  the  favour  of  God,  great  fruit
will  be  derived  from  their  labours.

Towards  the  snowy  mountains  or  Cordillera  of  the  Andes,
there  are  many  valleys  thickly  inhabited  by  Indians  called


116  THE    TRAVELS    OP

Coconucos^  in  whose  country  the  g]'eat  river  takes  its  rise.
Their  customs  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  Indians  we  have
left  behind^  except  that  they  do  not  commit  the  abominable
sin  of  eating  human  flesh.  There  are  many  volcanoes^  or
fiery  mouths,  in  the  lofty  parts  of  the  mountains,  and  out  of
one  comes  hot  water,  from  which  they  make  salt.  Their
art  in  making  salt  is  a  thing  well  worthy  of  note,  and  I
promise  to  give  an  account  of  it  further  on,  after  I  have
finished  what  I  have  to  say  concerning  the  town  of  Paste.
Near  these  Indians  there  is  a  village  called  Zotara,  and
further  on  another  called  Guanaca.

To  the  eastward  is  the  extensive  province  of  the  Paes,
who  have  worked  so  much  evil  to  the  Spaniards.  It
contains  seven  or  eight  thousand  Indians  fit  for  war,  who
are  valiant  and  dexterous  in  fighting,  with  fine  bodies,  and
very  clean.  They  have  their  captains  whom  they  obey,
and  five  in  valleys  surrounded  by  very  rugged  mountains
through  which  many  rivers  and  streams  flow,  and  in  which
it  is  believed  there  are  good  mines.  In  fighting,  they  use
stout  lances  of  black  palm  wood,  twenty-five  palmos  long,
besides  huge  stones,  which  they  throw  or  roll  down  w^hen
occasion  serves.  They  have  killed  so  many  valiant  Spaniards,
as  well  captains  as  soldiers,  that  it  causes  sorrow  and  fear
to  behold  what  injury  these  Indians  have  done,  being  so
few.  But  there  were  grave  faults  on  the  part  of  those  who
were  killed,  in  that  they  held  these  people  so  cheap,  and
God  permitted  that  the  Spaniards  should  fall,  and  the
Indians  be  victorious.  So  things  went  on  until  the  Adelan-
tado  Don  Sebastian  de  Belalcazar  destroyed  their  crops,  and
forced  them  to  make  peace.

Towards  the  east  is  the  province  of  Guachico,  and  further
on  are  many  other  provinces.  To  the  south  is  the  village
of  Cochesquio,  and  the  small  Lagoon,  also  the  district  they
call  Las  Barrancas,  where  there  is  a  small  village  of  the
same  name.     Further  on  are  other  villages,  the  river  called


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  117

Las  Juntas,  another  called  Los  Capitanes,  the  great  pro-
vince of  Masteles,  and  the  district  of  Patia,  which  includes
a  beautiful  valley  watered  by  a  river  that  is  fed  by  streams
flowing  from  the  other  district.  This  river  carries  its  waters
into  the  South  Sea.  All  these  plains  and  valleys  were
once  thickly  peopled,  but  the  natives  who  have  survived
the  wars  have  retired  into  the  heights  and  fastnesses  which
overhang  them.

Towards  the  west  is  the  pro\^nce  of  Bomba  and  other
villages,  whose  inhabitants  trade  with  each  other,  besides
other  districts  peopled  by  many  Indians,  where  a  town
has  been  founded,  and  they  call  them  the  provinces  of
Chapanchita.  All  these  villages  are  situated  in  fertile
land,  and  they  have  a  great  quantity  of  gold.  In  some
parts  idols  have  been  seen,  but  there  is  no  report  of
any  temple  or  house  of  worship  having  been  met  with.
They  converse  with  the  devil,  and,  by  his  advice,  they  do
many  things  in  accordance  with  his  wishes.  They  have  no
knowledge  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  but  they  think
that  their  chiefs  will  return  to  hfe,  and  some  believe  (as  I
have  been  informed)  that  the  souls  of  the  dead  enter  into
the  bodies  of  the  newly  born.  They  perform  ceremonies  at
the  burial  of  their  dead,  and  place  them  in  large  and  deep
tombs.  With  their  chiefs  they  inter  some  women  and  aU
their  property,  besides  food  and  wines.  In  some  parts  they
burn  the  bodies  until  they  are  converted  to  ashes,  and  in
others  they  merely  preserve  the  dried  bodies.

In  these  provinces  there  are  the  same  fruits  and  pro-
visions as  in  those  we  have  left  behind,  except  that  there
are  no  jjixibae  palms,  but  they  gather  great  quantities  of
potatoes.  The  people  go  naked  and  barefoot  without  more
clothes  than  a  small  mantle  and  a  few  ornaments  of  gold.
The  women  go  covered  with  small  mantles  of  cotton,  and
wear  necklaces  of  small  flies  made  of  pure  gold,  which  are
very  pretty  and  becoming.      As   to  their  customs  in  the


118  THE    TRAVELS    OP

matter  of  marriage,  I  will  not  relate  anything  about  them
because  tliey  are  cliildisb,  and  I  also  pass  over  other
matters  as  being  of  no  importance.  Some  of  the  Indians
are  great  magicians  and  sorcerers.  We  here  learnt,  also,
that  there  are  many  herbs,  both  wholesome  and  harmful,  in
these  parts.  All  the  Indians  eat  human  flesh.  The  por-
vince  round  Popayan  was  one  of  the  most  populous  in  all
Peru,  and  if  it  had  been  subjected  by  the  Yncas  it  would
have  been  the  best  and  richest  of  all.


CHAPTER    XXXIII.


In  which  an  account  is  given  of  what  there  is  between  Popayan  and  the
city  of  Pasto  ;  who  was  the  founder  of  Pasto  ;  and  what  there  is  to
be  said  concerning  the  natives  of  the  neighbouring  districts.

The  city  of  Popayan  is  forty  leagues  from  the  town  of
Pasto,  and  the  first  village  on  the  road  was  great  and  very
populous  in  ancient  times,  as  well  as  when  the  Spaniards
discovered  it,  and  even  now  it  contains  many  Indians.
The  valley  of  Patia  becomes  very  narrow  at  this  village,  and
the  Indians  live  in  deep  and  lofty  ravines  on  the  western
side.  The  Spaniards  call  the  place  "  El  pueblo  de  la  Sal."
It  is  very  rich,  and  has  yielded  goodly  tribute  of  fine  gold
to  those  who  have  held  the  encomienda  here.  The  natives,
in  their  arms,  dress,  and  customs,  resemble  those  of  the
countries  we  have  already  passed,  except  that  they  do  not
eat  human  flesh,  and  are  a  little  more  civilised.  They  have
many  very  fragrant  pine-apples,  and  they  trade  with  the
province  of  Chapanchita  and  with  other  neighbouring  dis-
tricts. Beyond  this  village  is  the  province  of  Masteles,
which  contains,  or  did  contain,  more  than  four  thousand
Indians  fit  for  war.  Adjoining  it  is  the  province  of  the
Abades   and   the   villages    of    Ysancal    and    Pangan    and


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  119

Caquanpas,  and  that  tliey  call  ''  Los  Chorros/'  and  Piclii-
linbuy,  also  Tuyles  and  Angayan,  Pagual,  Chuclialdo,  and
many  more.  Inland,  towards  the  west,  there  are  reports
of  many  more  Indian  villages  and  rich  mines  in  districts
extending  as  far  as  the  South  Sea.  The  following  villages
also  border  on  the  road,  namely,  Asqual,  Mallama,  Tucurres,
Sapuys,  lies,  Gualmatal,  Funes,  Chapal,  Males  and  Piales,
Pupiales,  Turca,  and  Cumba.  All  these  villages  were  in-
habited by  chiefs  and  Indians  called  Pastes,  and  hence  the
town  of  Pasto  has  received  its  name,  being  as  much  as  to
say,  "  the  town  built  in  the  land  of  Pasto  /'  also  another
tribe  of  Indians  borders  on  the  Indians  called  Pastos,  who
are  known  as  the  Quillacingas,  and  whose  villages  are  to  the
eastward,  and  are  well  peopled.  The  names  of  their  prin-
cipal villages  are  Mocondino,  Bexendino,  Buyzaco,  Guajan-
zangua,  Mocoxonduque,  Quaquanquer,  and  Macaxamata.
Still  further  to  the  east  there  is  another  province,  which  is
somewhat  larger  and  more  fertile,  called  Pastoco,  and
another  near  a  lake  on  the  summit  of  a  mountain,  where  the
water  is  so  cold  that,  though  the  lake  is  eight  leagues  long
and  more  than  four  broad,  no  fish  nor  bird  can  Hve  in  it.
The  land,  too,  produces  no  maize,  nor  are  there  any  trees.
Tliere  is  another  lake  near  it  of  the  same  kind.  Further  on
there  are  great  mountains,  and  the  Spaniards  do  not  know
what  there  is  on  the  other  side  of  them.

There  are  other  villages  on  the  road  to  this  city,  but  it
seems  unnecessary  to  enumerate  them,  ha\nng  already  men-
tioned the  principal  ones.  With  regard  to  this  city  of
Pasto,  I  have  to  say  that  no  city  or  town  in  the  whole
government  of  Popayan  has  so  many  Indians  subject  to  it,
and  it  even  has  more  than  Quito  and  other  places  in  Peru.
Populous  as  the  district  now  is,  in  ancient  times  it  must  have
been  far  more  populous,  for  it  is  most  astonishing  to  see,  in
all  the  wide  spread  plains,  on  the  banks  of  rivers,  on  the  hills
and  lofty  mountains,  that  there  is  not  a  part  (how  rugged


120  THE    TRAVELS    OP

and  inaccessible  soever)  wliicli  does  not  give  signs  of  having
been  tilled  or  built  over  in  times  past.  The  customs  of
these  Indians,  called  Quillacingas  and  Pastos,  differ  from
those  of  the  people  we  have  passed,  for  the  Pastes  do  not
eat  human  flesh,  either  when  they  fight  with  the  Spaniards
or  with  each  other.  Their  arms  are  stones  thrown  from  the
hand,  staves  hke  shepherds'  crooks,  and  a  few  badly-made
lances.  They  are  a  poor-spirited  people.  The  chiefs  are
well-mannered,  but  the  rest  of  the  Indians  are  ill-favoured,
as  well  the  men  as  the  women,  and  all  very  dirty,  but
gentle  and  good-tempered.  All  these  Indians  are  so  nasty,
that,  when  they  louse  themselves,  they  eat  the  hce  as  if  they
had  been  nuts,  and  their  drinking  vessels  and  cooking
utensils  are  very  seldom  cleaned  out.  They  have  no  creed,
nor  have  idols  been  seen  amongst  them,  but  they  beheve
that  after  death  they  will  come  to  hfe  again  to  live  in  some
pleasant  and  delightful  place.  There  are  some  things
amongst  these  Indians  that  are  so  secret  that  God  alone  can
penetrate  them.  Their  women  go  dressed  in  a  narrow
cloth  which  covers  them  from  the  bosom  to  the  knees,
with  a  smaller  one  falling  over  it.  These  mantles  are  made
either  of  the  bark  of  a  tree  or  of  cotton.  The  men  wear  a
mantle  three  or  four  varas  long,  which  is  passed  once  round
the  waist,  and  then  over  the  neck,  the  end  being  wrapped
round  the  head.  The  QuiUacingas,  as  well  as  the  Pastes,
also  wear  a  cloth  between  the  legs.  They  wear  a  mantle  of
cotton,  which  is  broad  and  flowing,  with  another  over  the
shoulders,  the  women  wearing  one  which  falls  over  the
bosom.  The  Quillacingas  converse  with  the  devil.  They
have  neither  temple  nor  creed,  and  when  they  die  the
bodies  are  put  into  large  and  deep  tombs,  together  with  aU
the  property  of  the  deceased,  which  is  not  much.  If  the
dead  man  has  been  a  chief,  they  bury  some  of  his  wives
and  servants  with  him.  They  also  have  a  custom,  which  is
this  (according  to  what  I  am  told) :  when  one  of  the  chiefs


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  121

dieSj  the  sin-rounding  cliiofs  send  two  or  tlireo  of  their
women,  who  are  taken  to  the  tomb  and  given  enough
maize-wine  to  make  them  drunk.  As  soon  as  they  are
insensible  they  are  buried  in  the  tomb  to  keep  company
with  the  dead  man;  so  that  none  of  these  savages  die  with-
out having  twenty  persons  to  keep  them  company,  and,
besides  these  people,  they  put  many  jars  of  wine  and  other
provisions  into  the  tomb.

When  I  passed  through  the  country  of  these  Indians,  I
collected  the  particulars  which  I  now  relate  with  great  dili-
gence, making  all  the  inquiries  I  possibly  could ;  and,
among  other  things,  I  asked  why  they  practised  such  an
evil  custom,  and  why,  not  content  with  burying  their  own
women  ahve,  they  sought  for  more  victims  from  amongst
their  neighbours  ?  I  found  out  that  the  devil  appears  in  a
terrible  and  appalling  form  (according  to  their  own  account),
and  gives  them  to  understand  that  they  will  come  to  hfe
again  in  a  great  kingdom  which  is  prepared  for  them,  and
that  they  will  arrive  with  more  authority  if  they  are  well
attended.  They  also  fall  into  other  sins  through  the  wiles
of  this  accursed  enemy.  God  our  Lord  knows  why  he
allows  the  devil  to  converse  with  these  people,  and  to  wield
such  great  power  over  them  by  deceiving  them.  Now  his
Divine  Majesty  is  displayed,  and  many  Indians,  abhorring
the  devil,  have  embraced  our  holy  reKgion.  Some  of  the
Pastes  converse  with  the  devil.  When  the  chiefs  die,  all
possible  honour  is  done  to  their  memory ;  the  people  mourn
for  many  days,  and  the  same  things  are  put  into  their
tombs  as  I  have  already  stated.

The  districts  of  Paste  yield  but  little  maize,  but  there
are  great  breeding-places  for  cattle,  and  especially  for  pigs,
which  are  raised  in  vast  quantities.  The  country  yields
much  barley,  potatoes,  and  xiquimas,^   and  there  are  very

1  I  cannot  make  out  what  this  can  be.  It  may  possibly  mean  the  grain
called  qninoa  {Chenopodimn  Qitinoa),  which  is  cultivated  in  the  loftier
parts  of  the  Andes.


122  THE    TRAVELS    OP

luscious  granadUlas^  and  other  fruits.  In  the  country  of  the
Quillacingas  there  is  plenty  of  maize  and  much  fruit,  except
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  lake,  where  the  people  have
neither  trees  nor  maize,  the  land  being  so  cold.  These
Quillacingas  are  warlike  and  untameable.  There  are  great
rivers  of  very  remarkable  water  in  their  country,  and  it  is
believed  that  some  of  them  contain  abundance  of  gold.
One  of  these  rivers  flows  between  Popayan  and  Pasto,  called
the  hot  river,  which  is  dangerous  and  difl&cult  to  cross  in
the  winter  time.  They  have  stout  ropes  stretched  from  one
bank  to  the  other,  for  crossing  it.  This  river  contains  the
most  excellent  water  I  have  met  with  in  the  Indies,  or  even
in  Spain.  Beyond  this  river,  on  the  road  to  Pasto,  there  is
a  mountain,  of  which  the  ascent  is  three  good  leagues  long.
The  famous  chase  which  Gonzalo  Pizarro  and  his  followers
gave  the  Viceroy  Blasco  Nunez  Vela,  extended  as  far  as
this  river.


CHAPTER    XXXIV.


In  wliich  the  account  of  what  there  is  in  this  country  is  concluded,  as
far  as  the  boundary  of  Pasto.

There  is  another  rather  large  river  in  this  country  of  the
Pastos,  called  Ancasmayu,^  which  is  the  point  to  which  the
King  Huayna  Ccapac,  son  of  the  great  captain  Tupac  Ynca
Yupanqui,  extended  his  conquests.  Having  passed  the  hot
river,  and  the  mountain  beyond  it,  the  road  continues  over
some  plains  and  hills,  and  crosses  a  small  paramo,^  where
there  was  no  little  cold  when  I  travelled  over  it.  Further
on  there  is  a  high  mountain,  on  the  summit  of  Avhich  a
volcano  sends  forth  quantities  of  smoke  at  intervals,  and  in

^  The  fruit  of  the  passion-flower.  -  Literally  "  Blue  river."

3  Paramo  is  the  name  given,  in  the  Quito  provinces,  to  the  elevated
plateaux  of  the  Andes.     In  Peru  they  are  called  Punas.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  123

times  past,  the  natives  say,  it  threw  out  volleys  of  stones.
Coming  from  Popayan,  this  volcano  is  left  on  the  right-hand
side.  The  town  of  Pasto  is  situated  in  a  very  beautiful
valley,  through  which  a  river  of  very  sweet  and  whole-
some water  flows,  fed  by  numerous  springs  and  brooks.
This  valley  is  called  Atris,  and  was  formerly  very  populous,
but  the  inhabitants  have  now  retired  to  the  mountains.  It
is  surrounded  by  mountains,  some  wooded  and  others  bare,
and  the  Spaniards  have  their  farms  and  hunting-lodges  in
the  valley.  The  banks  of  the  river  are  always  sown  with
much  excellent  wheat,  barley,  and  maize,  and  there  is  a
mill  where  the  wheat  is  ground,  for  in  this  town  they  do
not  eat  maize-bread,  owing  to  the  abundance  of  wheat.  In
the  plains  there  are  quantities  of  deer,  rabbits,  partridges,
doves,  pigeons,  pheasants,  and  turkeys,  and  the  Indians
take  many  in  the  chase.  The  land  of  the  Pastes  is  ex-
cessively cold,  and  in  summer  it  is  colder  than  in  winter,
the  same  thing  occurring  in  the  town  of  the  Christians,
insomuch  that  the  company  of  a  wife  is  by  no  means
irksome  to  a  husband,  nor  is  plenty  of  clothes  disagreeable.
The  delightful  town  of  Pasto  was  founded  and  settled  by
the  captain  Don  Lorenzo  de  Aldana,  in  the  name  of  his
Majesty,  the  Adelantado  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  being  his
governor  and  captain-general  of  all  the  provinces  of  Peru,
in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1539.  The  said  Lorenzo  de  Aldana
was  lieutenant-general  for  the  same  Don  Francisco  Pizarro
in  Quito,  Pasto,  Popayan,  Timana,  Cab,  Anzerma,  and
Cartage.  He  governed  them  all,  either  himself  or  through
lieutenants  whom  he  named,  and,  as  is  said  by  many  con-
querors in  these  parts,  he  ordered  that  the  natives  should
be  well  treated  during  the  whole  time  that  he  was  in  com-
mand.^

^  Lorenzo  de  Aldana  came  to  Peru  with  the  Adelantado  Pedro  de
Alvarado.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant-governor  of  Quito  by  Pizarro,
and  it  was  then  that  he  founded  the  town  of  Pasto.  Diu-ing  the  subse-
quent civil  wars  he  acted  a  very  conspicuous  part,  especially  in  the  battle


12  t  THE    TRAVELS    OP


CHAPTER    XXXV.


Of  the  notable  foimtains  and  rivers  in  these  provinces,  and  how  they
make  salt  of  good  quality  by  a  very  cm-ious  ai-tifice.

Before  I  treat  of  the  kingdom  of  Peru^  or  leave  tlie  govern-
ment of  Popayan^  it  seems  to  me  well  to  give  some  account
of  the  notable  fountains  there  are  in  this  land,  and  of  the
rivers  of  water  from  which  they  make  salt^  for  thus  the
people  are  sustained,  having  no  salt  pits  in  these  parts,  and
the  sea  being  far  distant.

When  the  Hcentiate  Juan  de  Vadillo  set  out  from  Car-
thagena,  we  marched  over  the  mountains  of  Abibe,  which
are  very  rugged  and  difficult  to  cross,  so  that  we  passed  a
time  of  no  little  hardship ;  most  of  the  horses  died,  and  we
were  obliged  to  leave  the  greater  part  of  our  baggage  in  the
road;  and,  having  reached  the  plain,  we  found  many  vil-

of  Chupas,  when  the  younger  Ahnagro  was  defeated.  "Wlien  Gonzalo
Pizarro  determined  to  send  an  embassy  to  Spain  to  obtain  a  confirmation
of  his  authority,  Aldana  was  selected  as  his  envoy  in  1546  ;  but  he  was
won  over  to  the  side  of  Gasca  at  Panama,  by  the  persuasions  of  that  wily
ecclesiastic.  He  was  then  sent  to  cruise  off  Callao,  and  receive  all  those
on  board  who  washed  to  join  the  royal  cause  ;  and  during  the  remainder
of  the  struggle  he  took  an  active  part  against  his  old  commander.  Aldana
died  at  Arequipa  in  1556,  unmarried  and  leaving  no  children.  In  his
will  he  left  all  his  property  to  the  Indians  whom  he  had  received  in
repartimiento^  for  the  payment  of  their  tribute  in  future  years.  He  seems
to  have  been  a  noble  minded  man,  and  superior  to  the  common  run  of
Simnish  conquistador es.  Aldana  was  not  the  only  conquistador  whose
conscience  smote  him  on  his  death  bed,  when  too  late,  for  his  treatment
of  the  Indians.  The  curious  dying  confession  of  Marcio  Serra  de  Le-
jesama,  addressed  to  Philip  II  in  1589,  is  another  instance  of  these  stony-
hearted men  being  moved  at  last.  {Calancha^  i,  cap.  15,  p.  98.).  After
telling  the  simple  truth  concerning  the  poor  Indians,  their  former  happy
state,  and  the  desolate  misery  to  which  the  Spaniards  had  reduced  them,
the  guilty  wretch  thus  concludes :  "I  pray  to  God  that  he  will  pardon
me,  for  I  am  the  last  to  die  of  all  the  conquerors  and  discoverers  ;  it  is
notorious  that  there  are  none  surviving  except  I  alone,  in  all  this  king-
dom nor  out  of  it ;  and  I  now  do  what  I  can  to  relieve  my  conscience."


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  125

lages,  with  great  store  of  fruit  trees,  and  broad  rivers.
But,  as  the  stock  of  salt  which  we  had  brought  with  us
from  Carthagena  was  coming  to  an  end,  our  food  being
herbs  and  beans  for  want  of  meat,  except  that  of  horses
and  a  few  dogs  we  caught ;  we  began  to  feel  distress,  and
many,  from  the  want  of  salt,  began  to  lose  their  colour,  and
became  yellow  and  thin.  We  procured  some  things  in  the
Indian  farms,  but  there  was  only  a  little  black  salt  mixed
with  the  aji  that  the  natives  eat,  and  even  this  was  very
scarce,  so  that  he  thought  himself  fortunate  who  could  get
any.  Necessity  teaches  men  notable  things,  and  we  found
a  lake  in  a  small  mountain,  the  water  of  which  was  black
and  salt.  We  put  a  quantity  of  this  water  into  jars,  which
gave  us  a  relish  for  our  food.

The  natives  of  these  provinces  take  the  quantity  of  water
they  require  either  from  this  lake  or  from  others  of  the
same  kind,  and  boil  it  in  great  jars.  As  soon  as  the  fire  has
consumed  the  greater  part  of  the  water,  black  salt  remains
at  the  bottom,  with  which,  though  not  of  good  taste,  they
season  their  food,  and  Hve  without  feeling  the  want  that
would  let  itself  be  known  if  it  were  not  for  these  fountains.

Divine  Providence  takes  such  care  of  his  creatures  that,
in  all  parts,  he  gives  them  what  they  require ;  and  if  men
would  always  consider  the  ways  of  nature,  they  would  know
the  obligation  they  are  under  to  serve  our  true  God.

In  the  province  called  Cori,  which  is  near  the  town  of
Anzerma,  there  is  a  river  which  flows  with  considerable
force,  and  near  it  there  are  some  ponds  of  salt  water,  whence
the  Indians  obtain  the  quantity  they  require,  and,  making
great  fires,  they  place  jars  of  this  salt  water  on  them,  and
set  the  water  to  boil  until  from  an  arroha  there  is  not  left
half  an  azumhre.  Then  their  experience  enables  them  to
convert  the  residue  into  as  pure  and  excellent  salt  as  is
made  from  the  salt-pits  of  Spain.  Throughout  the  districts
of  Antioquia  there  are  many  of  these  foimtains,  and  they


126  THE    TRAVELS    OP

make  so  mucli  salt  that  they  take  it  inland,  and  exchange
it  for  gold,  cotton  cloth,  and  other  things  which  they  may
require.

Beyond  the  great  river  which  flows  near  the  city  of  CaH,
and  near  that  of  Popayan,  towards  the  north,  we  discovered
a  village  called  Mungia,  in  company  with  the  captain  Jorge
Robledo,  whence  we  crossed  the  Cordillera  of  the  Andes,
and  discovered  the  valley  of  Aburra  and  its  plains.

In  this  village  of  Mungia,  and  in  another  called  Cenu-
sara,  we  found  some  other  fountains  in  mountains  near  a
river,  and  from  these  fountains  the  natives  made  so  much
salt  that  their  houses  were  full  of  it,  moulded  into  shapes
exactly  like  loaves  of  sugar.  They  took  this  salt  by  the
valley  of  Aburra  to  the  provinces  to  the  eastward,  which
have  not  been  discovered  or  seen  by  the  Spaniards  to  this
day.     This  salt  has  made  the  Indians  exceedingly  rich.

In  the  province  of  Caramanta,  which  is  not  very  distant
from  the  town  of  Anzerma,  there  is  a  fountain  which  rises
out  of  a  river  of  sweet  water,  and  turns  some  of  its  water
into  a  vapour  resembling  smoke,  which  assuredly  must
arise  from  there  being  some  metal  in  that  part.  The  Indians
make  good  black  salt  from  this  water,  and  they  also  say
that  they  know  of  a  lake  near  a  great  rock,  at  the  foot  of
which  there  is  the  same  kind  of  water.  They  make  salt
from  this  water  for  their  chiefs,  for  they  say  that  it  makes
better  and  whiter  salt  than  in  any  other  part.

In  the  province  of  Anzerma,  and  in  all  its  districts,  there
are  fountains  of  the  same  sort,  from  which  they  make  salt.

In  the  provinces  of  Arma,  Carrapa,  and  Picara,  they
suffer  much  from  the  want  of  salt,  there  being  many  in-
habitants and  few  of  these  fountains,  so  that  the  salt  that  is
brought  fetches  a  high  price.

In  the  city  of  Cartage  every  citizen  has  his  apparatus  for
making  salt,  which  is  prepared  in  an  Indian  viUage  called
Consota,  a  league  from  the  city,  where  a  small  river  flows.


PEDRO    DB    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  127

Near  the  river  there  is  a  mountain,  out  of  which  comes  a
hirge  spring  of  very  black  and  thick  water.  The  water  is
taken  from  this  spring  and  boiled  in  cauldrons  until  it  is
nearly  all  evaporated,  when  a  white-grained  salt  remains,
as  good  as  that  of  Spain.  The  citizens  of  that  city  use  no
other  salt  than  that  which  is  obtained  from  this  spring.
Further  on  there  is  another  village  called  Coyusa,  near
which  flows  several  rivers  of  very  remarkable  water.  I
noticed  in  them  a  thing  which  astonished  me  not  a  little.
This  was  that  certain  brackish  pools  were  formed  by  these
streams,  and  also  at  the  source  whence  they  take  their  rise ;
and  that  the  Indians,  with  much  industry,  had  certain
pipes,  made  of  the  stout  canes  of  these  parts,  fixed  in  them
after  the  manner  of  ships'  pumps,  so  that  they  could  pump
up  the  quantity  of  water  they  required,  and  make  their  salt
from  it.

In  the  city  of  Cali  there  are  none  of  these  springs,  and
the  Indians  get  their  salt  by  barter  from  a  province  near
the  sea,  called  Timbas.  Those  who  cannot  make  the  ex-
change boil  fresh  water,  and  mix  a  certain  herb  with  it,  by
which  they  make  a  bad  salt  of  very  evil  smell.  The
Spaniards  who  live  in  this  city  do  not  feel  the  want  of  salt
because  the  port  of  Buenaventura  is  near,  and  vessels  arrive
there  from  Peru  with  large  blocks  of  salt.

In  the  city  of  Popayan  there  are  some  of  these  fountains,
especially  among  the  Coconucos,  but  not  so  many,  nor  of
such  good  quahty  as  those  of  Anzerma  and  Cartage.  At
Paste  all  the  salt  is  obtained  by  trading,  and  it  is  better
than  that  of  Popayan.  I  have  seen  many  springs,  besides
those  which  I  have  now  described,  with  my  own  eyes,  but
it  seems  to  me  that  I  have  said  enough  to  make  the  reader
understand  the  manner  of  procuring  salt  from  these  springs.
Having  declared  the  method  of  making  salt  in  these  pro-
vinces, I  shall  now  pass  on  to  the  great  kingdom  of  Peru.


128  THE    TRAVELS    OP


CHAPTER    XXXVI.

"VMiich  contains  tlie  description  and  appearance  of  the  kingdom  of  Peru
from  the  city  of  Quito  to  the  town  of  La  Plata,  a  distance  of  more
than  seven  hundred  leagues.

Now  that  I  liave  finislied  what  there  is  to  be  told  respecting
the  province  of  Popajan,  it  appears  to  me  that  it  is  time  to
use  my  pen  in  giving  an  account  of  the  notable  things
that  are  to  be  said  of  Peru,  commencing  from  the  city
of  Quito.  But,  before  describing  that  city,  it  will  be  con-
venient to  give  a  sketch  of  the  whole  country,  which  is
seven  hundred  leagues  long  and  one  hundred  in  breadth,
rather  more  in  some  parts  and  less  in  others.

I  do  not  at  present  desire  to  treat  of  the  whole  empire
over  which  the  Kings  Yncas  ruled,  which  was  more  than
one  thousand  two  hundred  leagues  long,  but  I  shall  confine
myself  to  that  part  which  is  understood  under  the  name  of
Peru,  from  Quito  to  La  Plata.

In  this  land  of  Peru  there  are  three  desert  ranges  where
men  can  in  no  wise  exist.  One  of  these  comprises  the
montana  (forests)  of  the  Andes,  full  of  dense  wildernesses,
where  men  cannot,  nor  ever  have  lived.  The  second  is  the
mountainous  region,  extending  the  whole  length  of  the
Cordillera  of  the  Andes,  which  is  intensely  cold,  and  its
smnmits  are  covered  with  eternal  snow,  so  that,  in  no  way,
can  people  live  in  this  region,  owing  to  the  snow  and  the
cold,  and  also  because  there  are  no  provisions,  all  things
being  destroyed  by  the  snow  and  by  the  wind,  which  never
ceases  to  blow.  The  third  range  comprises  the  sandy  deserts
from  Tumbez  to  the  other  side  of  Tarapaca,  in  which  there
is  nothing  to  be  seen  but  sand-hills  and  the  fierce  sun  which
dries  them  up,  without  water,  nor  herb,  nor  tree,  nor
created  thing,  except  birds,  which,  by  the  gift  of  their
wings,  wander  wherever  they  list.     This  kingdom,   being


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  129

SO  vast,  has  groat  deserts,  for  the  reasons  I  have  now
given.

The  inhabited  region  is  after  this  fashion.  In  parts
of  the  mountains  of  the  Andes  there  are  ravines  and
dales,  which  open  out  into  deep  valleys  of  such  width  as
often  to  form  great  plains  between  the  mountains,  and,
although  the  snow  falls,  it  all  remains  on  the  higher  part.
As  these  valleys  are  closed  in,  they  are  not  molested  by  the
winds,  nor  does  the  snow  reach  them,  and  the  land  is  so
fruitful  that  all  things  which  are  sown  yield  abundantly,  and
there  are  trees  and  many  birds  and  animals.  The  land
being  so  fertile,  is  well  peopled  by  the  natives.  They  make
their  villages  with  rows  of  stones  roofed  with  straw,  and
live  healthily  and  in  comfort.  Thus  the  mountains  of  the
Andes  form  these  dales  and  ravines,  in  which  there  are
populous  villages,  and  rivers  of  excellent  water  flow  near
them.  Some  of  these  rivers  send  their  waters  to  the  South
Sea,  entering  by  the  sandy  deserts  which  I  have  mentioned,
and  the  humidity  of  their  water  gives  rise  to  very  beau-
tiful valleys  with  great  rows  of  trees.  The  valleys  are  two
or  three  leagues  broad,  and  great  quantities  of  algoroha^
trees  grow  in  them,  which  flourish  even  at  great  distances
from  any  water.  Wherever  there  are  groves  of  trees  the
land  is  free  from  sand,  and  very  fertile  and  abundant.  In
ancient  times  these  valleys  were  very  populous,  and  still
there  are  Indians  in  them,  though  not  so  many  as  in  former
days.  As  it  never  rains  in  these  sandy  deserts  and  valleys
of  Peru,  they  do  not  roof  their  houses  as  they  do  in  the
mountains,  but  build  large  houses  of  adobes,-  with  pleasant
terraced  roofs  of  matting  to  shade  them  from  the  sun,  nor
do  the  Spaniards  use  any  other  roofing  than  these  reed
mats.  To  prepare  their  fields  for  sowing,  they  lead  channels
from  the  rivers  to  irrigate  the  valleys,  and  the  channels  are  so
well  made,  and  with  so  much  regularity,  that  all  the  land  is

•  Frosopis  horrida.  Willd.     ^  Bricks  of  immense  size,  baked  in  tlie  sun.


130  THE    TRAVELS    OF

irrigated  without  any  waste.  This  system  of  irrigation
makes  the  valleys  very  green  and  cheerful,  and  they  are
full  of  the  fruit  trees  both  of  Spain  and  of  this  country.
At  all  times  they  raise  good  harvests  of  maize  and  wheat,
and  of  everything  that  they  sow.  Thus,  although  I  have
described  Peru  as  being  formed  of  three  desert  ridges,  yet
from  them,  by  the  will  of  God,  descend  these  valleys  and
rivers,  without  which  no  man  could  live.  This  is  the  cause
why  the  natives  were  so  easily  conquered;  for,  if  they
rebelled,  they  would  all  perish  of  cold  and  hunger.  Ex-
cept the  land  which  they  inhabit,  the  whole  country  is  full
of  snowy  mountains  of  enormous  height,  and  very  terrible.

This  kingdom,  as  I  have  already  said,  is  seven  thousand
leagues  long  from  north  to  south,  but  if  we  include  all  the
country  that  the  Kings  Yncas  had  under  their  dominion,  its
leno^th  would  be  one  thousand  two  hundred  leagues  of  road
from  north  to  south  on  a  meridian.  Its  greatest  breadth,
from  east  to  west,  will  be  little  less  than  one  hundred
leagues,  and  in  other  places  from  forty  to  sixty,  more  or
less.  What  I  say  of  the  length  and  breadth  is  to  be  under-
stood as  applied  to  the  mountains  also,  which  extend  over
the  whole  of  this  land  of  Peru.  And  this  mighty  chain,
which  is  called  the  Andes,  is  forty  leagues  from  the  South
Sea  in  some  parts,  in  others  sixty;  in  some  more,  and  in
others  less.  Being  so  very  high,  and  the  greatest  heights
being  towards  the  South  Sea,  the  rivers  which  flow  from
them  on  that  side  are  small  because  their  courses  are  short.

The  other  chain  of  mountains,  which  also  extends  along
the  whole  length  of  this  country,  prolongs  its  spurs  into
the  plains,  and  ends  close  to  the  sea  in  some  places,  and  at
others  eight  or  ten  leagues  from  it,  more  or  less.  The  climate
of  these  plains  is  more  hot  than  cold,  and  in  some  seasons
more  so  than  in  others,  and  the  plains  are  so  low,  that
the  sea  is  almost  as  high  as  the  land.  The  season  of  greatest
heat  is  when  the  sun  has  passed  by  and  reached  the  tropic


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  131

of  Capricorn,  which  is  on  tho  11  th  of  December,  and  then  it
turns  again  towards  the  equinoctial  line.  In  the  moun-
tains, although  there  are  provinces  with  a  warm  climate,
yet  the  contrary  may  be  said  of  them,  that  there  is  more
cold  weather  than  hot.  So  much  I  have  said  concerning
these  provinces,  and  further  on  I  shall  add  what  more  tlicre
is  to  be  observed  concerning  them.


CHAPTER    XXXVII.


Of  the  villages  and  provinces  between  the  town  of  Pasto  and  the  city
of  Quito.

Having  written  what  is  notable  concerning  the  pleasant
to-\vn  of  Pasto,  it  will  now  be  well  to  continue  the  journey,
by  relating  what  there  is  on  the  road  to  the  city  of  Quito.

I  said  that  the  town  of  Pasto  was  built  in  the  vaUey  of
Atris,  within  the  territory  of  the  Quillacingas,  a  shameless
people,  and  they  and  the  Pastes  are  very  dirty,  and  are  held
in  little  estimation  by  their  neighbours.  Leaving  the  town
of  Pasto,  the  road  leads  to  a  village  of  the  Pastes  called
Funes,  and  farther  on  there  is  another  called  lies.  Three
leagues  more  bring  the  traveller  to  Gualmatan,  and
another  three  leagues  on  the  road  towards  Quito  bring
him  to  the  village  of  Ipiales.

In  all  these  villages  there  is  little  or  no  maize,  the  country
being  very  cold,  and  the  maize  seed  very  delicate.  But
they  grow  plenty  of  potatoes  and  quinoa^  besides  other
products.  From  Ipiales  the  road  leads  to  a  smaU  district
called  Guaca,  but  before  reaching  it  the  road  of  the  Yncas
is  seen,  which  is  as  famous  in  these  parts  as  that  which
Hannibal  made  over  the  Alps  when  he  descended  into
Italy.  Indeed,  the  former  ought  to  be  held  in  more  estima-
'  See  note  at  page  143.


132  THE    TRAVELS    OP

tion,  as  well  on  account  of  the  great  lodgings  and  store-
houses along  its  whole  length,  as  for  being  made  in  spite  of
many  difficulties  over  rugged  and  swampy  mountains,  so
that  it  is  a  sight  marvellous  to  behold.  There  is  also  a
river  near  the  road,  close  to  which  the  place  is  seen  where,
in  former  days,  the  Kings  Yncas  had  built  a  fortress.  Here
they  made  war  upon  the  Pastes,  and  set  out  to  conquer
them.  There  is  a  natural  bridge  over  the  river  which
appears  artificial.  In  truth  it  is  a  lofty  and  massive  rock,
■with  a  hole  in  it,  through  which  the  river  passes  in  its  fury^
and  on  the  top  all  wayfarers  can  pass  at  their  pleasure.
This  bridge  is  called  Rumichaca^  in  the  language  of  the
Yncas,  which  is  as  much  as  to  say  the  "  stone  bridge."

Near  this  bridge  there  is  a  fountain  of  hot  water,  the
heat  of  which  is  such,  that  in  no  wise  can  any  man  keep  his
hand  long  in  it.  The  land  is  so  cold  that  no  one  can  endure
it  without  great  suffering.  The  Kings  Yncas  intended  to
have  built  another  fortress  near  the  bridge,  and  they  placed
faithful  guards  in  order  to  prevent  the  troops  from  return-
ing to  Cuzco  or  Quito,  for  the  people  held  the  region  of  the
Pastes  to  be  a  worthless  conquest.

In  all  these  villages  there  is  a  fruit  called  mortimos,  which
is  smaller  than  a  sloe,  and  black.  If  a  man  eats  many  of
them  he  becomes  giddy  and  sick,  and  for  a  whole  day  is  in
great  pain.  I  know  this,  because  when  we  went  to  give
battle  to  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  a  man  named  Rodrigo  de  las
Penas  came  vsdth  us,  a  friend  of  mine,  and  ensign  to  the
captain  Don  Pedro  de  Cabrera.  When  we  reached  this
village  of  Guaca,  the  said  Rodrigo,  having  eaten  some  of
these  berries,  suffered  so  much  that  we  thought  he  would
have  died  of  them.

From  the  small  district  of  Guaca  the  road  leads  to  Tusa,
which  is  the  last  village  of  the  Pastes.     On  the  right  hand
are  the  mountains  which  overhang  the  sea  of  sweet  water,
'  Rumi  (a  stone)  and  chaca  (a  bridge)  in  Quichua.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON,  133

and  on  the  left  the  height  which  rises  from  the  South  Sea.
Further  on  a  small  hill  is  reached,  where  a  fortress  may  be
seen,  built  by  the  Yncas  in  former  days,  which  must  be  of
no  small  strength  for  Indian  warfare.  Beyond  this  fort  and
the  village  of  Tusa  is  the  river  of  Mira,  which  is  very
warm,  and  on  its  banks  there  is  plenty  of  fruit,  such  as
melons,  besides  game,  excellent  rabbits,  pigeons,  and
partridges.  Here  they  reap  large  harvests  of  wheat,  barley,
and  maize,  for  the  land  is  very  fertile.  From  the  river
there  is  a  descent  to  the  great  and  sumptuous  buildings  of
Cavangue,  but,  before  arriving  at  them,  the  lagoon  of
Yahuar-cocha^  is  seen,  which,  in  our  languege,  is  as  much
as  to  say  "  the  sea  of  blood."  The  Indians  say  that,  before
the  arrival  of  the  Spaniards,  the  King,  Huayna  Ccapac,  for
some  offence  committed  by  the  natives  of  Carangue  and
other  villages,  ordered  more  than  twenty  thousand  to  be
killed,  and  their  bodies  to  be  thrown  into  this  lake.  The
dead  men  were  so  numerous  that  it  looked  like  a  sea  of
blood,  for  which  reason  this  name  was  given.^

Further  on  are  the  buildings  called  Carangue,  where
some  say  that  Atahualpa,  the  son  of  Huayna  Ccapac,  was
born,  for  his  mother  was  a  native  of  this  place.     But  this  is

>  Yahuar  (blood)  and  Cocha  (a  lake)  in  Quichua.

"^  After  the  conquest  of  Quito  by  Huayna  Ccapac,  the  cacique  of
Carangue  was  the  first  to  submit  to  his  authority,  and,  while  he  lulled
the  Ynca  and  his  captaias  into  seciu-ity,  he  meditated  their  destruction
by  a  sudden  and  secret  blow.  Siispecting  nothing,  they  were  encamped
in  his  coimtry,  when  his  Indians  made  a  fiu'ious  attack  upon  them  in  the
dead  of  night,  many  of  the  nobles  of  the  guard  were  killed,  and  the
Ynca  himself  narrowly  escaped  with  his  life.  Huayna  Ccapac  resolved
to  give  these  people  of  Carangue  a  terrible  and  memorable  lesson.  He
put  every  man  in  the  province,  who  was  capable  of  bearing  arpis,  to
death,  and  ordered  their  bodies  to  be  thrown  into  the  lake,  which  to  this
day  is  called  "  the  lake  of  blood."  GarcUasso  de  la  Vega  considers  that
the  munber  stated  by  Cieza  de  Leon  to  have  been  put  to  death  on  this
occasion  is  an  exaggeration,  and  that  two  thousand  would  be  nearer  the
ti-uth  than  twenty  thousand.  G.  de  la  Vega^  i,  lib.  ix,  cap.  ii ;  Velasco^
i,  p.  18.


134  THE    TRAVELS    OF

certainly  not  the  case^  for  I  inquired  into  the  matter  with
great  care,  and  Atahualpa  was  born  in  Cuzco.  Any  other
account  of  his  birth  is  unworthy  of  credit.  These  buildings
of  Carangue  are  in  a  small  square,  and  within  there  is  a
basin  of  cut  stone.  The  palace  and  lodgings  of  the  Yncas
are  also  of  elegant  stones  of  great  size,  and  are  very  neatly
fitted  without  cement,  which  is  a  thing  worthy  of  no  small
attention.  Formerly  there  was  a  temple  of  the  sun,  and
within  there  were  more  than  two  hundred  beautiful  maidens
dedicated  to  the  service,  who  were  obhged  to  preserve  their
chastity,  and  if  any  of  them  failed  to  do  so  she  was  very  cruelly
punished.  Those  who  committed  adultery,  which  was  con-
sidered a  great  sacrilege,  were  buried  aHve.  These  maidens
were  carefully  watched,  and  there  were  also  priests  who
performed  the  sacrifices  enjoined  by  their  rehgion.  This
house  of  the  sun  was  held  in  great  estimation  in  the  days
of  the  Lords  Yncas.  It  was  reverenced  and  guarded,  and
was  full  of  great  vases  of  gold  and  silver,  and  of  other
riches  which  cannot  be  quickly  enumerated.  Even  the
walls  were  lined  with  plates  of  gold  and  silver.  Although
it  is  now  in  a  ruinous  state,  there  is  enough  left  to  show
that  it  was  once  a  magnificent  structure.  The  Yncas
maintained  a  garrison  of  troops,  with  their  ofiicers,  in  this
station,  who  were  here  both  in  time  of  peace  and  war  to  put
down  any  rising.  Speaking  of  these  Lords  Yncas,  I  will
treat  somewhat  of  their  greatness  and  power  before  passing
onwards  in  our  journey.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  13c


CHAPTER    XXXYIII.


In  wliicli  it  is  stated  who  were  the  Kings  Yncas,  and  how  they  ruled
over  Peru.

As  I  shall  often  liave  to  treat  of  tlie  Yncas,  and  give  an
account  of  many  of  their  buildings,  and  of  other  notable
things,  it  appears  to  me  to  be  appropriate  that  I  should  say-
something  concerning  them  in  this  place,  that  readers  may
know  who  these  Yncas  were,  and  not  misunderstand  their
importance,  or  fall  into  mistakes  about  them.  I,  however,
have  written  a  special  book  upon  them  and  their  deeds,
which  is  very  copious.

From  the  accounts  which  the  Indians  of  Cuzco  have  given
us,  we  gather  that,  in  ancient  times,  there  were  great
disorders  in  all  the  provinces  of  that  kingdom  which  we
now  call  Peru,  and  that  the  natives  were  so  savage  and
stupid  as  to  be  beyond  belief;  for  they  say  that  these  early
tribes  were  bestial,  and  that  many  ate  human  flesh,  others
taking  their  mothers  and  daughters  for  their  wives.  Besides
all  this,  they  committed  other  greater  sins,  having  much
intercourse  with  the  devil,  whom  they  all  served  and  held  in
high  estimation.  They  had  their  castles  and  forts  in  the
mountain  fastnesses,  and,  on  very  slight  provocation,  they
made  war  upon  each  other,  killing  and  taking  prisoners
without  mercy.  Notwithstanding  that  they  committed  all
these  crimes  and  walked  in  wickedness,  they  are  said  to
have  been  given  to  religion,  which  is  the  reason  why,  in
many  parts  of  this  kingdom,  great  temples  have  been  found
where  they  prayed  to,  adored,  and  had  interviews  with  the
devil,  making  great  sacrifices  before  their  idols.  The
people  of  this  kingdom  hved  in  this  manner,  and  great
tyrants  rose  up  in  the  provinces  of  Collas,  in  the  valleys  of
the  Yuncas,  and  in  other  parts,  who  made  fierce  wars  upon
each   other,   and  committed  many  robberies  and  murders ;


136  THE    TRAVELS    OF

insomuch  that  they  caused  great  calamities^  and  many-
castles  were  destroyed,  while  the  devil,  the  enemy  of  human
nature,  rejoiced  that  so  many  souls  should  be  lost.

While  all  the  provinces  of  Peru  were  in  this  state,  two
brothers  rose  up,  the  name  of  one  of  whom  was  Manco
Ccapac.  The  Indians  relate  great  marvels  and  very  plea-
sant fables  respecting  these  men,  which  may  be  read  by
any  one  who  pleases,  when  the  book  written  by  me  on  the
subject  sees  the  light.  This  Manco  Ccapac  founded  the  city
of  Cuzco,  and  established  laws  for  the  use  of  the  people.  He
and  his  descendants  were  called  Yncas,  a  word  which  signi-
fies lords  or  kings.  They  conquered  and  dominated  over
all  the  country,  from  Pasto  to  Chile,  and  their  banners
were  carried  to  the  south  as  far  as  the  river  Maule,  and
north  to  the  Ancasmayu.  These  rivers  were  the  boundaries
of  the  empire  of  these  Yncas,  which  was  so  great,  that
from  one  end  to  the  other  is  a  distance  of  one  thousand
three  hundred  leagues.  The  Yncas  built  great  fortresses,
and  in  every  province  they  had  their  captains  and  governors.
They  performed  such  great  deeds,  and  ruled  with  such
wisdom,  that  few  in  the  world  ever  excelled  them.  They
were  very  intelligent  and  learned  without  having  letters,
which  had  not  been  invented  in  these  Indies.  They  intro-
duced good  customs  into  all  the  conquered  provinces,  and
gave  orders  that  the  people  should  wear  usutas  in  the  place
of  leathern  sandals.  They  thought  much  of  the  immortality
of  the  soul,  and  of  other  secrets  of  nature.  They  believed
that  there  was  a  Creator  of  all  things,  and  they  held  the
sun  to  be  a  god,  to  whom  they  built  great  temples ;  but,
deceived  by  the  devil,  they  worshipped  among  trees  and  on
stones,  like  heathens.  In  the  principal  temples  they  kept  a
great  quantity  of  very  beautiful  virgins,  just  as  was  done
in  the  Temple  of  Vesta,  at  Rome,  and  the  rules  concerning
them  were  almost  the  same.  They  chose  the  bravest  and  most
faithful  captains  they  could  find  to  command  their  armies.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  137

They  were  very  astute  and  artful  in  turning  enemies  into
friends  without  having  resort  to  war,  but  they  chastised
rebels  with  severity  and  cruelty.  But,  as  I  have  already
said,  I  have  a  book  concerning  the  Yncas,  so  that  what  I
have  now  written  will  suffice  to  enable  those  who  may  read
it  to  understand  who  these  Kings  were,  and  their  great
power,  and  I  will  therefore  return  to  my  road.


CHAPTER    XXXIX.


Of  other  villages  and  buildings  between  Carangue  and  the  city  of
Quito :  and  of  the  robbeiy  which  the  people  of  Otabalo  are  said
to  have  committed  on  those  of  Carangue.

In  the  former  chapter  I  spoke  of  the  great  power  and
dominion  which  the  Yncas,  Kings  of  Cuzco,  held  over  all
Peru,  and  it  will  now  be  well  to  proceed  on  our  journey.

From  the  royal  station  of  Carangue  the  famous  road  of
the  Yncas  leads  to  the  station  of  Otabalo,  which  is  not,  and
never  has  been,  very  rich  or  important,  but  on  each  side
of  it  there  are  large  villages  of  Indians.  Those  on  the
west  side  are  called  Poritaco,  CoUaguaso,  the  Huacas,  and
Cayambes ;  and  near  the  great  river  Maranon  are  the  Quijos
in  a  country  covered  with  vast  forests.  It  was  into  this
region  that  Gonzalo  Pizarro  made  his  way  when  he  went  in
search  of  the  cinnamon.  He  was  accompanied  by  many
vaUant  Spaniards,  and  they  took  with  them  great  store  of
provisions,  yet  with  all  this  they  suffered  terrible  hardships
and  much  hunger.  In  the  fourth  part  of  my  work  I  will
give  a  full  account  of  this  discovery,  and  I  will  relate  how
they  came,  by  this  way,  to  the  great  river,  and  how  Captain
Orellana  came  down  it  into  the  ocean,  went  to  Spain,  and
was  named  governor  of  these  countries  by  his  Majesty.


138  THE    TRAVELS    OF

Towards  tlie  east  are  the  farms  of  Cotocoyambe  and  the
forests  of  Yumbo,  besides  many  other  districts^  some  of
which  have  not  been  thoroughly  explored.

The  natives  of  Otabalo  and  Carangue  are  called  Guama-
raconas  {Hiiayna  ciina^).  The  name  arose  from  what  was
said  after  the  massacre  ordered  by  Huana  Ccapac  in  the
lake,  where  most  of  the  men  were  killed.  Only  boys  were
left  in  these  villages,  and  the  word  means  in  our  language
*'  Now  you  are  boys.-'^  The  natives  of  Carangue  are  very
hostile  to  those  of  Otabalo  for  the  following  reason.  When
the  news  of  the  arrival  of  the  Spaniards  was  spread  abroad
in  the  provinces  of  Quito,  together  with  the  imprisonment
of  Atahualpa,  the  people  were  filled  with  wonder  and  fear,
and  were  particularly  astonished  at  what  they  heard  con-
cerning the  swiftness  of  the  horses.  Thus  they  awaited
their  arrival,  thinking,  that  as  they  had  overthrown  the
Ynca  their  Lord,  they  also  would  be  subjugated.  At  this
time  the  Lord  of  Cayambe  had  a  great  quantity  of  treasure
in  liis  charge,  and  he  of  Otabalo  observed  that  his  neigh-
bour was  in  great  fear  and  perturbation  for  the  safety  of
the  precious  treasure.  The  chief  of  Otabalo  then  called
together  his  people,  and,  selecting  those  who  were  most
agile  and  cunning,  ordered  them  to  dress  in  shirts  and  long
mantles,  and,  with  wands  in  their  hands,  to  mount  their
best  sheep  and  to  climb  up  into  the  heights,  so  that  they
could  be  seen  by  those  of  Carangue.  He,  with  most  of  his
people  and  some  women,  in  the  mean  time,  fled  to  Carangue
with  great  demonstrations  of  fear,  saying  that  he  was  flying
fi'om  the  fury  of  the  Spaniards,  who  had  reached  his  villages
on  their  horses,  and  that  he  had  left  all  his  valuables  behind,
to  escape  from  their  cruelty.

This  news  caused  great  terror,  and  it  was  received  as
certain,  because  the  Indians,  mounted  on  sheep,  could  be
seen  on  the  hills,  so  the  people  of  Carangue  began  their
'  Huayna  (a  youth)  and  cu)ui  (the  plural)  in  Quichua.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  139

flight.  Otabalo  pretended  to  do  the  same^  but  he  and  his
people  returned  to  Carangue,  and  stole  all  the  treasure  they
could  find,  which  was  not  httle.  When  those  of  Carangue
returned,  at  the  end  of  a  few  days,  the  deceit  was  dis-
covered.

This  strange  robbery  caused  much  agitation  among  the
people  of  Carangue,  and  they  had  several  debates  among
themselves ;  but,  as  the  captain  Sebastian  de  Belalcazar,
with  the  Spaniards,  entered  the  provinces  of  Quito  a  few
days  after  this  occurrence,  they  dropped  their  quarrels  in
order  to  defend  themselves.  Thus  the  people  of  Otabalo
retained  what  they  had  robbed,  as  is  stated  by  many
Indians  of  these  parts,  and  the  feud  has  not  ceased  amongst
them.

From  the  station  of  Otabalo  the  road  leads  to  that  of
Cochesqui,  and  crosses  a  snowy  pass,  where  it  is  so  cold
that  there  is  some  trouble  in  preserving  life.  From  Co-
chesqui. the  road  passes  on  to  Guallabamba,  which  is  four
leagues  from  Quito,  and  here,  the  land  being  low  and  nearly
on  the  equator,  it  is  warm,  but  not  so  much  so  as  to
prevent  it  from  being  very  populous,  and  it  yields  all  things
necessary  for  the  support  of  man.  We  who  have  travelled
in  these  parts  know  what  there  is  on  this  equinoctial  hne,
which  some  ancient  authors  held  to  be  an  uninhabitable
region.  Under  the  line  there  is  winter  and  summer,  and
the  country  is  thickly  inhabited,  the  crops  which  are  sown
yielding  abundantly,  especially  wheat  and  barley.

The  road  which  unites  these  stations  is  crossed  by  several
rivers,  all  with  bridges,  now  much  out  of  repair,  and  there
are  grand  buildings  and  many  other  things  to  be  seen.

The  distance  from  Guallabamba  to  Quito  is  four  leagues,
and  there  are  several  houses  and  farms  along  the  roadside,
where  the  Spaniards  have  their  flocks  until  the  plains  of
Anaquito  is  reached.  Here,  in  1545,  during  the  month
of  January,  the  viceroy  Blasco  Nunez  Vela  arrived  with  a


140  THE    TRAVELS    OF

company  of  Spaniards,  wlio  followed  him,  in  opposition  to
those  wlio  upheld  the  tyranny.  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  who  had
seized  the  government  of  the  country,  and  called  himself
governor  under  false  colours,  accompanied  by  most  of  the
conquerors  of  Peru,  marched  out  of  the  city  of  Quito  and
gave  battle  to  the  viceroy.  The  unfortunate  viceroy,  and
many  brave  knights  who  were  showing  their  loyalty  and
desii'e  to  serve  his  Majesty,  were  left  dead  on  the  field.
Passing  this  plain  of  Anaquito,  the  city  of  Quito  is  presently
reached.


CHAPTER    XL.


Of  the  situation  of  the  city  of  San  Francisco  del  Quito,  of  its  foundation,
and  who  it  was  who  founded  it.

The  city  of  San  Francisco  del  Quito  is  in  the  northern
province  of  the  kingdom  of  Peru.  This  province  is  nearly
sixty  leagues  long  from  east  to  west,  and  twenty-five  or
thirty  broad.  The  city  is  built  amongst  ancient  buildings,
which  the  Yncas,  in  the  days  of  their  power,  had  ordered  to
be  raised  in  these  parts.  They  were  the  work  of  the  illus-
trious and  powerful  Huayna  Ccapac,  and  of  the  great  Tupac,
his  father,  and  the  natives  called  these  royal  and  noble
buildings  Quito,  whence  the  city  took  its  name.^  The
climate  is  healthy,  and  more  cold  than  warm.  There  is
little  or  no  extent  of  view  from  the  city,  because  it  is  situ-
ated in  a  hollow  surrounded  by  high  mountains,  and  the

>  Before  the  country  of  Quito  was  conquered  by  the  Yncas,  it  was
governed  by  native  kings  called  Scyris.  The  Ynca  Tupac  Yupanqui
first  extended  his  dominion  licyond  the  frontiers  of  Quito,  and  Huayna
Ccapac  completed  the  conquest  in  1487.  Cacha,  the  last  Scyri,  was
killed  in  battle,  and  Paccha,  his  only  daughter,  wa«  married  to  Huayna
Ccapac  and  became  the  mother  of  Atahualpa.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  141

level  space  is  so  confined  that  there  will  be  some  difficulty
in  building  if  it  is  desired  to  enlarge  the  city,  but  it  could
be  made  very  strong  if  it  was  considered  necessary.  To  the
west  are  the  cities  of  Puerto  Viejo,  and  Guayaquil,  which
are  about  seventy  and  eighty  leagues  distant,  and  to  the
south  are  the  cities  of  Loxa  and  San  Miguel,  the  one
one  hundred  and  thirty  and  the  other  eighty  leagues  distant.
To  the  east  are  the  forests  and  the  sources  of  the  river
which  is  called  the  fresh  water  sea,^  and  to  the  north  is  the
government  of  Popayan,  which  we  have  just  passed.

The  city  of  Quito  is  under  the  equinoctial  line,  indeed
only  seven  leagues  distant  from  it.  The  surrounding  country
appears  to  be  sterile,  but  in  reality  it  is  very  fertile,  and
all  kinds  of  cattle  are  bred  in  it  plentifully,  besides  other
provisions,  corn  and  pulse,  fruit  and  birds.  The  country  is
very  pleasant,  and  particularly  resembles  Spain  in  its  pas-
tures and  its  climate,  for  the  summer  begins  in  April,  and
lasts  until  November,  and,  though  it  is  cold,  the  land  is  no
more  injured  by  it  than  in  Spain.

In  the  plains  they  reap  a  great  quantity  of  wheat  and
barley,  so  that  there  is  a  plentiful  supply  of  provisions  in
the  province,  and  in  time  it  will  yield  all  the  fruits  of  our
Spain,  for  even  now  they  begin  to  grow  some  of  them.
The  natives  are  in  general  more  gentle  and  better  disposed,
and  have  fewer  vices  than  any  of  those  we  have  passed,  and
indeed  than  all  the  Indians  of  the  greater  part  of  Peru.
This,  at  least,  is  what  I  myself  have  seen  and  understood,
although  others  have  formed  a  different  opinion.  But  if
they  had  seen  and  noted  all  these  people  as  I  have  done,
I  hold  it  for  certain  that  they  would  be  of  my  way  of
thinking.  They  are  a  people  of  middle  height,  and  very
hard  workers.  They  live  in  the  same  way  as  the  people  of
the  Kings  Yncas,  except  that  they  are  not  so  clever,  seeing
that  they  were  conquered  by  them,  and  now  Hve  by  the
'  The  Amazon.


142  THE    TRAVELS    OP

rules  which  were  ordered  to  be  observed  by  the  Yncas.
For  in  ancient  times  they  were^  hke  their  neighbours,
badly  dressed  and  without  industry  in  the  erection  of
buildings.^

There  are  many  warm  valleys  where  fruit  trees  and
pulses  are  cultivated  all  the  year  round.  There  are  also
vineyards  in  these  valleys,  but  as  the  cultivation  has  only
lately  commenced,  I  can  only  mention  the  hope  that  they
will  yield ;  but  they  already  have  large  orange  and  lime
trees.  The  pulses  of  Spain  yield  abundantly,  and  all  other
provisions  may  be  had  that  man  requires.  There  is  also  a
kind  of  spice,  which  we  call  cinnamon,  brought  from  the
forests  to  the  eastward.  It  is  a  fruit,  or  kind  of  flower,
which  grows  on  the  very  large  cinnamon  trees,  and  there  is
nothing  in  Spain  that  can  be  compared  with  it,  unless  it  be
an  acorn,  but  it  is  of  a  reddish  colour  inclined  to  black,
and  much  larger  and  rounder.  The  taste  is  very  pleasant,
like  that  of  real  cinnamon,  and  it  is  only  eaten  after  it  has
been  pounded,  for,  if  it  is  stewed  like  real  cinnamon,  it
loses  the  strength  of  its  flavour.  It  makes  a  warm  cordial,
as  I  can  afiirm  from  experience,  for  the  natives  trade  with
it,  and  use  it  in  their  illnesses,  particularly  for  pains  in  the
bowels  and  stomach.     They  take  it  as  a  drink.-

1  It  seems  to  be  generally  allow^ed,  even  by  Velasco,  that  all  the  rums
in  the  kingdom  of  Quito  date  from  the  time  of  the  Yncas,  and  that  none
can  be  refeiTed  to  the  Scyris,  or  native  kings.

-  It  was  partly  in  search  of  this  spice,  that  Gonzalo  Pizarro  midertook
his  famous  expedition  into  Quijos.  The  dried  calyx  alone  is  used  as  a
spice,  and  its  flavour  resembles  a  mixture  of  cinnamon  and  cloves.  The
tree  is  a  species  of  Lanracea.  Ilerrera  describes  it  as  resembling  an
olive,  with  large  pods.  Velasco  declares  that  the  cinnamon  of  his  country
exceeds  that  of  Ceylon  in  fragrance  and  sweetness.  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega
says  that  tlie  cinnamon  tree  of  Quijos,  a  province  of  Quito,  is  very  tall,
with  large  leaves,  and  fruit  growing  in  clusters  like  acorns.  He  adds
tliat  many  grow  wild  in  tlie  forests,  but  that  they  are  not  so  good  as  those
which  the  Indians  get  from  trees  whicli  they  plant  and  cultivate  for  their
own  use,  but  not  for  the  people  of  Peru,  who  care  for  nothing  but  their
own  condiment  called  nchu  (aji^  pepper).  [When


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  143

They  have  great  store  of  cotton,  which  they  make  into
cloth  for  their  dresses,  and  also  use  it  for  paying  tribute.
In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  city  of  Quito  there  are  many
flocks  of  what  we  call  sheep,  but  they  are  more  like  camels.
Further  on  I  shall  treat  of  these  animals,  of  their  shape,
and  of  the  different  sorts  of  these  sheep  of  Peru,  as  we  call
them.  There  are  also  many  deer,  rabbits,  partridges,
pigeons,  doves,  and  other  game.  Of  provisions,  besides
maize,  there  are  two  other  products  which  form  the  prin-
cipal food  of  these  Indians.  One  is  called  potatoe,  and  is
a  kind  of  earth  nut,  which,  after  it  has  been  boiled,  is  as
tender  as  a  cooked  chestnut,  but  it  has  no  more  skin  than
a  truffle,  and  it  grows  under  the  earth  in  the  same  way.
Tliis  root  produces  a  plant  exactly  like  a  poppy.  The  other
food  is  very  good,  and  is  called  quinoa.^     The  leaf  is  like  a

"Wlien  I  was  in  the  forests  of  Caravaya,  in  Southern  Peru,  I  met  with
trees  of  great  height  wliich  my  guide  called  canela  (cinnamon).  The
inner  bark  had  a  strong  taste  of  that  spice,  and  the  natives  use  it  to  scent
and  flavoiu-  their  huarapu  or  fermented  juice  of  the  sugar  cane.  G.  de  la
Vega^  ii,  hb.  iii,  cap.  2 ;  Velasco,  i,  p.  51  ;  Markhani's  Travels  in  Peru
and  India^  p.  264.

1  The  quinua  {Chenopodium  Quinua  L.)  is  cultivated  in  the  higher
parts  of  the  Andes  of  Quito  and  Peru,  and  is  probably  the  hardiest  cereal
in  the  world,  groAving  at  the  gTeatest  elevation  above  the  level  of  the  sea.
Velasco  mentions  two  kinds,  the  white  and  red.  The  former  is  a  small
white  roimd  grain,  extensively  raised  on  the  cold  lofty  momitains,  and
yielding  good  food ;  the  latter,  a  very  small  roimd  red  grain,  only  eaten
toasted.  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  mentions  quinua  as  having  been  exten-
sively cultivated  by  the  ancient  Peruvians,  both  for  the  sake  of  the  grain,
and  for  the  leaves,  which  they  use  in  soup.  He  sent  some  seeds  of  it  to
Spain  in  the  year  1590,  but  they  did  not  come  up.  In  Quichua  the
cultivated  plant  is  called  quinua;  the  green  leaves,  lliccha ;  the  plant
gro^\•ing  w^Ud,  azar ;  a  pudding  made  of  quinua  grains,  pisque ;  and
boiled  quinua  grains,  dried  in  the  sun  and  gromid  into  a  coarse  powder
for  food  on  a  journey,  quispina.  At  harvest  time  the  stalks  are  cut
and  tied  up  in  bundles,  and  the  grain  is  then  beaten  out  with  sticks.  It
is  an  insipid  and  not  very  nutritious  gTain.

UUoa  gives  the  following  account  of  the  quinoa.  It  resembles  a  lentil
in  shape,  but  is  much  smaller  and  very  white.    When  boiled  it  ojiens,  and


144  THE    TRAVELS    OP

Moorish  rush  (amaranth?),  and  the  plant  grows  almost  to
the  height  of  a  man,  forming  a  very  small  seed,  sometimes
white  and  at  others  reddish.  Of  these  seeds  they  make  a
drink,  and  also  eat  them  cooked,  as  we  do  rice.

There  are  many  other  seeds  and  roots,  but  the  natives  of
Quito,  seeing  the  value  of  wheat  and  barley,  sow  one  or  the
other,  and  eat  them,  also  making  a  drink  from  the  barley.^
As  I  have  said  before,  all  these  Indians  are  industrious,
although,  in  some  of  the  provinces,  they  have  a  different
character,  as  I  will  relate  when  we  pass  through  them,  for
the  women  are  made  to  work  in  the  fields,  while  their
husbands  sew  and  weave,  and  occupy  themselves  with
female  work.  I  have  seen,  in  the  villages  near  Cuzco,  while
the  women  are  ploughing,  the  men  spinning  and  preparing
their  arms  and  clothes,  work  suited  to  women  and  not
to  men.

In  the  time  of  the  Yncas  there  was  a  royal  road  made  by
the  force  and  labour  of  men,  which  began  at  this  city
of  Quito,  and  went  as  far  as  Cuzco,  whence  another  of  equal
grandeur  and  magnitude  led  to  the  province  of  Chile,  which
is  more  than  one  thousand  two  hundred  leagues  from
Quito.  On  these  roads  there  were  pleasant  and  beautiful
lodgings  and  palaces  every  three  or  four  leagues,  very  richly
adorned*  These  roads  may  be  compared  to  that  which  the
Romans  made  in  Spain,  and  which  we  call  the  silver  road.

out  of  it  comes  a  spiral  fibre,  which  appears  Hke  a  small  worm,  but  whiter
than  the  husk  of  the  grain.  It  is  an  annual  plant,  being  sown  every  year.
The  stem  is  about  three  or  four  feet  in  height,  and  has  a  large  pointed
leaf.  The  flower  is  of  a  deep  red,  and  five  or  six  inches  long,  and  in  it
are  contained  the  grains  or  seeds.  Tlie  quinoa  is  eaten  boiled  hke  rice,
and  has  a  very  pleasant  taste.  It  is  used  in  external  apphcations,  ground
and  boiled  to  a  proper  consistency,  and  applied  to  the  part  affected,  from
whicli  it  soon  extracts  all  corrupt  humoiu-s  occasioned  by  a  contusion.
Ulloa's  Voyage^  i,  p.  290.

'  Barley  is  cultivated  successfully  in  Teru,  at  heights  from  7000  to
l;l,2()0  feet  above  tlie  sea.  It  was  introduced  l)y  the  SiKxniards.  Von
TschmU.  p.  177.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  145

I  have  stopped  longer  to  descnbe  the  noteworthy  things
of  Quito  than  at  any  of  the  other  cities  we  have  left  behind,
and  the  reason  is  that  this  city  is  the  principal  place  in  this
part  of  Peru,  and  has  always  been  much  esteemed.  To
conclude  with  it,  I  must  add  that  it  was  founded  and  settled
by  captain  Sebastian  Belalcazar  (who  was  afterwards  gover-
nor and  Adelantado  of  the  province  of  Popayan)  in  the
name  of  the  Emperor,  Don  Carlos  our  lord,  the  Adelantado
Don  Francisco  Pizarro  being  governor  and  captain-general
of  the  kingdoms  of  Peru  and  pro^^nces  of  New  Castille,
in  the  year  of  the  nati\aty  of  our  Redeemer  Jesus  Christ
1534.


CHAPTER    XLI.


Concerning  the  \'illages  beyond  Quito  as  far  as  the  royal  palaces  of
Tmnebamba,  and  of  some  customs  of  the  natives.

The  distance  from  the  city  of  Quito  to  the  palaces  of  Tume-
bamba  is  fifty-three  leagues.  Soon  after  leaving  the  city
there  is  a  village  called  Pansaleo,  the  natives  of  which  differ
in  some  things  from  their  neighbours,  especially  in  the
fillets  or  bands  round  their  heads ;  for  by  these  bands  the
descent  of  the  Indians  is  known,  and  the  provinces  of  which
they  are  natives.^

These  and  all  the  other  natives  of  the  kingdom,  over  a
space  of  more  than  one  thousand  two  hundred  leagues,
speak  the  general  language  of  the  Yncas,  being  that  which

1  The  different  tribes  of  the  empire  of  the  Yncas  were  distinguished  by
their  head-dresses,  the  people  of  each  pro^^nce  wearing  one  of  a  distinct
coloiu-.  This  was  not  a  custom  introduced  by  the  Yncas,  but,  being  the
usage  of  the  different  tribes,  those  sovereigns  decreed  that  it  should  be  con-
tinued, in  order  that  the  tribes  might  not  be  confounded  one  with  another,
when  serving  in  the  ai-my  or  at  Cuzco.     G.  de  la  Vega,  i,  lib.  vii,  cap.  9.

L


146  THE    TRAVELS    OF

is  used  in  Cuzco.  They  generally  speak  this  language,
because  such  is  the  order  of  the  Yncas,  and  it  was  a  law
throughout  the  kingdom  that  this  language  should  be  used.
Fathers  were  punished  if  they  neglected  to  teach  it  to  their
sons  in  their  childhood,  yet,  notwithstanding  that  they
speak  the  language  of  Cuzco,  all  these  tribes  had  a  language
of  their  own  which  was  spoken  by  their  ancestors.  Thus,
those  of  Pansaleo  had  a  different  language  from  those  of
Carangue  and  Otabalo.  The  people  of  Pansaleo  are  dressed
in  shirts  without  sleeves  or  collars,  with  openings  at  the
sides  for  their  arms,  and  above  for  their  heads.  They  also
have  large  mantles  of  wool  or  cotton.  The  mantles  of  the
chiefs  were  very  fine,  and  were  dyed  with  many  bright
colours.  For  shoes  they  used  certain  usutas,  made  from  a
root  or  herb  called  Gahuya,^  which  forms  great  leaves,  out  of
which  very  useful  white  fibres  are  drawn,  like  hemp.  Of  these
they  make  their  usidas,  or  sandals,  which  serve  as  shoes,
and  they  wear  the  ends  of  these  fibres  as  a  covering  for  their
heads.  Some  of  the  women  wear  the  very  graceful  dress
of  those  of  Cuzco,  with  a  long  mantle  extending  from  the
neck  to  the  feet,  having  holes  for  the  arms.  Round  the
waist  they  fasten  a  very  broad  and  graceful  belt  called
cJiumpi,  which  tightens  and  secures  the  mantle.  Over  this
they  wear  another  fine  mantle  falling  from  the  shoulders,
and  coming  down  so  as  to  cover  the  feet,  called  Ih'rlla.  To
secure  their  mantles  they  wear  pins  of  gold  and  silver,
rather  broad  at  one  end,  called  tojm.  On  the  head  they
Avcar  a  very  graceful  band,  which  they  call  unclia,  and  the
Ksutas,  or  sandals,  complete  their  attire.  In  short,  the
dress  of  the  ladies  of  Cuzco  is  the  most  graceful  and  rich
that  has  been  seen  up  to  this  time  in  all  the  Indies."     They

'  Some  kind  of  aloe.

-  All  these  names  of  pai-ts  of  tlie  dress  are  correct  (Juiclma  words.
The  dress  here  described  by  Cieza  de  Leon  is  exactly  the  same  as  thos(>
represented  in  pictures  still  preserved  at  Cuzco,  which  arc  almost  contem-
poraneous with  the  conquest.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  M?

arc  very  careful  in  combing  out  their  liair,  and  wear  it  very
long.  In  anotlier  place  I  will  treat  more  fully  of  tliis  dress
of  tlie  Pallas,  or  ladies  of  Cuzco.

Betw^een  this  village  of  Pansaleo  and  the  city  of  Quito
there  are  some  scattered  villages  here  and  there  among  the
hills.  To  the  westward  are  the  valleys  of  Uchillo  and
Langazi,  where  the  land^  which  is  very  fertile,  yields  many
of  those  products  concerning  which  I  wrote  in  the  chap-
ter on  the  foundation  of  Quito.  The  inhabitants  are  not
hostile  to  each  other,  nor  do  they  eat  human  flesh,  and
they  are  not  so  wicked  as  some  of  those  in  the  pro-\nnces
which  we  have  passed.  Formerly  they  adored  many  idols,
according  to  their  own  report,  but  after  they  were  con-
quered by  the  Kings  Yncas,  they  offered  their  sacrifices  to
the  sun,  and  worshipped  it  as  a  god.

Here  a  road  leads  to  the  forests  of  Yumbo,  where  the
natives  are  not  so  serviceable  nor  so  docile  as  those  of  Quito,
but,  on  the  contrary,  proud  and  vicious.  They  live  in  a
rugged  and  inaccessible  district,  which  is,  however,  very
rich  by  reason  of  the  warmth  and  fertility.  These  people
also  worship  the  sun,  and  resemble  their  neighbours  in
their  habits  and  customs,  for,  hke  them,  they  were  sub-
jugated by  the  great  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui  and  his  son
Huayna  Ccapac.

Auother  road  leads  towards  the  rising  of  the  sun,  where
there  is  a  province  called  Quijos,  inhabited  by  Indians  with
the  same  manners  and  customs.

Three  leagues  beyond  Pansaleo  are  the  buildings  and
village   of  Mulahalo,^   which    though  now  small   from   the

1  "  The  stone  made  use  of  for  the  house  of  Huayna  Ccapac,  mentioned
by  Cieza  de  Leon  imder  the  name  of  3/ulahalo,  is  a  rock  of  volcanic
origin,  a  burnt  and  spongy  porphyry  -n-ith  basaltic  basis.  It  was  probably
ejected  by  the  mouth  of  the  volcano  of  Cotopaxi.  As  this  monmnent
appears  to  have  been  constructed  in  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury, the  materials  employed  in  it  prove  that  it  is  a  mistake  to  consider
as  the  first  eruption  of  Cotopaxi  that  which  took  place  in  15:i;^>.  when


148  THE    TRAVELS    OF

desertion  of  its  inhabitants,  was,  in  ancient  times,  a  station
wliere  there  were  lodgings  for  the  Yncas  and  their  captains
when  they  travelled  on  this  road,  and  great  store  of  pro-
visions for  the  troops.  On  the  right  hand  of  the  \-illage  of
Mulahalo  there  is  a  fiery  mouth,  or  volcano,  of  which  the
Indians  say  that,  in  former  times,  it  threw  out  great  quan-
tities of  stones  and  cinders,  insomuch  that  many  villages
were  destroyed  by  them.  Some  pretend  that,  before  the
irruption,  infernal  visions  were  seen,  and  trembhng  voices
heard.  "What  these  Indians  say  of  the  volcano  appears  to
be  certainly  true,  for  at  the  time  Don  Pedro  de  Alvarado
(formerly  governor  of  the  province  of  Guatemala)  entered
Peru  -with  his  armed  force  by  way  of  these  provinces  of
Quito,  it  rained  cinders  for  several  days,  as  several  Spaniards
assert  who  came  with  Alvarado.  They  must  have  burst
from  some  fieiy  mouth,  as  there  are  many  in  these  moun-
tains which  would  yield  much  sulphur.

A  little  beyond  Mulahalo  are  the  village  and  great  build-
ings called  Llacta-cunga,  which  were  as  important  as  those
of  Quito. ^     The  buildings,  though  now  in  ruins,  give  signs

Sebastian  de  Belalcazar  made  the  conquest  of  the  kingdom  of  Quito."
Humboldt's  Researches^  i,  p.  6.

^  These  are  the  ruins  called  CaUo,  near  Latacunga  (Llacta-cunga).
In  Ulloa's  time  they  served  as  a  house  for  the  Augustine  monks  at  Quito.
As  Humboldt  says  that  UUoa's  description  of  Callo  is  very  inaccurate,  it
will  be  preferable  to  refer  to  the  account  given  of  the  ruins  by  the  great
Prussian  traveller.

The  Yncas  Tupas  Yupanqui  and  Huayna  Ccapac,  -when  they  had  com-
pleted the  conquest  of  Quito,  caused  magnificent  roads  to  be  formed,  and
tamp  us  (inns),  storehouses,  and  magazines  to  be  built  for  the  reception  of
the  sovereign  and  his  armies.  Travellers  have  called  the  ruins  of  these
buildings  palaces.  Tlie  most  celebrated  of  these  ruins  are  those  near
Latacunga,  ten  leagues  soutli  of  Quito,  and  tlu-ee  leagues  from  tlie  volcano
of  Cotopaxi.  The  edifice  forms  a  square,  each  side  of  whicli  is  thirty-
five  yards  long.  Four  great  outer  doors  are  still  disting-uishable,  and
eight  apartments,  three  of  which  are  in  good  preservation.  The  walls
are  nearly  five  yards  and  a  half  liigh,  and  a  yard  thick.  The  doors  are
similar  to  those  in  the  Egyptian  temples,  and  there  are  eighteen  niches  in


PEDRO    1)10    CIKZA    DK    LEON.  1 -lO

<of  their  former  grandeur,  aud  in  some  of  the  walls  the
niches  may  be  seen  where  the  golden  sheep  and  other
valuable  things  which  they  carved,  were  kept.  The  build-
ing set  apart  for  the  Kings  Yncas,  and  the  temple  of  the
sun,  where  they  performed  their  sacrifices  and  superstitions,
were  especially  remarkable  for  these  precious  things.  There
were  also  many  virgins  here,  dedicated  to  the  service  of
the  temple,  whom  they  called  Mama-cuna.  In  this  village
the  Lords  Yncas  placed  a  superintendent,  who  had  charge
of  the  collection  of  tribute  in  the  neighbouring  provinces,
and  stored  it  here,  where  there  were  also  a  great  number  of
Mitimaes}  The  Yncas,  considering  that  the  centre  of  their
dominion  was  the  city  of  Cuzco,  whence  they  promulgated
laws,  and  sent  forth  their  captains  to  war,  and  that  Quito
was  six  hundred  leagues  distant,  while  the  road  to  Chile
was  still  longer;  and  considering,  also,  that  all  this  vast
extent  of  country  was  peopled  by  barbarous,  and  some  of
them  very  warlike  tribes,  they  adopted  the  following  system
in  order  to  keep  the  empire  in  greater  security.  It  was
first  commenced  in  the  time  of  King  Ynca  Yupanqui,  father
of  the  great  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui,  and  grandfather  of
Huayna  Ccapac.

As  soon  as  a  province  was  conquered,  ten  or  twelve  thou-
sand men  were  ordered  to  go  there  with  their  wives,  but
they  were  always  sent  to  a  country  where  the  climate  re-
sembled that  from  wliich  they  came.     If  they  were  natives

each  apartment,  distributed  with  the  greatest  symmetry.  Humboldt's
Researches.

^  Cieza  de  Leon  gives  the  best  account  of  these  Mitimaes  or  Colonists.
Indeed,  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  quotes  from  lum.  (i,  hb.  vii,  cap.  1 ;  and
i,  Ub.  iii,  cap.  19.)  It  is  curious  that  the  descendants  of  Mitimaes  on  the
coast  of  Peru  still  retain  the  tradition  concerning  the  villages  in  the
Andes,  whence  their  ancestors  were  transported.  Thus  the  Indians  of
Arequipa  are  descended  from  Mitimaes  who  were  sent  from  a  village
called  Cavanilla,  near  Puno ;  those  of  iSIoquegua,  from  Mitimaes  who
were  natives  of  Acora  and  Have,  on  the  shores  of  I^ake  Titicaca  :  and
those  of  Tacna,  from  natives  of  Juli  and  Pisacoma,  near  the  same  lake.


150  THE    TRAVELS    OP

of  a  cold  province,  they  were  sent  to  a  cold  one ;  and  if  tliey
came  from  a  warm  province,  they  went  to  a  warm  one.
These  people  were  called  Mitimaes,^  which  means  Indians
who  have  come  from  one  country  and  gone  to  another.
They  received  grants  of  land  on  which  to  work,  and  sites
on  which  to  build  their  houses.  The  Yncas  decreed  that
these  Mitimacs  should  always  obey  the  orders  of  the  gover-
nors and  captains  who  were  placed  over  them,  so  that  if  the
natives  rebelled,  the  Mitimaes,  who  owed  obedience  to  their
captains,  would  punish  them  and  force  them  into  the  ser-
vice of  the  Yncas ;  consequently,  if  there  was  any  disturb-
ance among  the  Mitimaes  themselves,  they  were  attacked
by  the  natives.  By  this  policy  these  Lords  Yncas  kept
their  empire  safe  and  free  from  rebellion ;  and  the  provinces
were  well  supplied  with  provisions,  for  most  of  the  in-
habitants of  each  were  natives  of  some  other  country.
They  also  adopted  another  plan,  in  order  that  they  might
not  be  detested  by  the  natives.  They  never  deprived  the
native  caciques  of  their  inheritance,  and  if  any  one  of
them  was  so  guilty  as  to  merit  deprivation,  the  vacant
office  was  given  to  his  sons  or  brothers,  and  all  men  were
ordered  to  obey  them.  In  my  book  of  the  Yncas  I  treat
more  fully  of  this  system  of  Mitimaes  than  I  am  able  to  do
here.  To  return  to  what  I  was  saying,  these  Indians,
called  Mitimaes,  in  the  station  of  Llacta-cunga,  were  ordered
to  obey  the  officer  appointed  by  the  Ynca.  Around  the
buildings  were  the  farms  and  villages  of  the  chiefs  and
officers,  which  were  well  supplied  with  provisions.

When  the  last  battle  was  fought  in  Peru  (which  was  in
the  valley  of  Xaquixaguana,  where  Gonzalo  Pizarro  was  put

'  I  am  doubtful  about  the  etymology  of  this  word,  but  inchne  to
believe  that  it  is  derived  from  the  Quichua  word  Mita  (tune  or  turn),
whence  come  other  cognate  words.  From  labourers  or  soldiers  taking
their  turn  at  work,  it  came  to  mean  service  generally — hence  Mitta-mna
(a  man  required  to  perform  forced  service)  and  Mitta-chanacuy  (a  law
of  the  Yncas  regulating  the  division  of  laboiu-).


PEDKO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  151

to  death)  we  set  out  from  the  government  of  Popayan  with
the  Adelantado  Don  Sebastian  de  Belalcazar^  and  little  less
than  two  hundred  Spaniards^  to  take  the  side  of  his  Majesty
against  the  tyrants,  and  some  of  us  arrived  at  this  village,
for  we  did  not  all  march  along  the  same  road,  lest  there
should  be  difficulty  in  obtaining  food  and  other  necessaries.
In  one  direction  there  were  plenty  of  rabbits,  in  another
pigs,  in  another  fowls,  and  so  on  with  sheep  and  lambs ;  and
thus  all  were  provided  for.

The  natives  of  this  village  all  go  about  dressed  in  shirts
and  mantles,  each  one  as  richly  and  gallantly  adorned  as  his
means  will  allow.  The  women  also  go  dressed  in  the  same
way  as  those  of  Mulahalo,  and  they  speak  almost  the  same
language.  All  their  houses  are  of  stone,  roofed  with
straw,  some  being  large,  and  others  small,  according  to
the  rank  and  wealth  of  the  occupants.  The  captains  and
lords  have  many  women,  but  there  is  one  principal  and
legitimate  wife,  through  whom  the  lordship  is  inherited.
They  worship  the  sun,  and  when  the  chiefs  die,  they  make
large  tombs  in  the  mountains  and  plains,  where  they  bury
his  gold  and  silver  jewels,  arms,  clothes,  and  live  women
(not  the  ugliest)  with  the  body,  together  with  plenty  of
provisions.  This  custom  of  thus  burying  the  dead  is  adopted
throughout  the  greater  part  of  the  Indies  by  advice  of  the
devil,  who  gives  the  people  to  understand  that  they  will
thus  be  well  provided  for  when  they  arrive  in  the  new
country.  They  make  great  lamentations  over  their  dead,
and  the  women  who  are  not  killed,  with  all  the  servants,  are
shorn  of  their  hair,  and  remain  for  many  days  in  constant
mourning.  After  weeping  through  all  the  day  and  night
in  which  the  death  took  place,  they  still  continue  to  weep
for  a  whole  year.  These  Indians  eat  early  in  the  morning,
and  they  eat  on  the  ground  without  troubling  themselves
much  about  cloths  or  napkins.  After  they  have  eaten  their
maize,  with  meat  or  fish,  they  pass  all  the  rest  of  the  day


152  THE    TRAVELS    OF

in  drinking  chlcha,^  or  wine  made  from  maize,  always  hold-
ing tlie  cup  in  their  hands.  They  ai*e  very  careful  and
orderly  in  their  festive  songs,  the  men  and  women  holding
hands,  and  going  round  to  the  sound  of  a  drum.  They
recount  former  events  in  their  songs  and  ditties,  but  they
always  go  on  drinking  until  they  are  very  drunk.  [Here
follow  sentences  unfii  for  translation.'] "

They  beheve  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  know
that  there  has  been  a  Creator  of  all  things  in  the  world,  so
that  in  contemplating  the  grandeur  of  the  heavens,  the
movements  of  the  sun  and  moon,  and  other  marvels,  they
understand  that  there  was  a  Creator  of  them  all,  but,
blinded  and  deceived  by  the  devil,  they  think  that  the  same
devil  has  power  over  all  things.  Some,  however,  seeing
his  villainy,  and  that  he  never  tells  the  truth,  abhor  him,
and  they  obey  him  more  from  fear  than  because  they  believe
in  his  divinity.  They  hold  the  sun  in  great  reverence,  and
believe  it  to  be  a  god.  The  priests  are  much  esteemed  by
the  people.

I  shall  conclude  this  chapter  by  saying  that  these  people
of  Llacta-cunga  use  lances  of  palm  wood,  darts,  and  slings
for  fighting.  The  women  are  very  amorous,  and  some  of
them  are  beautiful.  There  are  still  many  Mitimacs  here,
descended  from  those  who  came  here  when  the  Yncas  ruled
over  these  provinces.

1  A  fermented  liquor  made  from  maize,  called  acca  in  the  Quichua
language,  and  universally  drunk  by  the  Indians,  in  all  parts  of  Peru.

■  "  Y  como  estan  sin  sentido,  algunos  toman  las  mugeres  que  (juieren,
y  llevadas  a  alrjuna  casa,  usan  con  ellas  sus  luxurias,  sin  tenerlo  por
cosafea;  ponjue  ni  entienden  el  don  que  esta  dehaxo  de  la  verguen^a,  ni
miran  mucho  en  la  honra,  ni  tienen  mucha  cuenta  con  el  mundo."


PEDKO    DE    CIEZA    UE    LEON.  153


CHAPTER    XLII.

Of  the  other  villages  between  Llacta-cunga  and  Riobaniba  ;  and  of  what
passed  between  the  Adelantado  Don  Pedro  de  Alvarado  and  tlie
JNIai^ial  Don  Diego  de  Ahnagro.

After  travelling  for  some  distance  beyond  Llacta-cunga,
along  the  royal  road  wliich  leads  to  the  great  city  of  Cuzco,
the  buildings  of  Muliambato  are  reached,  concerning  which
I  have  nothing  more  to  say  than  that  they  are  inhabited  by
Indians  of  the  same  nation  and  customs  as  those  of  Llacta-
cunga.  There  were  ordinary  buildings  at  this  station,  where
stores  were  deposited  according  to  the  orders  of  the  officer
delegated  by  the  Ynca,  who  obeyed  the  principal  superin-
tendent at  Llacta-cunga.  The  chiefs  looked  to  large
stations,  such  as  Quito,  Tumebamba,  Caxamarca,  Xauxa,
Vilcas,  or  Paria,  and  others  of  the  same  rank  for  orders.
These  stations  were  like  the  seat  of  a  bishopric,  or  the
capital  of  a  kingdom,  which  gave  the  tone  to  all  the  parts,
and  whence  came  the  officers  who  administered  justice,  or
formed  armies  in  case  of  war  or  insurrection.  Nevertheless
affairs  of  great  difficulty  or  importance  were  not  decided
upon  without  a  reference  to  the  Kings  Yncas.  The  trans-
mission of  these  references  was  arranged  with  such  skill
and  order,  that  the  post  went  from  Quito  to  Cuzco  in  eight
days.  Every  half-league  along  the  road  there  was  a  small
house,  where  there  were  always  two  Indians  with  their
wives.  One  of  these  ran  with  the  news  that  had  to  be
transmitted,  and,  before  reaching  the  next  house,  he  called
it  out  to  the  other  runner,  who  at  once  set  off  running  the
other  half-leao-ue,  and  this  is  done  with  such  swiftness  that
neither  mules  nor  horses  could  go  over  such  rocky  ground
in  a  shorter  time.^     But,  as  in  the  book  of  the  Kings  Yncas

1  This  accoimt  of  the  great  Ynca  road  from  Quito  to  Cuzco  is  quoted  at
length  by  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  (i,  Ub.  ix,  cap.  13).

Zai'ate,  the  Accountant,  was  equally  impressed  with  the  grandeur  of


154  THE    TRAVELS    OP

(which  is  the  one  that^  with  the  help  of  God,  will  appear
after  this)  I  treat  fully  of  these  posts^  I  will  not  say  more
here,  my  present  intention  being  merely  to  make  things
clear  to  the  readers'  understanding.

From  Muliambato  the  road  leads  to  the  river  called
Ambato,  where  there  are  also  buildings  which  sei-ved  the
same  purpose  as  those  already  described.  Three  leagues
from  this  place  are  the  splendid  buildings  of  Mocha,  which
are  so  numerous  and  so  grand,  that  I  was  astonished  at  the
sight  of  them ;  but,  now  that  the  Eangs  Yncas  have  lost
their  power,  all  these  palaces  and  buildings,  with  other
grand  works  of  theirs,  have  fallen  into  ruin,  so  that  the
vestiges  of  some  of  these  edifices  alone  remain.  As  they  are
built  of  very  beautiful  stone,  and  as  the  masonry  is  excel-
lent, they  will  endure  for  ages  as  memorials,  without  being
entirely  destroyed.

this  work.  He  says  that  "  the  road  was  made  over  the  mountains  for  a
distance  of  five  hundred  leagues.  It  was  broad  and  level,  rocks  wore
broken  up  and  levelled  where  it  was  necessary,  and  ravines  were  filled  up.
"When  the  road  was  finished  it  was  so  level  that  carts  might  have  passed
along  it.  The  difficulty  of  this  road  will  be  understood  when  it  is  con-
sidered how  great  the  cost  and  labour  has  been  in  levelling  two  leagues  of
hilly  country  in  Spain,  between  Espinar  de  Segovia  and  Guadarramar,
which  has  never  yet  been  completely  done,  although  it  is  the  route  by
which  the  Kings  of  Castille  continually  pass,  mth  their  households  and
their  court,  every  time  they  go  to  or  come  from  Andalusia."  Zarate  was
Comptroller  of  Accounts  for  Castille  from  1528  to  1543,  and  in  1544  he
went  to  Peru  to  hold  the  same  office.  He  was  an  educated  man  and  an  eye-
witness, so  that  liis  testimony  is  valuable.  Historia  del  Peru^  Ub.  i,  cap.  10.
Velasco,  who  was  a  native  of  Riobamba,  near  Quito,  measured  the
breadth  of  the  great  road  of  the  Yncas,  and  found  it  to  be  about  six
yards  in  one  place,  and  seven  in  another.  He  says  that  the  parts  cut
through  the  living  rock  were  covered  with  a  cement  to  make  the  siu-facc
smooth,  while  the  loose  places  were  paved  with  stones  and  covered  with
the  same  cement,  in  which  he  observed  very  small  stones,  not  mucli  larger
than  grains  of  sand.  To  cross  ravines  the  road  was  raised  with  gi-eat
pieces  of  rock  united  together  by  cement ;  and  he  adds  that  this  cement
was  so  strong  that,  where  torrents  had  worked  their  way  tlu-ough  the
emiiankments,  the  road  still  spanned  the  ravines  in  the  form  of  bridges.
llUt.  ,k  (^uito,  i,  p.  5!t.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    I)E    LEON.  155

Round  Mocha  tliorc  arc  several  villages  where  the  in-
habitants and  their  women  all  go  dressed.  Their  customs
and  language  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  Indians  we  have
left  behind.

To  the  westward  are  the  villages  of  Indians  called  Sichos,
and  to  the  east  are  the  Pillaros.  All  these  have  great
store  of  provisions^  because  their  land  is  veiy  fertile^  and
flocks  of  deer,  some  sheep  of  the  kind  called  Peruvian,
many  rabbits,  partridges,  doves,  and  other  game.  Besides
these,  the  Spaniards  have  large  herds  of  cattle  in  all  the
plains  and  villages,  and  they  breed  extensively  by  reason  of
the  excellent  pasture.  There  are  also  goats,  the  country
being  well  suited  for  them ;  and  better  swine  than  in  any
other  part  of  the  Indies,  and  they  make  as  good  ham  and
bacon  as  in  the  Sierra  Morena.

Leaving  Mocha,  the  great  buildings  of  Eiobamba  are
reached,  which  are  not  less  worthy  to  be  seen  than  those  of
Mocha.  They  are  in  the  province  of  the  Puruaes,  in  the
midst  of  beautiful  plains,  very  similar  to  those  of  Spain  in
climate,  in  the  flowers  and  grasses,  and  in  other  things,  as
every  one  knows  who  has  travelled  over  them.

For  some  days  the  city  of  Quito  was  established  at
Riobamba,  before  it  was  removed  to  its  present  site.  But
the  buildings  at  Riobamba  are  more  memorable  for  another
event.  The  Adelantado  Don  Pedro  de  Alvarado,  formerly
governor  of  the  province  of  Guatemala,  which  borders  on
the  great  kingdom  of  New  Spain,  set  out  with  a  fleet
of  ships  fiUed  with  many  knights  (concerning  whom  I  shall
treat  fully  in  the  third  part  of  this  work),  and  landed  on  the
coast,  where  the  fame  of  Quito  reached  the  Spaniards.
They  marched  inland  by  difiicult  and  rugged  forests,  where
they  sufiered  from  hunger  and  other  hardships.  I  cannot  and
ought  not  to  pass  on  without  saying  something  concerning
the  evils  and  miseries  which  these  Spaniards,  and  all  others,
suffered  in  the  discovery  of  these  Indies,  because  I  hold  it


156  THE    TRAVELS    OF

for  very  certain  that  no  nation  that  has  ever  been  in  the
world  has  passed  through  so  much.  It  is  a  thing  well
worthy  of  note  that,  in  less  than  sixty  years,  a  navigation
so  long,  and  a  land  so  vast  and  so  full  of  different  tribes
should  have  been  discovered,  the  way  leading  through
dense  and  dismal  forests,  and  over  deserts  without  roads ;
and  that  these  countries  should  have  been  conquered,  and
more  than  two  hundred  cities  founded  in  them.  Surely
those  who  have  done  this  deserve  great  praise  and  everlast-
ing fame,  far  more  than  my  memory  knows  how  to  imagine,
nor  my  weak  hand  to  write.  One  thing  is  very  certain,  that
the  followers  of  Alvarado  suffered  so  much  on  this  road
from  hunger  and  fatigue,  that  many  of  them  cast  aside  gold
and  precious  emeralds,  from  want  of  strength  to  carry  them.
As  soon  as  the  arrival  of  the  Adelantado  Don  Pedro  de
Alvarado  was  known  in  Cuzco,  through  evidence  brought
by  Gabriel  de  Rojas,^  the  governor,  Don  Francisco  Pizarro,
although  he  was  occupied  in  peopling  that  city  with  Chris-
tians, set  out  to  take  possession  of  the  coasts  of  the  South
Sea ;  while  he  ordered  his  companion,  the  marshal  Don
Diego  de  Almago,  to  march  in  all  haste  to  the  province
of  Quito,  place  himself  at  the  head  of  the  troops  then  under
the  orders  of  his  lieutenant,  the  captain  Sebastian  de
Belalcazar,  and  take  every  necessary  precaution.  By  hasty
marches   the    diligent  marshal  arrived  in  the  province  of

^  This  captain  was  a  native  of  Estremadiu-a  and  a  follower  of  Pizarro.
lie  was  distinguished  for  his  valour  at  the  defence  of  Cuzco,  when  that
city  was  besieged  by  the  Indians  ;  but  seems  subsequently  to  have  gone
over  to  the  party  of  Ahnagro,  who  left  him  as  his  governor  of  Cuzco,
when  he  marched  towards  Lima  after  his  return  from  Chile.  He  had
charge  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro  and  other  prisoners,  who  broke  loose  and
forced  Rojas  to  accompany  them.  On  arriving  at  the  camp  of  Pizarro
near  Lima,  the  marquis,  notwithstanding  his  desertion,  gave  Rojas  a  large
estate  in  Charcas.  lu  the  war  between  Gonzalo  Pizarro  and  Gasca,  he
went  over  to  the  latter  and  was  given  command  of  liis  artillery.  Imme-
diately after  the  fall  of  Gonzalo  he  was  sent  as  treasurer  to  Charcas,
where  he  died.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON,  157

Quito,  and  took  command  of  the  troops  that  he  found
there,  speaking  sharply  to  the  captain  Bclalcazar  for  having
left  Tangaraca  without  orders  from  the  governor.

The  Adelautado  Don  Pedro  de  Alvarado,  accompanied  by-
Don  Diego  de  Alvarado,  Gomez  de  Alvarado,  Alonzo  de
Alvarado,  who  is  now  marshal  of  Peru/  the  captain  Gar-
cilasso  de  la  Vega/  Juan  de  Saavedra/  and  other  knights  of

1  These  Cavalleros  played  a  very  conspicuous  part  in  the  conquests  and
civil  wars  of  Peru.  For  an  account  of  Alonzo  de  Alvarado,  see  my  Life  of
Enriquez  de  Guzman^  p.  109  {jiote^\  of  Diego  de  Alvarado,  Ihid.^  p.  124
{iiote').

^  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  was  born,  of  noble  parentage,  in  the  city  of
Badajos,  in  Estremadm-a.  His  great-grandfather  was  Gomez  Suarez
de  Figueroa,  the  first  Count  of  Feria,  by  Elvira  Lasso  de  la  Vega.  This
lady  was  a  sister  of  the  famous  Marquis  of  Santillana,  the  charming  poet,
and  founder  of  the  great  family  of  Mendoza.  She  was  a  maternal  grand-
daughter of  that  Garcilasso  who  in  1372  received  the  surname  of  "  de  la
Vega,"  in  memory  of  a  famous  duel  fought  with  a  Moorish  giant  before
the  walls  of  Granada : —

"  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega
They  the  youth  thenceforward  call,

For  his  duel  in  the  Vega
Of  Granada  chanced  to  fall."
The  lady's  paternal  grandfather  was  Don  Diego  de  Mendoza,  the  knight
who,  in  the  battle  of  Aljubarrota  with  the  Portuguese  in  1385,  saved  the
life  of  King  John  I  by  giving  him  his  horse,  when  his  own  was  killed
under  him,  a  loyal  act  which  is  commemorated  in  an  old  ballad : —
"  Si  el  cavallo  vos  han  muerto
Subid  Rey  en  mi  cavallo."
The  subject  of  this  note  was  a  second  cousin  twice  removed  of  Garcilasso
de  la  Vega  the  poet,  whose  poems  were  published  with  those  of  his  friend
Boscan  in  1544.

So  much  for  GarcUasso's  descent,  which  was  sufficiently  noble  and  dis-
tinguished. He  was  a  young  man  of  twenty-five  years  of  age,  tall,
handsome,  polished,  generous,  and  well  practised  in  the  use  of  arms,  when
in  1531  he  set  out  for  the  New  World  as  a  captain  of  infantry  in  com-
pany with  Alonzo  de  Alvarado,  who  was  returning  to  resume  his  govern-
ment of  Guatemala.  That  famous  chief,  on  hearing  of  the  riches  of  Peru.
set  out  with  a  large  fleet  from  Nicaragua,  and  landed  in  the  bay  of
Caragues  in  ^larch  1534.  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  accompanied  him,  and
shared  in  all  the  terrible  hardships  and  sufferings  of  the  subsequent  march


158  THE    TRAVELS    Or

high  rank,  arrived  in  the  neighbourliood  of  the  camp  of  the

to  Riobamba.  After  the  convention  -svith  Almagro,  and  the  dispersion
of  Alvarado's  forces,  Garcilasso  was  sent  to  complete  the  conquest  of  the
country  roimd  the  port  of  Buenaventura.  He  and  his  small  band  of  fol-
lowers forced  their  way  for  many  days  through  dense  uninhabited  forests,
endiu'ing  almost  incredible  hardshijjs,  and  finding  notliing  to  repay  their
labours.  He  displayed  much  constancy  and  endm-ance  and  persevered
during  a  whole  year,  but,  having  lost  eighty  of  his  men  from  hunger  and
fever,  he  was  at  last  obliged  to  retreat.  He  was  nearly  drowned  in  cross-
ing the  river  Quiximies,  and  after  many  other  strange  adventures  and
narrow  escapes,  he  reached  the  Spanish  settlement  of  Puerto  Viejo,  and
went  thence  to  Lima,  where  Pizarro  was  closely  besieged  by  the  insur-
gent Indians.  He  then  marched  to  the  rehef  of  Cuzco,  and  afterwards
accompanied  Gonzalo  Pizarro  in  his  expedition  to  the  Collao  and  Charcas.
On  the  arrival  of  Vaca  de  Castro  in  Peru,  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  joined
him,  and  was  wounded  in  the  battle  of  Chupas.  "\Mien  Gonzalo  Pizarro
rose  in  rebeUion  against  the  viceroy  Blasco  Nuuez  de  Vela,  Garcilasso
and  several  other  loyal  knights  fled  from  Cuzco  to  Arequipa,  and  thence
up  by  the  deserts  of  the  coast  to  Lima,  in  order  to  share  the  fortimes  of
the  viceroy.  But  when  they  arrived  at  Lima,  that  ill-fated  and  wrong-
headed  knight  was  gone,  and  the  whole  covmtry  was  in  favour  of  Gonzalo.
The  fugitives,  therefore,  concealed  themselves  as  best  they  could.  Gar-
cilasso was  lodged  in  the  house  of  a  friend,  and  afterwards  hid  himself  in
the  convent  of  San  Francisco.  Tlu-ough  the  intercession  of  friends  Gonzalo
Pizarro  granted  him  a  pardon,  but  detained  him  as  a  prisoner  mitil
he  escaped  to  the  army  of  Gasca  on  the  morning  of  the  battle  of  Xaquixa-
guana,  galloping  across  the  space  between  the  two  camps  at  early  down,
on  his  good  horse  Salinillas.  He  afterwards  resided  at  his  house  in
Cuzco  mitil  the  rebellion  of  Giron  broke  out  in  1554,  when  he  once  more
showed  his  loyalty  by  escaping  in  the  night,  and  joining  the  royal  camp.
After  the  fall  of  Giron,  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  was  apjjointed  corregidor
and  governor  of  Cuzco,  where  he  appears  to  have  devoted  himseK  to  the
duties  of  his  office,  and,  amongst  other  good  deeds,  restored  the  aqueduct
which  brought  a  supply  of  water  from  the  lake  of  Cliinchiru  for  a  dis-
tance of  two  leagues,  to  ii-rigate  the  valley  of  Cuzco.  His  house  was  a
centre  of  hospitality  and  kindness,  where  the  conquerors  fought  their
battles  over  again  in  the  evenings,  while  Garcilasso  s  wife,  the  Ynca
princess,  and  her  friends  dispensed  their  nmnerous  charities.  Both  he
and  his  wife  were  engaged  in  acts  of  benevolence,  and  in  collecting  sub-
scriptions for  chai-itable  purposes  during  the  time  that  he  held  office.  It
is  sjiid  that  in  one  night  they  raised  34,500  ducats  for  a  hospital  for
Intlians.  \Micn  Garcilasso  wjis  relieved  of  his  charge,  the  Juez  de  Resi-
dencia,  who  came  to  review  liis  administration,  lionourably  acquitted  liim


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON,  159

marshal  Don  Diego  de  Almagro.  Tlioro  was  soino  danger
of  a  rupture  between  them  ;  but  at  last,  by  the  intervention
of  the  licentiate  Caldera  and  other  prudent  persons,  it  was
agreed  that  the  Adelantado  should  leave  the  fleet  of  ships
he  had  brought,  with  the  arms  and  troops,  in  Peru,  and  that,
in  consideration  of  the  expenses  of  the  expedition,  he  should
receive  one  hundred  thousand  castellanos}     This  capitula-

of  the  charges  which  were  brought  against  him,  and  he  retired  into
private  life.     He  died  at  Cuzco  in  the  year  1559,  after  a  long  illness.

Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  was  married  to  a  fmsta  or  Ynca  princess,  who
was  baptised  under  the  name  of  Isabella  in  1539.  She  was  a  daughter  of
Hualpa  Tupac,  a  younger  brother  of  the  gi-eat  Ynca  Iluayna  Ccapac.
By  this  lady  he  had  a  son,  the  well  known  historian,  who  was  born  at
Cuzco  in  1540.  After  his  father's  death  the  young  Garcilasso  Ynca  de
la  Vega,  who  had  received  his  early  education  at  a  school  in  Cuzco,  went
to  Spain.  This  was  in  1560,  when  he  was  just  twenty  years  of  age.  He
fought  against  the  rebel  Moriscos  under  the  banner  of  Don  John  of
Austria,  and  afterwards  setthng  at  Cordova,  devoted  himself  to  literary
pursuits.  He  wrote  a  history  of  the  conquest  of  Florida,  and  the  two
parts  of  his  Commentarios  Rectles  were  published  in  1609  and  1616.  An
excellent  second  edition  appeared  at  IMadrid  in  1722.  His  memory  was
well  stored  with  the  recollections  of  his  youth,  when  he  had  learnt  the
history  of  the  Yncas  from  his  mother's  relations,  and  of  the  conquest
from  his  father's  old  companions  in  arms.  He  also  quotes  largely  from
Cieza  de  Leon,  Gomara,  Zarate,  Fernandez,  and  Acosta,  as  well  as  from
the  manuscript  of  the  missionary  Bias  Valera,  a  most  important  work
which  was  destroyed  when  Lord  Essex  sacked  the  city  of  Cadiz.  No  man,
therefore,  could  be  better  qualified  to  write  a  history  of  the  early  civilisa-
tion of  the  Yncas,  and  of  the  conquest  of  Peru  by  the  Spaniards.  He
has  been  invaluable  to  me  in  explaining  and  illustrating  the  text  of  Cieza
de  Leon ;  and  in  gratitude  I  have  therefore  devoted  a  long  note  to  an
account  of  his  father.  The  Ynca  Garcilasso  died  in  1616  at  the  ad-
vanced age  of  seventy-six,  and  was  buried  at  Cordova.

^  Juan  de  Saavedra  was  a  native  of  Se\'ille.  He  afterwards  accompanied
Almagro  in  liis  expedition  into  Chile,  and,  when  Hernando  Pizarro  was
in  liis  commander's  power,  he  persuaded  the  old  marshal  not  to  put  his
enemy  to  death.  In  the  battle  of  Chupas  he  fought  against  the  younger
Almagro.  When  Gonzalo  Pizarro  and  his  unscrupulous  old  lieutenant
Carbajal  entered  Lima  and  wreaked  vengeance  on  those  who  had  opposed
them,  Juan  de  Saavedra,  with  two  other  knights,  were  hung  under  cir-
cumstances of  great  barbarity.

'  A  castellano^  in  those  days,  was  worth  about  £2  :  12  of  our  money;
so  that  Alvarado  was  bought  off  by  Pizarro  for  the  sum  of  £260,000.


160  THE    TRAVELS    OF

tion  having  been  agreed  to,  the  marshal  took  the  troops
into  his  service,  and  the  Adelantado  proceeded  to  the  City
of  the  Kings,  where  the  governor  Don  Francisco  Pizarro
received  him  with  the  distinction  that  was  due  to  so
valorous  a  captain  as  Don  Pedro  de  Alvarado.  He  received
the  one  hundred  thousand  casteUanos,  and  returned  to  his
government  of  Guatemala.  The  agreement  and  capitulation
above-mentioned  was  made  and  agreed  to  in  the  buildings
of  Riobamba,  concerning  which  I  am  now  treating.  It  was
also  here  that  the  captain  Belalcazar,  who  was  aftenvards
governor  of  the  province  of  Popayan,  fought  a  battle  with
the  Indians,  in  which,  after  many  of  them  had  been  killed,
the  victory  remained  with  the  Christians.


CHAPTER    XLIII.


AMiich  treats  of  what  there  is  to  be  said  concerning  the  other  Lidian
villages  as  far  as  the  buildings  of  Tumebamba.

These  buildings  of  Riobamba,  as  I  have  already  said,  are  in
the  province  of  the  Puruaes,  which  is  one  of  the  best  and
most  populous  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  city  of  Quito.
The  men  go  dressed,  as  well  as  the  women.  They  have
the  same  customs  as  their  neighbours,  but  are  distinguished
by  the  band  round  their  heads.  They  all  wear  very  long
hair,  and  plait  it  in  very  small  tails.  The  women  do  the
same.  They  worship  the  sun,  and  those  who  are  selected
as  most  fit  for  such  a  business,  converse  with  the  devil.
They  have  other  rites  and  abuses,  the  same  as  those  of  the
Yncas  who  conquered  them.  When  a  chief  dies  they  dig  a
deep  square  tomb,  into  Avhich  they  put  the  body,  with  the
anns  and  other  effects  of  the  deceased.  Some  of  these
tombs  arc  made  witliin  tlie  houses  of  the  inhabitants.    Thcv


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  1 '')  I

have  tlie  same  customs  as  the  other  natives  of  these  parts ;
that  is  to  say,  they  bury  the  most  beautiful  of  the  women
of  the  deceased  with  tlic  body.  I  have  been  told  by  the
Indians  that  this  is  done  because  some  among  them,  who  are
looked  upon  as  men  of  credit  (God  permitting  that,  for  their
sins  and  idolatries  they  may  at  times  be  deceived  by  the
illusions  of  the  devil) ,  have  seen,  or  thought  they  saw,  those
who  had  long  been  dead  walking,  adorned  with  the  things
that  were  buried  with  them,  and  accompanied  by  their
wives  who  had  been  buried  alive.  Seeing  this,  they  con-
cluded that  where  the  souls  went,  women  and  gold  should
also  be  sent,  and  so  they  do  as  I  have  described.  The
reason  why  the  son  of  the  sister  inherits,  and  not  the  son  of
the  brother,  I  will  relate  hereafter.

There  are  many  villages  in  this  province  of  the  Puruaes,
which  I  shall  not  further  allude  to,  in  order  to  avoid  pro-
lixity. To  the  east  of  Riobamba  there  are  other  villages  in
the  forests  near  the  sources  of  the  river  Maraiion,  and  the
mountain  called  Tinguragua,  round  which  there  are  also
many  villages.  The  inhabitants  have  the  same  customs  as
all  the  others,  they  wear  clothing,  and  their  houses  are
built  of  stone.  They  wei-e  conquered  by  the  Kings  Yncas,
and  their  captains  speak  the  general  language  of  Cuzco,
although  they  have  their  own  tongue  as  well.  To  the  west-
ward there  is  a  snowy  region  thinly  inhabited,  called  Urco-
laso.  Near  this  land  a  road  leads  to  the  city  of  Santiago,
which  is  called  Guayaquil.

Leaving  Riobamba,  some  other  buildings  are  reached,
called  Cayambe.  All  this  country  is  bare  and  very  cold.
Beyond  Cayambe  are  the  tampvs,  or  lodgings  of  Teocaxas,
situated  on  a  large  and  bitterly  cold  plain,  where  the  Indian
natives  fought  the  battle  with  the  captain  Sebastian  de
Belalcazar,  which  is  called  Teocaxas.  Although  it  lasted
all  day,  and  was  very  obstinately  contested,  neither  party
obtained  the  victory.

M


162  THE    TRAVELS    OF

Three  leagues  further  on  are  the  important  buildings
called  Tiquisambi,  -which  have  the  forests  of  Guayaquil  on
the  rights  and  on  the  left  Pomallata,  Quizna,  Macas,  and
other  regions  as  far  as  the  gi"eat  river.  The  road  then
descends  to  the  buildings  of  Chanchan,  where,  the  country
being  warm,  it  is  called  by  the  natives  Yunca,  which  means
a  warm  land.  There  being  no  snow  nor  cold,  the  trees
grow  abundantly,  besides  other  things  which  are  not  to  be
had  in  cold  countries.  For  this  reason  all  those  who  live
in  warm  and  genial  countries  are  called  Yiincas  j  they  have
this  name  now,  and  will  never  lose  it  while  they  exist,
although  ages  should  pass  away.  The  distance  between  these
buildings  and  the  sumptuous  royal  edifices  of  Tumebamba
is  nearly  twenty  leagues,  the  whole  intervening  country
being  scattered  over  with  depots  and  other  buildings,  at
intervals  of  two  or  three  or  four  leagues.  Amongst  these
there  are  two  principal  stations,  one  called  Canaribamba
and  the  other  Hatuncanari,^  whence  the  natives  and  their
province  took  the  name  of  Cafiaris,  as  they  are  now  called.
Right  and  left  of  the  road  there  are  numerous  villages  and
provinces,  which  I  shall  not  further  mention,  because  the
natives,  having  been  conquered  by  the  Kings  Yncas,  have
the  same  customs  as  all  the  rest,  speak  the  general  langviage
of  Cuzco,  and  wear  clothes,  both  men  and  women.  In  the
order  of  their  marriages,  rules  of  inheritance,  and  custom  of
burying  food,  arms,  and  live  women  with  their  dead,  they
are  also  the  same  as  their  neighbours.  They  all  believe  the
sun  to  bo  god,  but  that  there  was  also  a  Creator  of  all
things,  whom,  in  the  language  of  Cuzco,  they  call  Huira-


^  Ulloa  describes  the  ruins  at  Hatmi-cauari  as  the  largest  and  best  built
in  the  province  of  Quito.  In  the  rear  the  building  terminates  in  a  high
thick  wall  on  the  slope  of  a  mountain.  In  the  centre  there  is  an  oval
tower  containing  two  chambers.  The  walls  are  full  of  niches  ynth  stone
l)egs  in  them.  'J'he  outer  walls  are  very  thick,  with  ramparts  round  the
inner  sides.


PKDRO    DE    CIKZA    DE    LEON.  1 G3

cncha}  Although  they  now  have  this  belief,  they  formerly
worshipped  trees,  stones,  and  the  moon,  being  prompted
by  the  devil,  our  enemy,  with  whom  some  of  them  con-
verse, and  they  obey  him  in  many  things.  In  our  time,  the
wrath  of  God  having  been  raised,  the  sacred  evangel  will  be
preached,  and  the  light  of  faith  spread  abroad,  so  that  they
will  abhor  the  devil.  Already  in  many  places  where  he
was  esteemed  and  venerated,  he  is  now  detested,  and  the
temples  of  the  accursed  idols  are  destroyed,  insomuch  that
there  is  no  sign  of  an  image,  and  many  Indians  have
become  Christians.  There  are  now  few  villages  in  Peru
without  a  friar  or  clergyman  who  teaches  the  people ;  and,
in  order  that  the  Indians  may  more  readily  be  made  to
understand  their  errors,  and  induced  to  embrace  our  holy
religion,  a  grammar  has  been  made,  by  which  to  speak  their
language,  so  that  the  priests  and  Indians  may  understand
each  other.  The  reverend  father  Don  Domingo  de  Santo
Tomas  has  laboured  much  in  this  work.^

All  along  the  road  there  are  rivers,  some  small  others
larger,  and  all  with  excellent  water.  Over  some  there  are
bridges  to  pass  from  one  side  to  the  other.  In  former
times,  before  the  Spaniards  gained  this  kingdom,  there  were
great  quantities  of  sheep  in  these  mountains  of  the  kind
peculiar  to  this  country,  and  a  still  greater  number  of
huanacos  and  vicunas.  But  the  Spaniards  have  slaughtered
so  many,  that  now  there  are  scarcely  any  left.  No  wolves
nor  other  mischievous  animals  have  been  met  with  in  these
parts,  except  the  tigers,  which  I  mentioned  in  describing
the  forests  of  Buenaventura,  and  some  small  lions.  In  the
wooded  ravines  there  are  also  some  snakes,  and  in  all  parts
there  are  foxes  of  the  country,  and  other  wild  creatures.    Of

'  Literally  "  Foam  of  the  lake."   It  was  the  name  of  one  of  the  Yncas.

-  The  first  Quichua  grammar  was  composed  by  Father  Santo  Tomas,
and  printed  at  Valladolid  in  lofiO,  vnth  a  vocabulary  as  an  appendix.
This  friar,  a  Dominican,  was  the  first  doctor  who  sraduated  in  the
University  of  Lima.

M  2


164  THE    TRAVELS    OF

partridges,  pigeons,  doves,  and  deer,  there  is  abundance,
and  in  the  vicinity  of  Quito  there  are  many  rabbits.  Dantas,
or  tapirs,  are  met  with  in  the  forests.


CHAPTER    XLIV.


Concerning  the  grandeur  of  the  rich  palaces  of  Tumebamba,  and  of  the
province  of  the  Caiiaris.

In  some  parts  of  this  book  I  have  aUuded  to  the  great  power
of  the  Kings  Yncas  of  Peru,  and  to  their  surpassing  valour,
and  how,  along  a  distance  of  more  than  one  thousand  two
hundred  leagues  of  coast  which  was  under  their  rule,  they
appointed  their  delegates  and  governors,  and  formed  many
deposits  full  of  all  things  necessary  for  their  troops.  In  some
of  these  depots  there  were  lances,  in  others  darts,  and  in
others  sandals,  and  so  on  with  other  arms  and  articles  of
clothing  which  these  people  use,  besides  stores  of  food.
Thus,  when  a  chief  was  lodged  in  one  of  these  depots  with
his  troops,  there  was  nothing,  from  the  most  important  to
the  most  trifling  article,  with  which  they  were  not  supplied.
If  there  was  any  rising  in  the  surrounding  districts,  they
were  ready  to  punish  it  with  great  severity ;  for  the  Yncas
were  such  perfect  judges,  that  they  did  not  hesitate  to
punish  even  their  own  sons.  Besides  these  depots  and
lodgings  throughout  the  kingdom,  there  were  palaces  and
temples  of  the  sun  at  every  ten  or  twenty  leagues  along  the
road,  where  there  were  priests,  Mama-cunas,  virgins,  and
more  complete  supplies  than  at  the  other  stations.  There
were  also  governors,  or  chief  captains,  appointed  by  the
Ynca,  with  the  Mitimaes  and  Indians  bound  to  service.
In  the  time  when  there  was  no  war,  and  when  the  Ynca  was
not   travelling    in    the    neighbourhood,   the    duty   of  these


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  1G5

people  was  to  collect  the  tribute  in  their  districts,  and  see
that  all  necessary  supplies  were  kept  in  readiness.  One
of  these  stations  was  a  grand  affair,  for,  when  a  King  died
his  successor  disturbed  nothing,  but  rather  repaired  and
improved  the  place,  for  each  Ynca  had  his  own  palace,
while  that  of  his  predecessor  was  ordered  to  be  preserved  as
he  left  it.

The  famous  buildings  of  Tumebamba  are  in  the  province
of  Caiiaris,  and  they  were  among  the  richest  and  most
splendid  in  the  whole  kingdom  of  Peru.^  Certainly  there  is
nothing  which  the  Indians  say  of  these  buildings  that  did
not  appear  to  me  to  be  even  greater  than  their  account,
judging  by  the  remains  which  still  exist.

To  the  westward  is  the  province  of  Guancavilcas,  which
borders  on  the  cities  of  Guayaquil  and  Puerto  Viejo,  and  to
the  east  is  the  great  river  Maranon,  with  its  forests  and  some
villages.

The  buildings  of  Tumebamba  are  situated  in  a  plain  more
than  twelve  leagues  in  extent,  near  two  small  rivers.  The
climate  is  cold,  and  there  is  plenty  of  game,  such  as  deer,
rabbits,  partridges,  pigeons,  and  other  birds.

The  temple  of  the  sun  is  built  of  stones  very  cunningly
wrought,  some  of  them  being  very  large,  coarse,  and  black,
and  others  resembling  jasper.  Some  of  the  Indians  pre-
tend that  most  of  the  stones  of  which  these  buildings  and
the  temple  of  the  sun  are  built,  have  been  brought  from
the  great  city  of  Cuzco  by  order  of  the  King  Huayna
Ccapac,  and  of  the  great  Tupac  Ynca  his  father,  by  means
of  strong  ropes.  If  this  be  true  it  is  a  wonderful  work,  by
reason  of  the  great  size  of  the  stones  and  the  length  of  the
road.2     The  doorways  of  many  of  the  buildings  were  very

'  Velasco  says  there  were  few  traces  left  of  the  buildings  at  Tume-
bamba in  his  time.  This  was  the  favomite  residence  of  the  Ynca
Huayna  Ccapac.

-  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  quotes  this  statement  from  Cieza  de  Leon
(i,  lib.  viii,  cap.  5).


166  THE    TRAVELS    OF

handsome  and  briglitly  painted,  witli  several  precious
stones  and  emeralds  let  into  the  stone ;  and  the  interior
walls  of  the  temple  of  the  sun,  and  of  the  palaces  of  the
Yncas,  were  lined  with  plates  of  the  finest  gold  stamped
with  many  figures.  The  roofs  were  of  straw,  so  well  put
on  that  no  fire  would  consume  it,  while  it  would  endure  for
many  ages.^  Within  the  buildings  there  were  several
bunches  of  golden  straw,  and  sheep,  lambs,  birds,  and
many  other  things  were  sculptured  on  the  walls.  Besides
all  this,  they  say  that  there  were  enormous  sums  in  gold
preserved  in  jars  and  vases,  and  many  rich  vestments
adorned  with  silver  work  and  beads.  In  short,  I  am  unable
to  describe  the  magnificence  of  these  royal  palaces  of  the
Yncas.  The  cloth  in  the  store-houses  was  in  such  quantity,
and  so  rich,  that,  had  it  been  preserved  and  not  lost,  it
would  have  been  worth  a  great  treasure.  There  were  more
than  two  hundred  virgins  dedicated  to  the  service  of  the
sun,  who  were  very  beautiful,  and  natives  of  Cailaris,  the
province  governed  by  the  chief  superintendent  of  the  Ynca,
who  resided  in  these  buildings.  They  and  the  priests  were
well  cared  for  by  those  who  had  charge  of  the  temple,  at
the  doors  of  which  there  were  porters.  Near  the  temple
and  the  palaces  of  the  Yncas  there  were  many  buildings

'  I  can  testify  to  the  truth  of  this  statement,  having  carefully  examined
a  thatch  roof  at  Azangaro  in  Peru,  which  undoubtedly  dates  from  the
time  of  the  Yncas.  It  is  over  the  ancient  circular  building  in  that  town,
known  as  the  Sondor-huasi.  The  outside  coating  consists  of  a  layer  of
grass  (StT/pa  Ychn :  Kunth)  tAvo  feet  thick,  placed  in  very  regular  rows,
and  most  carefully  finished,  so  as  to  present  a  smooth  surface  to  the
weather.  Next  there  is  a  thick  layer  of  the  same  grass  placed  hori-
zontally and  netted  together  with  reeds,  and  finally  an  inner  perpendicu-
lar layer: — the  whole  thatch  being  five  feet  thick,  and  finished  with  most
admirable  neatness.  It  has  been  said  that  the  colossal  and  highly  finished
masonry  of  the  Yncas,  such  as  that  of  the  palace  at  Tumebamba,  formed  a
barbaric  contrast  with  the  poor  thatched  roof,  but  the  Sondor-hitasi  proves
that  the  roofs  made  by  the  Peruvians  rivalled  the  walls  in  the  exquisite  art
and  neatness  of  their  finish.    See  my  Travels  in  Peru  and  India^  p.  104.


I'EIJKO    DE    CIEZA    DK    LEON.  1 07

used  as  lodgings  for  the  troops,  and  as  store-houses,  which
were  always  kept  full.

The  natives  of  this  province,  called  Caiiaris,  arc  good-
looking  and  well  grown.  They  wear  their  hair  very  long,
so  much  so,  that  by  that  and  a  circular  crown  of  wands,  as
fine  as  those  of  a  sieve,  the  Caiiaris  may  easily  be  known,  for
they  wear  this  head-dress  as  a  distinguishing  mark.^

The  women  also  wear  their  hair  very  long,  and  take  a  turn
with  it  round  their  heads,  by  which  they  may  be  known  as
easily  as  their  husbands.  They  dress  in  woollen  and  cotton
cloth,  with  usiitas  on  their  feet,  which  are,  as  I  have  said
before,  like  sandals.  The  women  are  very  pretty,  amorous,
and  friendly  to  the  Spaniards.  They  are  great  labourers,
for  it  is  they  who  dig  the  land,  sow  the  crops,  and  reap  the
harvests,  while  their  husbands  remain  in  the  houses  sewing
and  weaving,  adorning  their  clothes,  and  performing  other
feminine  offices.  AVTien  any  Spanish  army  passed  through
their  province,  the  Indians  at  that  time  being  obliged  to
supply  people  to  carry  the  baggage  of  the  Spaniards  on
their  backs,  many  of  these  Cauaris  sent  their  wives  and
daughters,  and  remained  at  home  themselves.  I  saw  this
myself  when  we  marched  to  join  the  licentiate  Gasca,  presi-
dent of  his  Majesty,  for  they  sent  us  a  number  of  women
who  carried  our  baggage.

Some  Indians  say  that  this  arises  from  the  dearth  of  men
and  the  great  abundance  of  women,  owing  to  the  cruelty  of
Atahualpa  to  the  people  of  this  province,  when  he  entered
it  after  having  kiUed  the  captain-general  of  his  brother
Huascar  at  Ambato,  whose  name  was  Atoco.     They  affirm

■  The  Caiiaris  wore  their  haii'  long,  and  rolled  it  up  in  a  knot  on  the
top  of  their  heads.  On  the  knot  of  hair  they  fastened  a  wooden  hoop,
from  which  hung  a  fringe  of  various  colours.  The  commoner  sort,  in
place  of  this  hoop,  wore  a  small  calabash  over  their  hair,  and  hence  the
whole  tribe  was  nicknamed  by  the  other  Indians  Mathe-unia  {Mathe  in
Quichua  is  a  calabash,  and  Uma,  head).     G.  de  la  Vega,  i.  lib.  viii,  cap.  4.


168  THE    TRAVELS    OF

that,  although  the  men  and  boys  came  out  with  green
boughs  and  palm-leaves  to  seek  for  mercy,  he,  with  a  haughty
air  and  severe  voice,  ordered  his  captains  to  kill  them  all.
Thus  a  great  number  of  men  and  boys  were  killed,  and  they
say  that  now  there  are  fifteen  times  as  many  women  as
men,  and,  being  so  numerous,  they  have  to  work  as  they
are  ordered  by  their  husbands  or  fathers.  The  houses  of
the  Canaris  are  small,  and  built  of  stone  with  straw  roofs.
The  land  is  Very  fertile,  and  abounds  in  provisions  and
game.  The  people  worship  the  sun.  The  chiefs  marry  as
many  women  as  they  please,  but  one  is  always  the  principal
wife.  Before  the  mari-iage  takes  place,  they  make  a  festival,
and,  after  eating  and  drinking  at  their  will,  they  perform
other  ceremonies  according  to  the  custom  of  the  country.
The  son  of  the  principal  wife  inherits  the  chiefship,  although
the  chief  may  have  many  sons  by  other  wives.  They  place
their  dead  in  tombs  resembling  those  made  by  their  neigh-
bours, and  also  bury  the  women  alive,  together  with  arms
and  food.  Some  of  these  people  are  great  magicians  and
sorcerers,  but  they  do  not  practise  the  abominable  crime,
nor  other  sins  and  idolatries ;  but  they  certainly  reverence
the  devil,  and  those  who  are  selected  for  the  purpose  con-
verse with  him.  At  present  the  chiefs  have  become  Chris-
tians, and  (when  I  passed  through  Tumebamba)  the  prin-
cipal chief  was  called  Don  Fernando.  It  has  pleased  our
Lord  and  Eedeemer  that  they  should  be  Avorthy  to  be  called
his  sons,  and  to  come  into  the  union  of  our  holy  mother
Church;  for  they  hear  the  sacrefll  evangel,  and  his  words
bear  fruit  in  them.  The  temples  of  these  Indians  have  been
destroyed.

If  the  devil  now  deceives  them  it  is  in  an  underhand
way,  as  happens  sometimes  even  to  the  faithful,  and  not
openly,  as  was  his  wont  before  the  standard  of  the  cross  of
Christ  was  planted  in  these  Indies.

Very  great  events  passed  in  the  time  of  the  Yncas  in


PEDKO    V\i    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  109

these  royal  buildings  of  Tumebamba,  and  many  armies
have  been  assembled  there  for  important  objects.  When
the  King  died,  the  first  thing  that  his  successor  did,  after
he  had  taken  the  royal  fringe  or  crown,  was  to  send  gover-
nors to  Quito  and  Tumebamba,  with  orders  to  take  pos-
session in  his  name,  and  to  build  rich  palaces  adorned  with
gold,  like  those  of  his  predecessor.  The  Onjoncs  of  Cuzco
(the  most  learned  and  noble  men  in  the  kingdom),  say  that
Ynca  Yupanqui,  father  of  the  great  Tupac  Ynca,  who  was
the  founder  of  Tumebamba,  enjoyed  being  here  more  than
in  any  other  place,  and  they  say  the  same  of  Tupac  Ynca.
They  also  affirm  that  while  Huayna  Ccapac  was  residing
here,  he  heard  of  the  first  arrival  of  the  Spaniards  in  the
land,  when  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  reached  the  coast  in  the
ship  with  thirteen  companions,  who  were  the  first  discoverers
of  Peru;  and  that  he  said  that,  after  his  days,  a  strange
people  would  rule  the  land,  like  those  who  had  arrived  in
the  ship.  He  must  have  said  this  at  the  suggestion  of  the
devil,  as  well  as  that  the  Spaniards  would  return  to  the
country  with  great  power.  Now  these  buildings  of  Tume-
bamba are  in  ruins,  but  it  is  easy  to  see  how  grand  they  once
were.

The  province  of  Canaris  is  very  broad,  and  full  of  many
rivers,  in  which  there  are  great  riches.  In  1544,  they  dis-
covered such  great  and  rich  mines  in  these  rivers,  that  the
people  of  the  city  of  Quito  extracted  more  than  eight  hun-
dred thousand  pesos  of  gold.  The  quantity  of  this  metal  was
such,  that  they  often  took  out  of  the  troughs  more  gold
than  earth.  I  affirm  this,  because  I  spoke  with  a  man  who
had  taken  more  than  seven  hundred  2^esos  of  gold  out  of  a
single  trough ;  and  besides  what  the  Spaniards  got,  the
Indians  took  an  unknown  quantity.

In  all  parts  of  this  province  where  wheat  is  sown,  it  yields
abundantly,  and  so  also  does  barley.  It  is  believed  also
that  great  vineyards  may  be  planted,  and  that  all  the  fruits


170  THE    TRAVELS    OF

and  pulses  of  Spain  may  be  grown,  as  well  as  those  of  the
country.

There  is  no  want  of  a  good  site  for  building  a  great  city.
When  the  viceroy  Blasco  Nunez  Vela  passed  this  way,
flying  before  the  tyrannical  fury  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro  and
his  followers ;  it  is  stated  that  he  said  that,  if  he  should
become  governor  of  this  kingdom,  he  would  build  a  city  on
these  plains,  and  divide  the  Indians  among  the  settlers  who
should  establish  themselves  in  it.  But,  God  permitting  it
for  some  reason  which  he  alone  knows,  the  viceroy  was
killed,  and  Gonzalo  Pizarro  ordered  the  captain  Alonzo  de
Mercadillo  to  found  a  city  in  these  parts.  As,  however,
the  district  was  within  the  limits  of  Quito,  he  selected  the
province  of  Chaparra  instead,  as  I  will  relate  presently.  The
distance  from  the  city  of  San  Francisco  de  Quito  to  these
buildings  is  fifty-five  leagues.  Here  I  will  leave  the  royal
road,  along  which  we  have  hitherto  been  travelling,  in  order
to  give  an  account  of  the  country  in  the  neighbourhood  of
the  cities  of  Puerto  Viejo  and  Guayaquil ;  and  having  done
this  I  will  again  return  to  the  royal  road.


CHAPTER    XLV.


Concerning  the  road  which  leads  from  the  province  of  Quito  to  the  coast
of  the  South  Sea,  and  the  bounds  of  the  city  of  Puerto  Viejo.

I  HAVE  now  brought  my  narrative  as  far  as  the  buildings  of
Tumebamba,  and  it  is  necessary  that  I  should  describe  the
cities  of  Puerto  Viejo  and  Guayaquil,  although  I  would  rather
go  on,  both  because  I  have  not  been  much  in  the  latter
districts,  and  because  the  natives  are  deficient  in  intelli-
gence, and  it  is  difficult  to  get  information  from  them.
Also  because  it  seemed  to  me  sufficient  that  I  should  con-


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  171

duct  the  reader  along  the  royal  road ;  but  my  obligation  to
satisfy  tbe  curious  obliges  me  to  give  a  true  account  of
everything  that  has  come  within  my  observation;  and  I
feel  certain  that  this  will  be  agreeable  to  all  learned,
benevolent,  and  judicious  readers.  Thus  I  make  the  fol-
lowing statements  with  all  the  truthfulness  and  exactness
that  I  am  master  of.  Having  said  so  much  concerning  these
provinces,  I  will  then  return  to  the  royal  road.

To  go,  then,  to  these  cities  of  Puerto  Viejo  and  Guaya-
quil, it  is  necessary  to  take  the  road  from  Quito  to  the  coast
of  the  South  Sea,  and  I  wdll  commence  my  account  at
Guaque,  which  is  the  beginning  of  the  one  region  and  the
boundary  of  the  other.  From  Tumebamba  there  is  no
direct  road  to  the  coast,  except  in  the  direction  of  the  city
of  San  Miguel,  the  first  settlement  made  by  the  Christians
in  Peru.

In  the  district  of  Quito,  not  very  far  from  Tumebamba,
there  is  a  pi'ovince  called  Chumbo,  but  before  reaching  it
there  are  other  villages  of  various  sizes,  inhabited  by  Indians
wearing  clothes,  with  good-looking  women.  There  are  royal
buildings  in  the  villages,  as  in  those  we  have  passed,  and  the
people  obeyed  the  Lords  Yncas,  and  used  the  general  lan-
guage which  was  ordered  to  be  talked  in  all  parts.  The  natives
have  the  same  customs  as  their  neighbours,  and  the  same
religion,  worshipping  the  sun  and  other  gods,  and  believing
in  the  immortahty  of  the  soul.  They  had  relations  with
the  devil,  and,  God  permitting  it  for  their  sins,  the  evil  one
had  great  power  over  them.  Now,  as  the  holy  faith  is
preached  in  every  direction,  many  of  them  have  become
Christians,  and  friars  are  Living  amongst  them,  who  teach
them  the  things  concerning  the  faith.

The  natives  of  these  parts  have  a  very  well  marked  sign
of  distinction,  by  which  they  may  be  known  of  all  men.
When  I  was  in  Cuzco  people  arrived  there  from  all  parts,
and  we  knew  by  their  distinguishing  marks  that  some  came


172  THE    TRAVELS    OF

from  Canchiz,  otliers  from  Canas,  otliers  from  Collao^  others
from  Huancas^  and  others  from  Chacliapoyas.  This  was,
assuredly,  an  excellent  invention,  by  means  of  which,  in  time
of  war,  they  could  not  mistake  one  tribe  for  another,  and,
in  time  of  peace,  each  man  knew  his  own  countryman.
Without  some  distinguishing  mark,  there  would  be  many
tribes  gathered  together  by  order  of  their  chiefs,  all  of  one
colour,  with  the  same  features  and  appearance,  all  without
beards,  the  same  dress,  and  using  one  language.

In  all  these  villages  there  are  now  churches  where  they
say  mass,  and  great  care  is  taken  to  teach  the  children  their
prayers,  so  that,  with  the  help  of  God,  there  is  hope  that
things  will  go  on  improving.

From  this  province  of  Chumbo  the  road  continues  for
fourteen  leagues  over  rugged  and  sometimes  difl&cult  ground,
until  a  river  is  reached  where  there  are  always  natives  with
halsas  who  ferry  travellers  across.  This  place  is  called  the
pass  of  Huayna  Ccapac,  and  it  is  said  to  be  twelve  leagues
from  the  island  of  Puna.  Further  on  the  Indians  are  not
so  civilised  as  those  we  have  passed,  because  some  of  them
were  not  completely  subjugated  by  the  Kings  Yncas.


CHAPTER    XLVI.


In  which  an  account  is  given  of  certain  things  relating  to  the  province  of
Puerto  Viejo ;  and  also  concerning  the  equinoctial  line.

The  first  port  in  the  land  of  Peru  is  that  of  Passaos,  and
from  it  and  the  river  of  Santiago  the  government  of  the
Marquis  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  commenced,  for  to  the
northward  the  land  falls  within  the  limits  of  the  province  of
San  Juan,  and  thus  it  may  be  said  that  the  land  to  the
}iorth  is  within  the  boundaries  of  the  city  of  Santiago  do


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  173

Puerto  Viejo,  where,   being   so  near  the   equator,^  the  in-
habitants are  not  very  healthy.

Touching  the  equinoctial  line,  some  of  the  ancient  cos-
mographers  were  in  error  when  they  affirmed  that  the  heat
was  such  as  to  render  the  country  lying  under  it  uninhabit-
able. The  fertility  of  the  land,  and  the  abundance  of  all
things  necessary  to  sustain  man,  are  manifest  to  all,  and,  as
the  equinoctial  hne  is  touched  upon  in  several  parts  of  this
history,  I  will  here  give  an  account  of  what  I  have  gathered
from  the  best  cosmographers  concerning  it.  The  equinoctial
hne  is  an  imaginary  line  round  the  world  from  east  to  west,
at  equal  distances  from  the  poles  of  the  earth.  It  is  called
equinoctial,  because  the  passage  of  the  sun  across  it  makes
the  days  and  nights  equal.  This  occurs  twice  in  the  year,
namely  on  the  11th  of  March  and  13th  of  September.  It
is  to  be  understood,  as  I  have  already  said,  that  the  opinion
of  some  ancient  authors  was  that  the  country  under  this
equinoctial  hne  was  uninhabitable.  They  behoved  this  be-
cause, as  the  sun  there  sent  its  rays  on  the  earth  vertically,
the  heat  must,  as  they  thought,  be  so  excessive  that  none
could  live.  Yirgil,  Ovid,  and  other  worthies  were  of  this
opinion.  Others  held  that  some  part  might  be  inhabitable,
following  Ptolemy,  who  says,  "  It  does  not  follow  that  we
should  believe  the  torrid  zone  to  be  entirely  without  in-
habitants.'' Others  thought,  on  the  contrary,  that  the
climate  was  not  only  temperate  and  moderately  warm,  but
very  pleasant.  This  is  affirmed  by  St.  Isidore,  who  says
that  the  terrestrial  paradise  is  a  temperate  and  delightful
place  in  the  east,  under  the  equinoctial  hne.  Experience
has  now  taught  us  that,  not  only  the  country  exactly  under
the  equinoctial  line,  but  the  whole  torrid  zone,  from  one
tropic  to  the  other,  is  habitable  and  fertile,  by  reason  of  the
days  and  nights  being  almost  equal.  The  coolness  of  the
night  tempers  the  heat  of  the  day,  and  the  land  has  its  due
season  for  growing  and  producing  its  fruits.     This  is  the


174  THE    TRAVELS    OF

natural  condition  of  the  country,  thougli  some  parts  are  dif-
ferent.

The  Indians  of  the  province  of  Santiago  de  Puerto  Viejo
are  not  long  lived ;  and,  as  regards  the  Spaniards,  there
are  very  few  old  men  amongst  them,  though  their  number
has  been  thinned  more  by  the  v^ars  than  by  sickness.  From
this  equinoctial  line  towards  the  Arctic  Pole,  the  tropic  of
cancer  is  distant  420  leagues  in  2oi°,  and  the  sun  arrives
there  on  the  11th  of  June,  but  never  passes  beyond  it,  for
it  there  takes  a  turn  towards  the  equinoctial  hue  again,  and
reaches  it  on  the  13th  of  September.  Then  it  descends
to  the  tropic  of  Capricorn,  another  420  leagues,  and  also  in
23i°.  There  is,  therefore,  a  distance  of  840  leagues  from
tropic  to  tropic.  The  ancients  called  this  the  Torrid  Zone,
which  is  as  much  as  to  say  the  parched  or  toasted  land,  for
the  sun  moves  over  it  all  the  year.

The  natives  are  of  middle  height,  and  have  a  most  fertile
land,  yielding  abundance  of  maize,  yucas,  aji,  potatoes,  and
many  other  roots  which  are  useful  for  the  support  of  man.
There  are  also  plenty  of  guavas  and  aguacates,  besides  tunas^
of  two  kinds,  one  white  and  of  excellent  flavour,  caymitos,  and
another  fruit  they  call  cercziUa.  The  melons  are  of  two  kinds,
also,  those  of  Spain  and  those  of  the  country,  and  there  are
all  sorts  of  beans  and  peas.  The  orange  and  lemon  trees
abound,  also  bananas,  and  pine-apples  of  excellent  flavour.
There  are  great  quantities  of  those  pigs  which  (as  I  said
before  in  speaking  of  the  port  of  Uraba)  have  the  navel  on
the  back,  which,  however,  is  not  really  the  navel,  but  some
other  thing  that  grows  there.  As  they  did  not  find  a
navel  below,  they  called  this  excrescence  on  the  back  a
navel.  The  flesh  of  these  pigs  is  very  savoury.  There
are  also  pigs  of  the  Spanish  breed,  and  many  deer  with  the
most  singularly  delicate  flesh  of  any  in  Peru.  Partridges,
doves,  pigeons,  turkeys,  and  a  vast  number  of  other  birds
'   Prickly  pears.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  175

are  found ;  among  thorn  one  callocl  X.ida,  which  is  about
the  size  of  a  largo  duck,  and  which  the  Indians  rear  in
their  houses.  These  birds  are  tame  and  good  to  eat.  There
is  another  bird  called  Maca,^  very  little  smaller  than  a  cock.
It  is  a  beautiful  thing  to  see  the  colours  of  the  plumage  of
this  bird^  and  the  beak,  which  is  rather  thicker  than  a
finger,  is  most  distinctly  divided  into  two  colours,  yellow
and  red.  In  the  forests  they  meet  with  foxes,  bears,
small  lions,  and  some  tigers  and  serpents,  but  they  all
fly  from  men  who  do  not  first  attack  them.  There
are  also  night  birds  of  prey,  as  well  inland  as  on  the
coast,  such  as  condors,  and  the  bird  they  call  gallinazo,^
or  auraJ'  In  the  wooded  ravines  and  forests  there
are  many  trees,  which  are  useful  for  building  houses
and  for  other  purposes.  In  some  of  these  trees  the  bees
make  excellent  honeycombs.  The  Indians  have  fisheries
where  they  kill  many  fishes,  among  which  are  fish  called
honitos,  a  bad  kind  of  fish  which  causes  fevers  and  other
evils  to  those  who  eat  it.  In  all  parts  of  the  coast  the  men
are  afflicted  with  dark-coloured  excrescences,  the  size  of
nuts,  which  grow  on  the  forehead,  nostrils,  and  other  parts,
and,  besides  being  dangerous,  they  are  very  disfiguring.
These  bumps  are  said  to  be  caused  by  eating  a  certain  fish.
However  this  may  be,  they  are  common  on  the  coast,  and,
besides  the  natives,  many  Spaniards  have  been  afflicted
with  these  bumps.

In  this  coast  and  territory,  subject  to  the  city  of  Puerto
Yiejo  and  to  that  of  Guayaquil,  there  are  two  kinds  of
people.  From  the  cape  of  Passaos  and  river  of  Santiago  to
the  town  of  Solango,  the  men  are  marked  in  the  face,  and
the  mark  begins  at  the  root  of  the  ear  and  descends  to  the

'  This  name  is  not  given  by  Vclasco.

-  The  turkey  buzzard,  a  carrion  bii'd  which  acts  as  a  scavenger  in  the
streets  of  South  American  towns.
^  The  word  used  in  Mexico.


176  THE    TRAVELS    OF

chin,  the  breadth  being  according  to  each  man's  fancy.
Some  mark  the  greater  part  of  the  face,  and  others  less,
much  after  the  fashion  of  the  Moors.  Both  men  and  women
wear  mantles  and  shirts  of  cotton,  and  sometimes  of  wool.
They  also  wear  a  few  ornaments,  such  as  jewels  of  gold  and
very  small  beads,  called  chaquira}  In  some  provinces  I
have  myself  seen  that  the  people  put  so  high  a  value  on
these  chaquiras,  that  they  will  give  their  weight  in  gold  for
them.  In  the  province  of  Quinbaya  (where  the  city  of
Cartage  is  situated)  certain  of  the  chiefs  gave  more  than
one  thousand  five  hundred  j^esos  to  the  marshal  Eobledo  for
little  more  than  a  pound  weight  of  them,  but  at  that  time
they  gave  two  or  three  hundred  pesos  for  three  or  four  glass
diamonds.  In  the  matter  of  selhng  to  Indians  we  were
then  pretty  safe  from  being  deceived  by  them.  It  has
even  happened  to  me  to  sell  a  copper  axe  to  an  Indian  for
its  weight  in  gold.  But  things  are  now  changed,  and  the
Indians  well  understand  how  to  sell  what  they  have,  and
how  to  buy  what  they  require.

The  principal  places  where  the  Indians  mark  their  faces
in  this  province  are  Passaos,  Xaramixo,  Pimpaguace,  Peclan-
semeque,  the  valley  of  Xagua,  Pechonse,  Apechigue,  Silos,
Canilloha,  Manta,  Sapil,  Manaui,  Xaraguasa,  and  others.
Their  houses  are  of  wood,  roofed  with  straw,  some  small
and  others  large,  according  to  the  means  of  the  owner.

'  The  chaquiras  were  very  minute  beads,  which  were  so  skilfully-
worked  that  the  best  silversmiths  in  Seville  asked  Garcilasso  how  they
were  made.  He  took  some  to  Spain  with  him,  where  they  were  looked
upon  as  great  curiosities.     G.  de  la  Vega,  i,  lib.  viii,  cap.  5.


PEDRO    DK    CIEZA    I)E    LEON.


CHAPTER    XLVII.


Treating  of  the  question  wliether  the  Indians  of  this  province  were
conquered  by  the  Yncas  or  not ;  and  concerning  the  death  which
they  inflicted  on  certain  captains  of  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui.

Many  Indians  say  that  the  Lords  Yncas  never  conquered,
nor  were  able  to  bring  under  their  yoke,  these  natives  of
Puerto  Viejo,  of  whom  I  am  now  treating,  though  others
affirm  the  contrary,  saying  that  the  Yncas  subjugated  them,
and  had  them  under  their  orders.  The  latter  say  that  Huayna
Ccapac  came  in  person  to  conquer  them,  and  that,  having
been  disobedient  in  some  particular,  he  made  a  law  that
they  and  their  descendants  should  have  three  of  their  front
teeth  pulled  out  in  each  jaw.  They  add  that  this  custom
was  preserved  for  a  long  time  in  the  province  of  Guan-
cavilcas.  In  truth,  as  all  vulgar  reports  are  confused,  and
as  the  common  sort  can  never  tell  the  plain  facts,  it  does
not  astonish  me  that  they  should  relate  these  things,  for  in
all  things  else  the  like  reports  are  spread  abroad,  and
become  the  talk  of  the  people,  being  in  reality  mere  fables.
I  make  this  digression  here,  that  it  may  be  borne  in  mind
hereafter,  for  if  things  are  repeated  over  and  over  again
they  become  tiresome  to  the  reader.  This,  therefore,  will
serve  to  give  notice  that  many  of  the  stories  commonly
reported  among  the  people,  concerning  events  which  have
happened  in  Peru,  are  fables.  As  regards  the  natives,
those  who  have  been  curious  in  trying  to  learn  their  secrets
know  that  what  I  say  is  the  case.  Concerning  the  govern-
ment, and  the  affairs  of  war  and  of  state  which  have
occurred,  I  only  look  upon  those  principal  men  who  were  in
high  positions  as  authorities.  These  will  relate  what  oc-
curred, and  the  sayings  of  the  people.

Returning  to  the  thread  of  my  narrative,  I   have  to  say


178  THE    TRAVELS    OF

(according  to  what  I  have  been  given  to  understand  hj  old
Indians  who  were  captains  under  Huayna  Ccapac),  that,  in
the  time  of  the  great  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui,  his  father,
certain  of  his  captains  came,  with  a  force  collected  from  the
ordinary  garrisons  of  the  provinces,  and,  by  their  politic
arts,  drew  some  of  the  chiefs  to  the  service  of  Tupac  Ynca
Yupanqui.  Many  of  them  went  with  presents  to  do  him
homage,  and  he  received  them  wdth  love  and  kindness,
giving  them  rich  pieces  of  woollen  cloth  made  in  Cuzco.
When  they  returned  to  their  provinces,  they  esteemed  him
so  highly  for  his  great  valour,  that  they  called  him  father,
and  honoured  him  with  other  titles,  his  benevolence  and
love  for  all  being  such  that  he  acquired  perpetual  fame
among  them.  In  order  to  instruct  them  in  things  apper-
taining to  the  government  of  the  kingdom,  he  set  out  in
person  to  visit  these  provinces,  and  left  governors  in  them
who  were  natives  of  Cuzco,  that  they  might  teach  the
people  more  civilised  customs,  and  other  useful  things.
But  these  natives  not  only  did  not  wish  to  learn  from  those
who  remained  in  their  provinces  by  order  of  Tupac  Ynca
Yupanqui,  in  order  to  indicate  to  them  a  better  mode  of
life,  and  to  teach  them  agriculture ;  but,  in  payment  of  the
benefits  they  had  received,  they  killed  them  all,  so  that  not
one  was  left.  They  killed  them,  although  they  had  done  no
ill,  nor  had  they  been  tyrannical,  so  as  to  merit  such  treat-
ment. Tupac  Ynca  heard  of  this  great  cruelty,  but  he
dissimulated,  because,  for  other  important  reasons,  he  was
unable  to  chastise  those  who  had  so  treacherously  murdered
his  captains  and  vassals.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  179


CHAPTER    XLVIII.

IIow  these  Indians  were  conquered  by  Iluayna  Ccapac,  and  how  they
conversed  with  the  devil,  sacrificed  to  liim,  and  buried  women  alive
with  the  bodies  of  their  chiefs.

After  the  events  wliicli  I  have  just  alluded  to  as  having
occurred  in  the  provinces  near  the  city  of  Puerto  Viejo,  many
of  the  natives  relate  that,  in  process  of  time,  when  the  King
named  Huayna  Ccapac  was  reigning  in  Cuzco,  he  visited  the
provinces  of  Quito  in  person,  and  entirely  subjugated  all
these  Indians.  It  must  be  understood  that  all  these  occur-
rences in  the  history  of  the  Indians  are  written  from  accounts
given  by  the  Indians  themselves,  who,  having  no  letters,
made  use  of  a  curious  invention  in  order  that  their  deeds  and
history  might  be  recorded.^  Although  these  Indians  were
subject  to  Huayna  Ccapac,  and  paid  tribute  in  rich  emeralds
and  gold,  yet  there  were  no  buildings,  nor  depots,  as  in  the
other  provinces  we  have  passed  through.  The  reason  of
this  is  that  the  country  is  poor  and  the  villages  small,  so
that  the  Orejones  did  not  wish  to  live  here,  and  held  the
country  in  small  estimation.  The  natives  of  these  villages
were  great  sorcerers,  and  it  is  well  known  that  no  people  in
all  Peru  were  so  addicted  to  sacrifices  and  religious  rites.
Their  priests  had  charge  of  the  temples,  and  of  the  service
to  images  which  represented  their  false  gods,  before  whom,
at  stated  times,  they  recited  songs  and  performed  cere-
monies which  they  learnt  from  their  fathers,  from  whom
they  received  the  ancient  customs.

The  devil,  in  frightful  shape,  appeared  to  those  ap-
pointed for  this  accursed  office,  who  were  much  respected
by  all  the  other  Indians.  Among  these  one  gave  re-
plies, and  heard  what  the  devil  had  to  say,  who,  in  order
to   preserve   his    credit,  appeared   in   a   threatening  form.

'  The  quipiis,  or  system  of  recording  events  by  means  of  knots.

N  2


180  THE    TRAVELS    OF

Thus  he  let  them  know  future  events,  and  no  battle  ov
other  event  has  taken  place  amongst  ourselves,  that  the
Indians  throughout  this  kingdom  have  not  prophesied
beforehand.  At  the  same  time  they  never  really  knew,  for
it  is  clear,  and  must  be  beheved,  that  God  alone  knows
what  will  come  to  pass.  If,  therefore,  the  devil  is  right  in
anything,  it  is  because  his  words  are  equivocal,  and  will
bear  many  meanings.  With  his  gift  of  subtlety,  and  his
great  age,  which  has  given  him  experience  in  affairs,  he
speaks  to  the  simple  who  will  hear  him ;  but  many  of  the
Gentiles  know  the  deceitfulness  of  his  replies.  Thus,  many
of  these  Indians  hold  it  to  be  certain  that  the  devil  is  false
and  wicked,  and  they  obey  him  more  from  fear  than  from  love.
At  one  time,  deceived  by  the  devil  himself,  at  others  by
their  own  priest,  they  submit  to  his  service  by  permission
of  Almighty  God.  In  the  temples,  or  huacas,  they  gave
presents  to  objects  which  they  held  to  be  gods,  and  offered
bloody  sacrifices  to  them.  And  in  order  to  do  them  more
honour,  they  sacrificed  something  still  more  noble,  namely,
the  blood  of  certain  Indians,  as  many  affirm.  AVhen  they
took  any  of  their  neighbours  prisoners,  with  whom  they  had
war  or  enmity,  they  assembled  (as  they  themselves  declare)
and,  after  having  got  drunk  with  their  wine,  and  also  having
made  the  prisoner  drunk,  the  chief  priest  killed  him  with
lancets  of  stone  or  copper.  They  then  cut  off  his  head,  and
offered  it,  with  the  body,  to  the  accursed  devil,  the  enemy
of  human  nature.  When  any  of  them  were  sick,  they
bathed  many  times,  and  offered  up  sacrifices,  praying  for
health.

They  mourned  for  their  chiefs  when  they  died,  and  put
the  bodies  in  tombs,  together  with  some  women  alive,  and
all  their  most  precious  effects.  They  were  not  ignorant
of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  although  they  did  not  fully
understand  it.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  by  an  illusion
of  the  (k'vil,  the  figures  of  persons  who  were  dead,  perhaps


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  181

fathers  or  relations,  appeared  to  these  Indians  in  the  fiekls  in
the  dress  they  wore  when  living.  By  such  false  apparitions
were  these  poor  people  made  to  obey  the  will  of  the  evil
one,  and  for  this  reason  they  buried  people  alive,  together
with  the  dead,  that  they  may  rise  again  with  more  honour.
They  held  that  by  so  doing  they  observed  the  rules  of  their
religion,  and  obeyed  their  gods,  and  would  go  to  a  very
delightful  and  pleasant  place  surrounded  by  the  food  and
drink  they  were  accustomed  to  when  they  were  alive  in  the
world.


CHAPTER    XLIX.

(The  heading  of  this  chapter  is  unfit  for  translation.)

In  many  parts  of  these  Indies  the  people  worshipped  the
sun,  although  they  also  beheved  in  a  Creator  whose  seat
was  in  heaven.  The  worship  of  the  sun  was  either  received
from  the  Yncas,  or,  as  in  the  province  of  Guancavilcas,
established  from  ancient  times.

The  people  of  Guancavilcas  (so  they  say)  used  to  pull  out
three  teeth  in  each  jaw,  the  fathers  doing  it  to  their  chil-
dren when  of  very  tender  age,  which  they  thought  was  no
evil,  but  rather  a  service  very  acceptable  to  their  gods.
They  marry  in  the  same  way  as  their  neighbours.  [The
remainder  of  this  j^ciragraph  is  unfit  for  translation.'\

The  chiefship  is  inherited  by  the  son  (according  to  the
account  which  they  gave  me),  and,  faihng  sons,  then  the
next  brother,  and,  failing  brothers,  the  sons  of  the  sisters.
There  are  some  women  who  are  good  looking.  Among  the
Indians  of  whom  I  am  now  treating  the  best-flavom-ed
maize  bread  is  made  in  all  the  Indies.  It  is  so  good  and
well  kneaded,  that  it  is  even  better  than  some  wheaten
bread.


182  THE    TRAVELS    OF

In  some  villages  of  these  Indians  tliey  have  a  great  quan-
tity of  skins  of  men  full  of  ashes,  the  appearance  of  which
is  as  frightful  as  those  in  the  valley  of  Lile,  near  the  city  of
Cali.      [The  rest  of  the  iJaragraph  is  unfit  for  translation.']

They  have  heard  the  preaching  of  many  clergymen  and
friars,  and  begin  to  understand  that  our  faith  is  the  perfect
and  true  one,  and  that  the  teaching  of  the  devil  is  false,  so
that  his  deceitful  communications  have  ceased.  In  all
parts  where  the  holy  evangel  is  preached,  a  cross  is  placed
at  which  the  devil  is  terrified  and  flies  away.  But  it  is
true  that  the  faith  impresses  itself  more  on  the  young  than
on  the  old ;  for  as  the  latter  are  grown  old  in  their  vices,
they  do  not  cease  to  commit  their  former  sins  in  secret,
and  in  such  sort  that  the  Christians  cannot  detect  them.
The  youths  listen  to  our  priests,  and  follow  our  Christian
doctrine,  so  that  in  these  districts  there  are  good  and  bad,
as  in  all  other  parts  of  the  world.


CHAPTER    L.


How  in  ancient  times  the  Indians  of  Manta  worshipped  an  emerald  as
their  god ;  and  of  other  things  concerning  these  Indians.

In  many  histories  which  I  have  seen,  I  have  read,  if  I  am
not  mistaken,  that  in  some  countries  they  worshipped  God
in  the  form  of  a  bull,  in  others  of  a  cock,  in  others  of  a  lion,
and  that  there  have  been  a  thousand  superstitions  of  this
kind,  which  seem  to  afford  matter  for  laughter  more  than
anything  else.  I  will  only  remark,  therefore,  that  the
Greeks,  among  whom  there  were  excellent  worthies,  whose
memory  will  last  as  long  as  writing  itself,  fell  into  these
errors,  as  also  did  the  Egy])tians,  Bactrians,  and  Babylonians.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  183

Grave  and  learned  doctors  say  that  the  Romans  had  many
gods,  and  that  they  worshipped  those  from  whom  they
had  received  benefits,  such  as  Jupiter  or  Saturn ;  these
g-ods,  however,  were  men  and  not  brutes.  These  Indians,
too,  notwithstanding  that  they  worshipped  the  sun  and
moon,  also  adored  trees  and  stones,  and  other  things  sug-
gested by  their  imaginations.  I  was  informed,  at  the  same
time,  that  their  pi-iests  saw  the  devil,  who  communicated
perdition  to  their  souls.  In  the  important  temple  of  Pacha-
camac  they  held  a  she  fox  in  great  venei-ation,  and  wor-
shipped it.  In  this  province,  also,  the  Lord  of  Manta  had
an  emerald  of  great  size  and  value,  which  the  people  and
their  ancestors  held  in  great  veneration.  On  certain  days
it  was  publicly  displayed,  and  worshipped  as  if  it  contained
some  deity. ^  On  these  occasions  if  any  man  or  woman  was
sick,  they  performed  a  sacrifice,  and  then  came  forward  to
pray  to  the  stone.  They  affirm  that  the  priest,  who  con-
versed with  the  devil,  gave  them  to  understand  that  the
stone  would  bring  health  to  them  in  requital  for  their  offer-

^  See  also  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  i,  lib.  ix,  p.  311 ;  and  Acosta,  lib.  iv,
cap.  14,  p.  233.  Acosta  says  that  emeralds  were  found  most  abundantly
in  New  Granada,  and  in  Peru,  near  Manta  and  Puerto  Viejo.  The
country  round  Manta,  he  adds,  is  called  Esmeraldas,  from  the  reported
abundance  of  emeralds  in  it.

According  to  UUoa  the  emerald  mines  of  Manta,  which  were  known  to
the  Indians,  were  never  discovered  by  the  Spaniards.  The  skill  of  the
Indians  in  working  these  precious  stones  is  very  remarkable.  They  are
found  in  the  tombs  of  the  Indians  of  ]\Ianta  and  Atacames  ;  and  are,  in
beauty,  size,  and  hardness,  superior  to  those  of  Xew  Granada.  They  Avere
worked  by  the  Indians  into  spherical,  cylindrical,  conical,  and  other
sliapes,  and  it  is  difficult  to  explain  how  this  could  have  been  done  -with-
out a  knowledge  of  steel  or  iron.  They  also  pierced  the  emeralds  with  a
skill  equal  to  that  of  modern  jewellers.    Ulloas  Voyage^  i,  lib.  vi,  cap.  11.

Velasco  says  that  an  emerald  was  among  the  insignia  of  the  Scyris  or
kings  of  Quito,  and  that  the  Indians  of  Manta  worsliipped  a  great
emerald  imder  the  name  of  UmiYia.  Historia  del  Quito^  i,  p.  29.  There
are  also  some  interesting  remarks  on  the  emeralds  of  ^Manta  in  Bollaert's
Antiquarian  and  othtr  Researches  in  New  Granada,  Ecuador,  Pern,  etc.,
p.  84.


184  THE    TRAVELS    OF

ings,  after  they  and  other  ministers  of  the  devil  had  applied
to  it.  People  who  were  afflicted  with  sickness  came  to
Manta  from  all  parts  of  the  interior  to  offer  afifts  and  per-
form sacrifices ;  and  the  Spaniards,  who  first  discovered
this  kingdom,  have  told  me  that  they  found  great  riches  in
this  town  of  Manta,  and  that  it  always  yielded  more  than
those  which  bordered  on  it  to  the  encomienderos.  They
also  say  that,  although  threats  and  menaces  have  been
resorted  to  to  discover  where  this  great  and  rich  emerald  is
concealed,  they  have  never  been  able  to  find  it,  nor  will  the
natives  betray  the  place  if  they  are  all  killed,  so  great  is  the
veneration  in  which  it  is  held.

This  town  of  Manta  is  on  the  coast.  In  the  interior
there  are  more  villages  and  more  people,  and  they  differ  in
language  from  those  on  the  coast,  but  they  have  the  same
food.  The  houses  of  those  inland,  called  Serranos,  are  of
wood  and  small,  the  roofs  of  straw  or  palm  leaves.  They
have  some  flocks  of  Peruvian  sheep,  but  not  so  many  as
there  are  in  Quito  or  in  the  province  of  Cuzco.

The  Serranos^  were  not  such  sorcerers  and  magicians  as
the  natives  of  the  coast,  nor  were  they  so  wicked  in  prac-
tising the  abominable  sin.  There  is  hope  of  some  gold
mijies  in  some  of  the  rivers  of  these  mountains,  aud  there
is  certainly  a  very  rich  emerald  mine ;  but  although  many
captains  have  tried  to  discover  it,  they  have  not  succeeded,
nor  will  the  natives  tell  them  where  it  is.  It  is  true  that
Captain  Olmos  is  said  to  have  known  where  this  mine  was,
but  I  think  that  surely  he  would  have  told  his  brothers  or
some  other  persons.  Certainly  the  number  of  emeralds  that
have  been  brought  to  Puerto  Viejo  is  very  great,  and  they
are  the  best  in  all  the  Indies ;  for  though  emeralds  are  more
numerous  in  the  new  kingdom  of  Granada,  they  are  not  so
good,  so  that  the  best  there  do  not  equal  in  value  the  most
ordinary  ones  here.

■   Tnliabitants  of  the  inouiitains  inland.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  185

The  Caraques  formed  another  tribe.  They  arc  not
labourers,  and  are  less  intelligent  than  their  neighbours,
being  a  disorderly  people,  and  making  war  for  very  slight
causes.  When  a  child  was  born  they  put  its  head  between
two  boards,  so  that  at  the  age  of  four  or  five,  the  head  was
long  and  broad,  but  flat  behind.  Not  content  with  the
heads  that  God  gives  them,  they  thus  make  them  into  the
shapes  that  please  them  most.  They  themselves  say  that
they  force  their  heads  into  these  shapes  that  they  may  be
more  healthy,  and  be  able  to  do  more  work.  Some  of  these
people,  especially  those  near  the  village  of  Colima,  to  the
northward,  go  naked.  They  relate  that  Huayna  Ccapac
arrived  here,  after  having  put  to  death  the  chiefs  as  far  as
Colima,  where  he  ordered  a  fort  to  be  built.  Seeing  that
the  Indians  went  naked,  he  did  not  go  any  further,  but
returned,  leaving  orders  to  his  captains  to  conquer  and
subjugate  as  far  as  the  river  Santiago.

Many  of  the  Spaniards  who  came  with  the  Adelantado
Don  Pedro  de  Alvarado  (especially  the  marshal  Alonzo  de
Alvarado,  and  the  captains  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  Juan  de
Saavedra,  and  another  gentleman  named  Suer  de  Cangas)
told  me  that  when  they  landed  on  the  coast  with  the  said
Adelantado  Don  Pedro,  and  came  to  this  village,  they  found
many  vases  full  of  gold,  silver,  and  precious  stones,  besides
a  great  quantity  of  emeralds,  so  that  they  gained  much
wealth  for  their  valour.  But  many  said  that  the  emeralds
were  of  glass ;  so,  to  try  the  question  (for  some  considered
they  might  be  stones),  they  determined  to  beat  them  with
hammers,  saying  that  if  they  were  of  glass  they  would  soon
break,  but  if  they  were  of  stone  the  blows  would  have  no
effect.  Thus,  from  want  of  knowledge  and  experience,
they  broke  many  of  these  emeralds,  and  profited  little  by
having  found  them.  Nor  did  they  enjoy  their  gold  and
silver,  for  they  suffered  much  from  cold  and  hunger,  and
left  their  loads  of  treasure  in  the  forests.


186  THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    LI.

Ill  which  the  account  of  the  Indians  of  Puerto  Viejo  is  finished  ;  and
concerning  the  founding  of  that  city,  and  who  was  its  founder.

I  SHALL  be  brief  in  describing  what  more  tliere  is  concern-
ing these  provinces  of  Puerto  Viejo,  because  the  substance
of  my  account  of  them  has  already  been  written  in  the  pre-
ceding chapter ;  and  I  shall  then  return  to  the  palaces  of
Tumebamba,  where  I  left  the  main  thread  of  my  history.
I  may  here  observe  that,  as  soon  as  the  Adelantado  Don
Pedro  de  Alvarado  and  the  marshal  Don  Diego  de  Almagro
had  made  their  agreement  on  the  plains  of  Riobamba,  the
Adelantado  Don  Pedro  went  to  the  City  of  the  Kings,  where
he  was  to  receive  the  hundred  thousand  casteUanos  which
were  to  be  paid  for  his  fleet  and  armament.  Meanwhile
the  marshal  Don  Diego  de  Almagro  left  the  captain
Sebastian  de  Belalcazar  with  certain  orders  respecting  the
conquest  of  the  province  of  Quito,  and  set  out  to  establish
the  settlements  on  the  coast.  He  then  put  things  in  order
at  San  Miguel  and  Chimo,  and  looked  out  for  a  good  and
convenient  site  for  the  city  of  Truxillo,  which  was  after-
wards founded  by  the  marquis  Don  Fracisco  Pizarro.

In  all  these  affairs  (as  I  have  been  told)  the  marshal
Don  Diego  de  Almagro  showed  himself  to  be  a  diligent
captain.  When  he  arrived  at  the  city  of  San  Miguel  it  was
made  known  to  him  that,  when  the  ships  which  came  from
Tierra  Firme,  and  from  the  provinces  of  Nicaragua,  Gruato-
mala,  and  New  Spain,  arrived  on  the  coast  of  Peru,  the
crews  landed  and  did  much  harm  to  the  natives  of  Manta,
and  of  the  coast  of  the  province  of  Puerto  Viejo.  To  avoid
these  evils,  and  that  the  natives  might  be  watched  and
protected,  he  determined  to  send  a  captain  to  select  a  site
where  a  town  or  city  might  be  founded.

Ho  selected  the  captain  Francisco  Pacheco  for  tliis  duty,


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  187

and  ordered  him  to  set  out  with  the  requisite  number  of
followers.  Francisco  Pacheco,  in  obedience  to  his  orders,
started  from  a  village  called  Piquasa,  and  founded  the  city
of  Puerto  Viejo  in  the  locality  which  appeared  to  him  most
suitable.  This  was  on  the  day  of  St.  Gregory,  the  12th  of
March,  in  the  year  of  the  birth  of  our  Redeemer  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ  1535,  and  he  founded  it  in  the  name  of  tlio
Emperor  Don  Carlos  our  King  and  Lord.

While  the  captain  Francisco  Pacheco  was  employed  on
this  service,  Pedro  de  Puelles,^  with  some  Spanish  troops,
came  from  Quito  (where  the  captain  Sebastian  de  Belal-
cazar  was  lieutenant-general  for  Don  Francisco  Pizarro)  to
conquer  the  same  coast  of  the  South  Sea,  and  there  were
some  misunderstandings  between  them.  When  the  news
reached  the  governor  Don  Francisco  Pizarro,  he  gave  such
orders  as  appeared  to  him  best  for  the  sei-vice  of  his  Majesty
and  the  good  government  and  protection  of  the  Indians  ;  in
obedience  to  which,  after  the  captain  Francisco  Pacheco
had  conquered  these  provinces,  and  marched  thi'ough  them
for  nearly  two  years,  he  peopled  this  city,  the  captain  Pedro
de  Puelles  having  returned  to  Quito.

'  Pedro  de  Puelles,  a  native  of  Se\alle,  was  left  as  governor  of  Quito
when  Gonzalo  Pizarro  went  on  his  famous  expedition  to  the  land  of
cinnamon  in  1539.  He  was  appointed  to  the  command  of  the  cavahy
of  Vaca  de  Castro's  army,  served  in  the  battle  of  Chupas  when  the
younger  Almagro  was  defeated,  and  was  afterw-ards  sent  as  governor
to  Huanuco.  He  was  confirmed  in  this  command  by  Blasco  Nuiiez  de
Vela,  the  viceroy ;  but  he  went  over  to  the  party  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,
and  commanded  his  cavalry  at  the  battle  of  Afiaquito,  when  the  viceroy
was  killed.  After  the  battle  he  urged  Gonzalo  to  assume  the  title  of
king,  believing  that  no  terms  could  jDossibly  be  obtained  from  Charles  V,
and  that  they  were  cormiiitted  too  far  to  hope  for  forgiveness.  Gonzalo
left  Puelles  in  Quito  as  his  governor,  and  he  afterwards  seems  to  have
intended  to  desert  his  old  master  and  hand  over  his  troops  to  the  pre-
sident Gasca,  on  condition  of  full  pardon.  But  he  was  surrounded  by
greater  traitore  than  himself,  and  one  Rodrigo  de  Salazar  headed  a  con-
spiracy of  five,  who  murdered  Puelles  in  his  own  house,  and  led  his  troops
to  join  Gasca,  in  order  to  get  all  the  credit  for  their  loyalty.


188  THE    TKAVELS    OP

At  first  tlie  city  was  called  tlie  new  town  of  Puerto  Viejo,
and  it  is  situated  in  the  most  convenient  and  best  part  of
the  province,  not  very  far  from  the  South  Sea.  In  many
districts  belonging  to  this  city  of  Puerto  Viejo,  they  make
deep  holes  for  the  burial  of  their  dead,  which  look  more
like  wells  than  tombs.  When  they  wish  to  inter  a  body,
they  clear  out  all  the  loose  earth.  A  large  number  of
Indians  then  assemble,  dancing,  singing,  and  mourning,
not  forgetting  to  drink,  and  beating  drums.  After  they
have  done  all  these  things,  according  to  the  custom  of  their
ancestors,  they  lower  the  body  down  into  the  deep  tomb,
and,  if  he  is  a  chief  or  important  person,  they  bury  the  most
beautiful  and  beloved  of  his  women  with  him,  besides  jewels,
food,  and  jars  of  wine  made  from  maize.  They  then  place
those  thick  canes  which  grow  in  the  country  over  the  hole.
As  these  canes  are  hollow,  they  take  care  to  fill  them  with
that  drink  made  of  maize  or  of  roots,  which  they  call  acca,^
because,  being  deceived  by  the  devil,  they  believe  (at  least
so  they  have  told  me)  that  the  dead  man  drinks  of  the
liquor  they  put  into  the  canes.  This  custom  of  burying
arms,  treasure,  and  food  with  the  dead,  is  practised  in  the
greater  part  of  these  newly-discovered  countries  ;  and  in
many  provinces  they  also  bury  women  and  boys  alive
with  them.


CHAPTER     LII.


Of  the  wells  which  there  are  at  the  point  of  Santa  Elena ;  of  the  story
they  tell  respecting  the  arrival  of  giants  in  those  parts  ;  and  of  the
t;ir  which  is  found  there.

As,  at  the  beginning  of  this  work,  I  gave  a  detailed  account
of  all  the  ports  on  the  coast  of  Peru,  from  Panama  to  the

'  The  Quichua  word  for  cliicha  or  fenaeuted  liquor.


PEDKO    DE    OIKZA    DE    LEON.  180

confines  of  Chile,  which  is  a  great  length  of  coast,  it  does
not  appear  necessary  to  repeat  them  here,  and  for  this
reason  I  shall  not  treat  of  them.  I  have  also  described  the
principal  places  in  this  province.  There  are,  however,
reports  concerning  giants  in  Peru,  who  landed  on  the  coast
at  the  point  of  Santa  Elena,  within  the  jurisdiction  of  this
city  of  Puerto  Viejo,  which  require  notice.  I  will  relate
what  I  have  been  told,  without  paying  attention  to  the
various  versions  of  the  story  current  among  the  vulgar,
who  always  exaggerate  everything.  The  natives  relate  the
following  tradition,  which  had  been  received  from  their
ancestors  from  very  remote  times.  There  arrived  on  the
coast,  in  boats  made  of  reeds,  as  big  as  large  ships,  a  party
of  men  of  such  size  that,  from  the  knee  downwards,  their
height  was  as  great  as  the  entire  height  of  an  ordinary
man,  though  he  might  be  of  good  stature.  Their  limbs
were  all  in  proportion  to  the  deformed  size  of  their  bodies,
and  it  was  a  monstrous  thing  to  see  their  heads,  with  hair
reaching  to  the  shoulders.  Their  eyes  were  as  large  as
small  plates.  They  had  no  beards,  and  were  dressed  in  the
skins  of  animals,  others  only  in  the  dress  which  nature  gave
them,  and  they  had  no  women  with  them.  When  they
arrived  at  this  point,  they  made  a  sort  of  village,  and  even
now  the  sites  of  their  houses  are  pointed  out.  But  as  they
found  no  water,  in  order  to  remedy  the  want,  they  made
some  very  deep  wells,  works  which  are  truly  worthy  of  re-
membrance; for  such  are  their  magnitude,  that  they  certainly
must  have  been  executed  by  very  strong  men.  They  dug
these  wells  in  the  living  rock  until  they  met  with  water,
arid  then  they  lined  them  with  masonry  from  top  to  bottom
in  such  sort  that  they  will  endure  for  many  ages.  The
water  in  these  wells  is  very  good  and  wholesome,  and
always  so  cold  that  it  is  very  pleasant  to  drink  it.  Having
built  their  village,  and  made  their  wells  or  cisterns  where
they  could  drink,  these  great  men,  or  giants,  consumed  all


190  THE    TRAVELS    OP

the  provisions  they  could  lay  their  hands  upon  in  the  sur-
rounding country ;  insomuch  that  one  of  them  ate  more
meat  than  fifty  of  the  natives  of  the  country  could.  As  all
the  food  they  could  find  was  not  sufficient  to  sustain  them,
they  killed  many  fish  in  the  sea  with  nets  and  other  gear.
They  were  detested  by  the  natives,  because  in  using  their
women  they  killed  them,  and  the  men  also  in  another  way.
But  the  Indians  were  not  sufficiently  numerous  to  destroy
this  new  people  who  had  come  to  occupy  their  lands.  They
made  great  leagues  against  them,  but  met  with  no  success.
\_The  next  sentence  is  unfit  for  translation.']  All  the  natives
declare  that  God  our  Lord  brought  upon  them  a  punish-
ment in  proportion  to  the  enormity  of  their  offence.  While
they  were  all  together,  engaged  in  their  accursed  ...  a
fearful  and  terrible  fire  came  down  from  heaven  with  a
great  noise,  out  of  the  midst  of  which  there  issued  a  shining
angel  with  a  glittering  sword,  with  which,  at  one  blow,
they  were  all  killed,  and  the  fire  consumed  them.  There
only  remained  a  few  bones  and  skulls,  which  God  allowed  to
remain  without  being  consumed  by  the  fire,  as  a  memorial
of  this  punisnment.  This  is  what  they  say  concerning
these  giants,  and  we  believe  the  account  because  in  this
neighbourhood  they  have  found,  and  still  find,  enormous
bones.  I  have  heard  from  Spaniards  who  have  seen  part
of  a  double  tooth,  that  they  judged  the  whole  tooth  would
have  weighed  more  than  half  a  butcher^s  poimd.  They  also
had  seen  another  piece  of  a  shin  bone,  and  it  was  marvel-
lous to  relate  how  large  it  was.  These  men  are  witnesses
to  the  story,  and  the  site  of  the  village  may  be  seen,  as
well  as  the  wells  and  cisterns  made  by  the  giants.  I  am
unable  to  say  from  what  direction  they  came,  because  I  do
not  know.^

'  This  account  of  the  tradition  concerning  giants  at  Point  Santa  Elene,
is  the  fullest  that  is  given  by  any  of  the  old  writers,  and  it  is  quoted  as
such  by  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  (i,  lib.  ix,  cap.  9).

Zarate's  version  of  the  tradition  differs  but  slightly  from  that  of  ("ieza


PEDRO    UK    CIKZA    DK    LKON.  191

In  this  year  1550,  1,  being  in  the  City  of  the  Kings,
heard  that,  when  the  most  ilkistrions  Don  Antonio  de  Men-
doza  was  viceroy  and  governor  of  New  Spain,  they  found
certain  bones  of  men  who  must  have  been  even  larger  than
tlieso  giants.  I  have  also  heard  that  previously  they  dis-
covered, in  a  most  ancient  tomb  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  or
in  some  other  part  of  that  kingdom,  certain  bones  of  giants.
From  all  this  we  may  gather  that,  as  so  many  persons  saw
and  affirmed  these  things,  these  giants  really  did  exist.

At  the  point  of  Santa  Elena  (which,  as  I  have  before
said,  is  on  the  coast  of  Peru  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the
city  of  Puerto  Viejo)  there  is  a  thing  well  worthy  of  note,
and  this  is  that  there  are  certain  wells,  or  mines,  of  such
excellent  tar,  that  as  many  ships  as  require  caulking  might
be  caulked  with  it.  This  tar  must  be  some  mineral  which
flows  out  at  this  place,  and  it  comes  forth  very  hot.  I  have
not  seen  any  other  mines  of  tar  in  any  of  the  other  parts  of
the  Indies  which  I  have  visited ;  but  I  believe  that  Gonzalo
Hernandez  de  Oviedo,  in  the  first  part  of  the  general  his-

de  Leon.  He  adds  that  little  credit  was  given  to  the  story  until  1543,
when  a  native  of  Truxillo,  named  Juan  de  Hohnos,  caused  excavations
to  be  made,  and  found  huge  ribs  and  other  bones,  and  enormous  teeth.
From  that  time  the  native  tradition  was  beUeved.  (Bistoria  del  Perv,
lib.  i,  cap.  iv.)  Acosta  also  mentions  the  bones  of  giants  of  huge  great-
ness, found  about  Manta.  (Acosta,  lib.  i,  cap.  19.)  Mr.  Ranking,  a
fantastic  theorist,  who  published  his  Researches  on  the  Coiiquest  of  Peru
and  Mexico  by  the  Mongols^  accompanied  with  Elephants^  in  1827,
founds  his  theory  on  this  tradition  of  giants  having  landed  at  Point  Sta.
Elena  (p.  51.)

It  appears  that  fossil  bones  of  huge  mammals  have  been  found  on
this  part  of  the  coast,  where  pieces  of  cliff  are  constantly  breaking  away,
and  they  doubtless  gave  rise  to  this  story  about  giants.  Mr.  Spruce  tells
me  that  a  French  naturalist  took  a  quantity  of  these  fossils  home  with
him  not  long  since.  Ulloa  calls  these  fossils  the  bones  of  giants,  and
Humboldt  tliinks  they  belonged  to  cetaceous  animals.  Stevenson  says
he  saw  a  grinder  which  weighed  more  than  three  pounds,  with  enamel
spotted  like  female  tortoise  shell,  in  the  possession  of  Do7i  Jose  INIcrino
of  Guayaquil.     {Travels^  ii,  p.  235.)


102  THE    TRAVELS    OF

toiy  of  the  Indies,  gives  an  account  both  of  this  and  of
others.  Nevertheless,  as  I  am  not  writing  concerning  the
Indies  generaHy,  but  only  of  the  events  which  have  taken
place  in  Peru,  I  do  not  treat  of  other  parts.  With  this  I
shall  conclude  what  I  have  to  say  concerning  the  city  and
province  of  Puerto  Yiejo.


CHAPTER    LIV.


Concerning  the  foundation  of  the  city  of  Guayaquil ;  and  how  certain  of
tlie  natives  put  tlie  captains  of  Huayna  Ccapac  to  death.

Further  on,  towards  the  west,  is  the  city  of  Guayaquil;
and,  as  soon  as  the  boundary  of  its  jurisdiction  is  crossed,
the  Indians  are  Gruancavilcas — those  toothless  ones  who,
from  custom,  or  to  honour  their  accursed  gods,  pulled  out
their  teeth,  as  I  have  before  said.  As  I  have  already  given
an  account  of  their  dress  and  customs,  I  have  no  wish  to
repeat  it  in  this  chapter.

In  the  time  of  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui,  lord  of  Cuzco,
these  people  were  conquered.  The  Lord  Ynca  subjugated
them,  and,  in  doing  so,  he  proved  himself  to  be  a  great
captain,  and  won  victories  and  notable  trophies,  displacing
the  garrisons  of  the  natives,  and  allowing  no  armed  men  in
any  part  except  those  who  were  posted  at  stations  assigned
by  himself.  He  then  ordered  certain  of  his  captains  to
explore  the  country,  and  to  bring  the  natives  to  obedience
by  kindness  and  friendship.  All  these  captains,  as  I  have
said  before,  were  killed  by  the  natives,  without  one  being

'  In  the  second  edition  of  Cieza  de  Tjcon  the  chapters  are  incorrectly
numbered.  Two  chapters  are  numbered  liv,  and  cliapters  hii  and  Iv  are
omitted  altogether.  Two  chapters  are  also  numbered  lix.  It  is  necessary
to  retain  the  incorrect  numbering,  because  all  modern  \vriters  have  quoted
from  the  second  edition.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  193

left  alive.  The  natives  did  not  at  once  receive  the  punishment
they  deserved  for  kilhng  those  who  slept  in  confidence
without  suspecting  such  treason,  because  the  Ynca  was  in
Cuzco,  and  his  governors  and  delegates  had  enough  to  do
in  their  respective  governments.  When  Huayna  Ccapac
succeeded,  he  showed  himself  to  be  as  brave  and  valiant  a
captain  as  his  father,  with  even  more  prudence,  and  full
of  pride  at  his  new  power.  He  set  out  from  Cuzco
in  great  haste,  accompanied  by  the  principal  Orcjones^  of
the  two  famous  tribes  of  that  city,  called  Hanan-Cuzcos,
and  Hurin-Cuzcos,  After  having  visited  the  sacred  temple
of  Pachacamac,  and  the  garrisons  which  were  stationed  by
his  order  in  the  provinces  of  Xauxa  and  Caxamarca,  and
other  parts,  both  in  the  mountains  and  in  the  fruitful
valleys  of  the  coast,  he  reached  Tumbez,  where  a  fortress
was  built  by  his  order,  although  some  Indians  say  that
this  edifice  is  more  ancient.  The  people  of  the  island  of
Puna  being  hostile  to  the  natives  of  Tumbez,  it  was
easy  for  the  captains  of  the  Ynca  to  build  this  fortress
while  the  Indians  were  engaged  in  their  own  quarrels.
^\Tien  it  was  finished  Huayna  Ccapac  ordered  a  temple  of
the  sun  to  be  built,  and  two  hundred  virgins,  from  amongst
the  most  beautiful  daughters  of  the  chiefs  of  the  province,
to  be  collected  together  in  it.  In  this  fortress  (which
before  it  was  ruined,  is  said  to  have  been  a  thing  worthy
of  notice)  Huayna  Ccapac  had  his  captain  or  delegate,  with
a  number  of  Mitimaes,  and  stores  and  provisions  for  their
maintenance,  as  well  as  for  the  troops  that  passed  that  way.
They  also  say  that  a  lion  and  a  very  fierce  tiger  were  placed
in  the  fortress  and  ordered  to  be  well  guarded.  These
must  have  been  the  beasts  which  made  as  if  they  would
tear  the  Captain  Pedi'o  de  Candia  in  pieces,-  at  the  time

'   Ynca  nobles,  so  called  by  the  Spaniards  from  the  large  gold  orna-
ments worn  in  their  ears.

-  Pedro  de  Candia  was  a  Greek,  and  one  of  the  heroic  thii-teen  wlio

O


194  THE    TRAVELS    OF

when  the  governor  Don  Francisco  Pizarro,  with  his  thirteen
companions  (who  were  the  discoverers  of  Peru,  as  I  shall
relate  in  the  third  part  of  my  work)  reached  this  coast.
In  the  fortress  of  Tumbez  there  were  a  great  number  of
silversmiths  who  made  vases  of  gold  and  silver,  and  many-
other  ornaments  both  for  the  service  and  adornment  of  the
temple,  which  these  people  considered  sacred,  and  for  the
use  of  the  Ynca  himself.  They  also  had  to  prepare  the
plates  of  these  metals,  to  line  the  walls  of  the  temples
and  palaces.  The  women,  who  were  dedicated  to  the  ser-
vice of  the  temple,  only  understood  how  to  spin  and  weave
very  fine  woollen  cloth,  which  they  did  with  great  skill.
As  I  shall  wi'ite  very  fully  and  copiously  of  these  things  in
my  second  part,  which  will  treat  of  the  kingdom  of  the
Yncas  in  Peru,  from  Manco  Ccapac,  who  was  the  first,  to

crossed  the  line  drawn  on  the  sand  by  Pizarro,  at  the  island  of  Gallo.  He
was  a  very  tall  stout  man.  When  the  ship  arrived  at  Tumbez,  in  Peru,
there  was  some  hesitation  as  to  landing  amongst  a  hostile  people,  and
Pedro  de  Candia  volunteered  to  go  first.  Putting  on  a  coat  of  mail
reaching  to  the  knees,  with  a  sword  by  his  side  and  a  cross  in  lus  hand,
he  walked  towards  the  town  with  an  air  as  if  he  had  been  lord  of  the
whole  province.  The  Indians  were  astonished  at  liis  appearance,  and,  to
find  out  what  manner  of  man  he  was,  they  let  loose  a  lion  and  a  tiger
upon  him,  but  the  animals  crouched  at  his  feet.  Pedro  de  Candia  gave
the  Indians  to  understand  that  the  virtue  of  the  cross  he  held  in  his  hand
had  been  the  cause  of  this  mii-acle.  The  Indians,  believing  that  he  must
be  a  child  of  the  sun,  showed  him  the  temple  and  palace  of  Tumbez,  and
so  he  retui-ned  to  the  ship,  which  sailed  back  to  Panama.  He  accom-
panied Pizarro  to  Spain  and  was  rewarded  by  Charles  V.  Tliis  Greek
captain  fought  by  the  side  of  Pizarro  during  the  conquest  of  Peru,  and
when  it  was  completed,  he  led  an  expedition  into  the  forests  of  Moxos,
east  of  Cuzco,  but  was  obliged  to  return.  After  the  murder  of  Pizarro
he  joined  the  younger  Almagro,  and  superintended  the  casting  of  cannon
for  him  at  Cuzco  ;  but  afterwards  entered  into  correspondence  with  the
royal  army  under  Vaca  de  Castro,  and  at  the  battle  of  Chupas  he  pur-
posely pointed  the  guns  at  such  an  angle  as  to  send  the  balls  over  tlie
heads  of  the  enemy.  Young  Almagro,  observing  this  treachery,  ran  him
through  the  bcxly,  and  he  fell  dead.

Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  says  that  he  was  at  school  with  Pedro  de  Candia's
son,  at  Cuzco,  who  inherited  his  father's  stature ;  for  being  only  twelve
years  old  he  had  a  body  large  enough  for  one  twice  his  age.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  195

Huascar,  who  was  the  last,  I  shall  say  no  more  in  this
chapter  than  is  necessary  to  make  the  narrative  clear.  As
soon,  then,  as  Huayna  Ccapac  had  made  himself  master  of"
the  province  of  the  Guancavilcas  and  of  Tumbez,  he  sent
to  Tumbala,  the  lord  of  Puna,  to  order  him  to  come  and  do
homage.  When  the  lord  of  the  island  of  Puna^  heard  what
the  Ynca's  message  conveyed,  he  was  much  moved,  for,
being  a  chief,  and  having  received  that  dignity  from  his
ancestors,  he  held  it  to  be  a  great  calamity  to  lose  that
liberty  which  is  so  much  esteemed  by  all  the  nations  of  the
earth,  and  to  receive  a  stranger  as  sole  lord  of  his  island ;
for  he  was  not  only  required  to  serve  him,  but  to  allow  his
edifices  and  fortresses  to  be  built  on  the  island,  and  to
give  up  his  most  beautiful  women,  which  was  what  he  felt
most.  Finally,  however,  those  of  the  island  consulted  one
with  another  touching  the  present  calamity,  and,  considering
how  small  their  power  was  to  resist  that  of  the  Ynca,  they
agreed  that  it  would  be  prudent  to  seek  for  his  friendship,
and  to  feign  submission.  Tumbala  then  sent  messengers
to  Huayna  Ccapac  with  presents,  and  invited  him  to  visit
the  island  of  Puna  for  a  few  days.  The  Ynca  was  satisfied
with  this  humility,  and  Tumbala,  with  the  chiefs  of  the  island,
sacrificed  to  the  gods,  seeking  what  they  should  do  to
escape  from  the  Ynca,  who  sought  to  be  supreme  lord  over
aU.  It  is  said  that  messengers  were  sent  to  all  the  neigh-
bouring provinces  to  try  the  temper  of  the  people,  and  to
excite  them  to  resist  Huayna  Ccapac.  This  was  done  very
secretly,  and  in  the  meanwhile  the  Ynca  went  to  the  island
of  Puna,  where  he  was  honourably  received,  and  lodged  in
buildings  which  had  been  prepared  for  him.  The  Orejones
and  the  chiefs  of  the  island  assembled,  and  showed  signs  of
real  and  not  simulated  friendship.

As  many  of  the  natives  of  the  main  land  desired  to  Hve
as  their  ancestors  had  done,  and  as  a  foreign  yoke  is  always

'  Tlie  large  island  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  of  Guayaquil.

o2


196  THE    TRAVELS    OP

heavy  and  distasteful,  while  that  of  a  countryman  is  easy  and
light,  they  conspired  with  the  natives  of  the  island  of  Puna
to  kill  all  those  who  came  into  the  country  with  the  Ynca.
At  that  time  Huayna  Ceapac  ordered  certain  of  his  captains,
with  a  large  force,  to  visit  some  of  the  villages  on  the  main-
land, and  to  arrange  affairs  connected  with  his  service;
and  he  ordered  the  islanders  to  convey  them  in  balsas
across  the  sea,  and  to  disembark  them  in  a  river  whence  it
would  be  convenient  to  go  to  their  destination.  Having
arranged  these  and  other  matters  on  the  island,  Huayna
Ceapac  returned  to  Tumbez,  or  to  some  place  near  it.  The
Orejones,  noble  youths  of  Cuzco,  then  got  into  the  balsas,
with  their  captains,  a  large  and  well-appointed  fleet.  They
were  crossing  the  water  without  suspicion,  when  the
islanders  treacherously  unfastened  the  cords  by  which  the
poles  of  the  balsas  were  secured,  so  that  the  poor  Orejones
fell  into  the  water,  where  they  were  all  cruelly  murdered  by
the  islanders  with  the  arms  which  they  had  secretly  brought
with  them.  By  killing  some  and  drowning  others,  they
put  an  end  to  all  the  Orejones,  and  nothing  was  left  of  them
but  some  mantles  and  a  few  of  their  ornaments.  As  soon
as  the  aggressors  had  committed  these  murders,  their  joy
was  very  great,  and  they  talked  and  complimented  each
other  in  the  balsas  to  such  an  extent,  that  it  might  have
been  supposed  that  the  Ynca  and  all  his  troops  were  in
their  power.  They  enjoyed  their  victory,  and  appropriated
the  treasures  and  ornaments  of  these  people  of  Cuzco,  but
they  finally  met  a  fate  very  different  from  their  thoughts,  as
I  am  about  to  relate.  The  Orejones  who  came  in  the  balsas
being  dead,  the  murderers  quickly  returned  to  the  place
whence  they  had  started,  to  take  more  people  on  board.
The  rest  of  the  Orejones,  unaware  of  the  trick  which  had
been  played  on  their  companions,  then  embarked  with  their
clothes,  ornaments,  and  provisions,  and  were  all  killed  in
the  same  way,  so  that  not  one  escaped.  If  any  that  knew
how  to  swim  tried  to  save  their  lives,  they  were  killcMl  l)y


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  197

fierce  and  cruel  blows,  and  if  they  dived,  and  thus  strove  to
fly  from  their  enemies  by  seeking  favour  of  the  fishes  that
dwell  in  the  depths  -of  the  sea,  it  was  of  no  avail,  for  the
islanders,  who  live  much  in  the  sea,  employed  in  their
fisheries,  swim  as  well  as  the  fishes,  and  easily  overtook  the
fugitives  and  sti-anglcd  them.  The  sea  was  full  of  blood,
the  sign  of  a  sad  spectacle.  As  soon  as  all  the  Orcjoiws
who  went  in  the  balsas  were  killed,  those  of  Puna,  with
the  other  Indians  who  had  conspired  with  them,  returned  to
the  island.

AVhen  these  events  were  made  known  to  the  King
Huayna  Ccapac,  he  was  enraged  and  deeply  distressed  that
so  many  of  his  nobles  should  have  no  tombs.  In  truth
they  think  more  of  the  building  and  adorning  of  their
tombs  where  they  are  to  be  put  after  death,  than  of  the
houses  where  they  dwell  while  li\Tng.  Presently  the  Ynca
assembled  all  his  remaining  forces,  and  resolved  to  punish
the  barbarians  in  such  a  manner  that  neither  resistance  nor
submission  should  avail  them,  for  their  offence  was  held  to
be  so  grave,  that  it  was  more  necessary  to  punish  with
severity  than  to  pardon  with  clemency  and  humanity.  Thus
thousands  were  put  to  death  in  various  ways,  and  the  chiefs
who  formed  the  conspiracy  were  impaled  or  hung.^  After
he  had  inflicted  a  great  and  terrible  punishment  on  these
Indians,  Huayna  Ccapac  ordered  that  the  misfortune  which
had  befallen  his  followers  should  be  recorded  in  songs,  and
sung  in  seasons  of  mourning ;  for  such  subjects  are  recited
in  their  languages  in  elegies.  He  also  ordered  a  causeway
to  be  made  along  the  river  of  Guayaquil,  which,  judging
from  some  parts  that  may  still  be  seen,  must  have  been  a
superb  work,  but  it  was  never  finished.  It  is  called  the
"  passage  of  Huayna  Ccapac.^^  Having  inflicted  this  punish-
ment, he  ordered  that  all  the  natives  should  obey  his  go-
vernor, who  was  in  the  fortress    of  Tumbez,  and  having

'  G.  do  la  Vega,  in  relating  these  events,  copies  largely  from  Cieza  de
I^eon  (i,  lib.  ix,  ca^is.  1,  2,  and  3).


198  THE    TRAVELS    OF

arranged  other  matters,  the  Yuca  departed  from  this  province.
There  are  other  districts  and  villages  within  the  jurisdiction
of  the  city  of  Guayaquil,  but  I  have  nothing  to  say  con-
cerning them,  except  that  the  manners  and  dress  of  the
inhabitants  are  the  same  as  those  already  described,  and
that  their  country  is  the  same.


CHAPTER    LV


Of  the  island  of  Puna,  and  of  that  of  La  Plata  :  and  concerning  the
atbiiirable  root  called  sai-saparilla,  wliich  is  so  useful  for  all  diseases.

The  island  of  Puna,  which  is  near  the  port  of  Tumbez,  is
little  more  than  ten  leagues  round,  yet  in  former  times
it  was  considered  an  important  place ;  for,  besides  that  the
inhabitants  are  great  traders,  and  possess  in  their  islands
all  things  needful  to  sustain  human  life,  which  are  sufficient
causes  for  their  wealth,  they  are  held  to  be  vahant  by
their  neighbours,  and  in  ancient  times  they  waged  fierce
wars  with  those  of  Tumbez  and  of  other  provinces.  For
very  slight  causes  they  killed  each  other,  and  seized  their
women  and  children.  The  great  Tupac  Ynca  sent  am-
bassadors to  these  islanders,  proposing  that  they  should
be  his  friends  and  allies;  and  they,  owing  to  his  great
fame,  heard  his  embassy,  but  refused  to  serve  him,  and  they
were  not  entirely  subdued  until  the  time  of  Huayna  Ccapac,
although  others  say  that  they  had  been  conquered  and
brought  within  the  rule  of  the  Yncas  by  Ynca  Yupanqui,
but  that  they  had  rebelled ;  however  this  may  have  been,
the  events  connected  with  the  murder  of  the  captains,
already  described,  certainly  took  place.  These  islanders
are  of  middle  height,  and  dark  skinned.  They  dress  in
cotton  cloths,  both  men  and  women,  and  wear  cliaqidras
on  several  parts  of  the  body.  They  also  put  on  pieces  of
gold  in  ordei'  to  look  smart.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  100

The  island  is  covered  with  lai-ge  woods  and  flowering
meadowSj  and  abounds  in  fruit.  It  yields  plenty  of  maize,
yucas,  and  other  edible  roots,  and  there  are  also  birds  of
all  kinds,  such  as  parrots,  (luacaviaijas,^  and  of  beasts,
monkeys,  lions,  foxes,  snakes,  and  many  others.  When
the  chiefs  die  they  are  lamented  by  all  the  people,  as  well
men  as  women,  and  are  interred  with  great  signs  of
respect,  according  to  their  custom.  They  bury  the  most
valuable  things,  arms,  and  most  beautiful  women  with  the
deceased,  the  women  being  buried  alive  in  the  tombs  to
keep  their  husbands  company.  They  mourn  for  the  dead
during  many  days,  and  shave  the  heads  of  the  women  in
the  houses,  even  those  who  are  the  nearest  relations.  They
are  given  to  religious  ceremonies,  and  to  the  commission
of  some  crimes.  The  devil  had  the  same  power  over  them
as  he  had  over  other  Indians,  and  some  of  them  conversed
with  him.

They  had  their  temples  in  dark  and  hidden  places,  and
carved  the  walls  with  horrible  pictures.  In  front  of  their
altars,  where  they  performed  sacrifices,  they  killed  many
animals  and  some  birds ;  and  it  is  said  that  they  even  killed
slaves  or  prisoners  taken  in  war,  offering  up  their  blood  to
the  accursed  devil.

In  another  small  island,  at  no  great  distance,  the  natives
say  that,  in  the  time  of  their  ancestors,  there  was  a  temple,
or  Jiuaca,  where  they  also  worshipped  their  gods  and  per-
formed sacrifices.  Round  the  temple  they  had  quantities
of  gold,  silver,  and  other  valuable  things,  such  as  woollen
cloths  and  jewels,  which  had  been  offered  up  at  different
times.  It  is  also  said  that  some  of  the  islanders  of  Puna
committed  the  accursed  sin.  At  present,  by  the  will  of
Grod,  they  are  not  so  bad,  or,  if  they  are,  they  do  not
commit  their  crimes  publicly  and  openly,  for  there  are
clergy  on  the  island  now,  and  the  natives  are  aware  of  the
'  ^Macaws.


200  THE    TKAVELS    OF

blindness  in  which  their  fathers  lived,  and  how  erroneous
was  their  belief.  They  also  know  how  much  they  gain  by
believing  our  holy  catholic  faith,  and  by  having  Jesus  Christ,
our  Redeemer,  for  their  Grod.  Thus,  by  his  great  goodness
and  mercy,  many  have  become  Christians,  and  more  are
converted  every  day.

An  herb  grows  in  abundance  on  this  island,  and  in  the
province  of  Guayaquil,  which  is  called  sarsaparilla  because  it
grows  like  a  bramble  from  its  birth,  and  small  leaves  grow
out  of  the  suckers  and  other  parts  of  the  branches.^  The  roots
of  the  herb  are  useful  for  all  sicknesses,  and  especially  for
bilbos,  and  to  mitigate  the  evil  which  this  pestiferous  disease
causes  to  man.  Those  who  wish  to  be  cured  are  put  in  a  warm
room,  well  covered  up,  so  that  the  cold  or  air  can  do  no
injury.  Then,  by  merely  purging,  eating  delicate  meats,
and  drinking  an  infusion  of  this  root  for  some  days,  without
any  other  remedy,  the  evil  is  cleared  out  of  the  body,  and
shortly  the  patient  is  more  healthy  than  he  ever  was  before,
and  the  body  is  left  without  any  vestige  of  the  evil,  but  re-
mains so  perfect  that  it  seems  as  if  it  had  never  been  ailing.
Thus  they  have  truly  effected  great  cures  in  the  town  of  Gua-
yaquil at  different  times.  Many,  too,  whose  bowels  are  out
of  order,  by  simply  drinking  an  infusion  of  these  roots,  be-
come healthy,  and  in  better  condition  than  before  they  were
taken  ill.  Others  suffering  from  hubos  are  also  cured,  as
well  as  those  with  boils  or  tumours.  I  take  it  for  certain
that  this  is  the  best  root  and  herb  in  the  world,  and  the
most  useful,  as  is  proved  by  the  numbers  who  have  been
cured  by  it.  This  sarsaparilla  grows  in  many  parts  of  the
Indies,  but  none  is  so  good  or  efficacious  as  that  which  is
found  on  the  island  of  Puna  and  in  the  province  of  the  city
of  Guayaquil.-

'  Sarsa^  a  bramble,  and  parilla,  a  vine.

'  Smilax  ojficinalis  H..  B.  K.     The  root  of  sarsaparilla  was  brought  to


I'EURO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  201


CHAPTER    LVI.


I  low  the  city  of  Santiago  de  Guayaquil  was  founded  and  settled,  of
some  Indian  villages  which  are  subject  to  it,  and  concerning  other
things  until  its  boundary  is


That  it  may  be  known  how  the  city  of  Santiago  de  Guay-
aquil was  founded,  it  will  be  necessary  to  say  something-
concerning  it,  although,  in  the  third  part  of  my  work,  I
shall  treat  more  fully  on  the  subject,  in  the  place  where  the
discovery  of  Quito  and  conquest  of  these  provinces  by  the
captain  Don  Sebastian  Belalcazar  is  narrated.  This  officer,
having  full  powers  from  the  Adelantado  Don  Francisco
Pizarro,  and  hearing  of  the  province  of  Guayaquil,  deter-
mined to  found  a  city  within  its  hmits.  He,  therefore,
started  from  San'  Miguel  with  a  party  of  Spaniards,  and,
entering  the  province,  induced  the  natives  to  come  to  terms,
giving  them  to  understand  that  their  natural  lord  and  king
was  his  Majesty.  As  the  Indians  already  knew  that  San
Miguel,  Puerto  Viejo,  and  Quito  itself,  were  peopled  by
Christians,  many  of  them  came  forward  to  make  peace ;  so
the  captain  Sebastian  de  Belalcazar  chose  a  place  which
seemed  to  him  proper  for  the  site  of  a  city,  but  he  remained
there  only  a  few  days,  because  it  was  necessary  for  him  to
return  to  Quito.  He  left  one  Diego  Dasa  as  captain  and
alcalde,  and  it  was  not  long  before  the  Indians  began  to
understand  the  exacting  spirit  and  avarice  of  the  Spaniards,
their  greed  for  gold  and  silver,  and  their  desire  after  pretty
women.  As  the  Spaniards  were  also  divided  amongst
themselves,  the  Indians  conspired  to  kill  them,  and  as  they

Eiu-ope  in  about  1530.  The  stem  is  twining,  shrubby,  and  prickly.
Acosta  says  that  the  water  on  the  island  of  Puna,  flowing  past  the  sarsa-
pariUa  roots,  ha.s  healing  virtues  (Ub.  iii,  cap.  17).  lliere  is  a  great
trade  in  siirsaparilla  down  all  the  Peruvian  tributaries  of  the  Amazon.


202  THE    TRAVELS    OF

determined  so  they  acted^  the  Spaniards  being  very  in-
cautious. All  were  killed  except  five  or  six  soldiers  and
their  chief,  Diego  Dasa.  These,  amidst  great  dangers  and
difficulties,  escaped  to  Quito,  but  the  captain  Belalcazar
had  already  set  out  to  discover  the  provinces  further  to  the
north,  leaving  as  his  lieutenant  a  captain  of  good  hneage,
named  Juan  Diaz.  When  the  news  was  heard  in  Quito,
several  Christians  returned  with  the  same  Diego  Dasa  and
the  captain  Tapia,  and  had  several  fights  with  the  Indians,
who  had  encouraged  and  animated  each  other  to  defend
their  persons  and  property.  The  Spaniards  made  proposals
of  peace,  but  without  avail,  for  the  natives  were  full  of
hatred  and  animosity.  They  showed  these  feelings  by  kill-
ing several  Christians  and  horses,  and  the  rest  retreated  to
Quito.  These  events  having  occurred,  the  governor  Don
Francisco  Pizarro  sent  the  captain  Saera  to  form  this
settlement.  He  entered  the  province  afresh,  with  the
intention  of  dividing  the  villages  amongst  the  Spaniards
who  accomj)anied  him  on  this  conquest,  but  the  governor
recalled  him  in  great  haste  to  relieve  the  City  of  the  Kings,
which  was  besieged  by  the  Indians.  The  new  city  was
therefore  again  abandoned,  owing  to  this  order  of  the
governor.  Some  time  afterwards  the  captain  Francisco  de
Orellana^  entered  the  province,  by  order  of  the  Adelantado
Don  Francisco  Pizarro,  with  a  larger  force  of  Spaniards
and  horses.  He  founded  the  city  of  Santiago  de  Guayaquil
in  a  better  position,  in  the  name  of  his  Majesty,  Don
Francisco  Pizarro  being  governor  and  captain-general  of
Peru,  in  the  year  1537.  Many  of  the  Guancavilcas  Indians
sei've  the  Spanish  citizens  of  this  city  of  Santiago  de
Guayaquil;  and,  besides  the  city,  the  towns  of  Yaquel,
Colonche,  Chanduy,  Chongon,  Daule,  Chonana,  and  many
others  are  within  the  limits  and  jurisdiction  of  the  province.

'  This  is  the  otHcer  who  afterwards  deserted  (louzalo  Pizarro,  and  was
the  first  to  SJiil  down  the  Amazon.


PEDRO    UE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  203

All  these  places  have  fertile  lands  well  supplied  with  pi-o-
visions  and  abundance  of  fruit,  and  in*  the  hollows  of  the
trees  there  is  much  excellent  honey.  Near  the  city  there
are  wide  open  plains,  forests,  and  thickets  of  tall  trees.
Rivers  of  good  water  flow  down  from  the  mountains.

The  Indians,  both  men  and  women,  dress  in  shirts,  with
cloths  between  their  legs.  On  their  heads  they  wear  crowns
of  very  small  gold  beads,  called  chaquira,  and  some  of  silver.
The  women  wear  one  mantle  from  the  waist  downwards,
and  another  over  their  shoulders,  and  their  hair  is  worn
very  long.  In  some  of  these  villages  the  caciques  or  chiefs
fasten  bits  of  gold  on  their  teeth.  It  is  said  by  some  of
them  that  when  they  sowed  their  fields,  they  sacrificed
human  blood  and  the  hearts  of  men  to  him  whom  they
reverenced  as  god ;  and  that  in  every  village  there  were  old
Indians  who  conversed  with  the  devil.  When  the  chiefs
were  sick,  to  appease  the  wrath  of  their  gods,  and  pray  for
health,  they  made  other  sacrifices  of  a  superstitious  nature,
killing  men  (as  I  was  told),  and  beheving  that  human
blood  was  a  grateful  ofiering.  In  doing  these  things  they
sounded  drums  and  bells  before  certain  idols  shaped  Hke
lions  or  tigers,  which  they  worshipped.  When  any  of  the
chiefs  died,  they  made  a  round  tomb  with  a  vaulted  roof,
and  the  door  towards  the  rising  sun.  The  body  was  buried
with  Live  women,  his  arms,  and  other  things,  in  the  same
way  as  was  done  by  the  Indians  already  described.  The
arms  with  which  these  Indians  fight  are  wands,  and  clubs
called  macanas}  Most  of  these  Indians  have  died  out  and
come  to  an  end.  Those  that  remain  are,  by  the  will  of
God,  becoming  Christians,  and  httle  by  httle  forgetting
their  evil  customs  as  they  embrace  our  holy  faith.  It  now
appears  to  me  that  I  have  said  enough  concerning  the  cities
of  Puerto  Viejo  and  Guayaquil,  so  I  will  return  to  the  royal
road  of  the  Yncas,  which  I  left  after  reaching  the  build-
ings of  Tumebamba.

'  A  Qiuchua  word.


204  THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    LVII.

Of  the  Indian  villages  between  the  buildings  of  Tumebaniba  and  the
city  of  Loxa,  and  concerning  the  founding  of  that  city.

Setting  out  from  Tumebamba^  in  tlie  direction  of  Cuzco,
the  great  road  passes  through  the  province  of  the  Canaris^
until  it  reaches  Canaribamba  and  the  buiklings  a  little
further  on.  Villages  belonging  to  the  same  province  are
seen  on  either  hand/and  to  the  eastward  there  are  moun-
tains^ on  the  other  side  of  which  the  country,  which  is
inhabited,  slopes  down  towards  the  river  Maranon.  Be-
yond the  boundary  of  these  Caiiaris  Indians  is  the  province
of  the  Paltas,  in  which  there  are  some  buildings  now  known
as  "  the  stones,"  because  many  are  to  be  seen  which  the
Yncas,  in  the  time  of  their  power,  had  sent  to  their  super-
intendents or  delegates.  These  tampus^  were  ordered  to
be  built,  because  the  province  of  the  Paltas  was  considered
important.  They  were  extensive  and  handsome,  the  masonry
being  well  executed.  The  quarry  whence  the  stones  were
brought  is  near  the  source  of  the  river  of  Tumbez.  Here
the  tribute  was  collected,  which  the  natives  were  obliged
to  pay  to  their  king  and  lord,  or  to  the  governors  in  his
name.

To  the  westward  of  these  buildings  is  the  city  of  Puerto
Viejo,  and  to  the  eastward  the  province  of  Bracamoros,-
were  there  are  vast  territories  and  many  rivers,  some
of  them  very  great  and  powerful.  There  is  hope  that
by  marching  for  twenty  or  thirty  days,  a  rich  and  fer-
tile land  will  be  reached.  But  there  are  great  forests
in  the  way,  some  of  them  very  frightful  and  dangerous.
The  Indians  go  naked,  and  are  not  so  intelligent  as  those
of  Peru,  nor  were  they  subdued  by  the  Kings  Yncas.
They  arc  not  so  civilised,  nor  have  they  any  pohty,  any
>   Inns.  -  ^lorc  correctly  Paca-muru.


PEDRO    OE    CIEZA    I)E    LEON.  205

more  than  the  Indians  subject  to  the  city  of  Antioquia,  or
to  the  town  of  Arma,  or  those  in  the  government  of  Po-
payan.  These  Indians  of  the  province  of  Bracamoros
resemble  those  mentioned  above  iu  their  customs,  and  they
are  said  to  be  very  valiant  warriors.  Even  the  very  Orejoncfi
of  Cuzco  confess  that  Huayna  Ccapac  turned  and  fled  before
their  fury.

The  captain  Pedro  de  Vergara  was  occupied  for  some
years  in  making  discoveries  and  conquests  in  this  region,
and  founded  a  settlement  in  it ;  but  the  troubles  of  Peru
prevented  its  complete  exploration,  and  the  Spaniards
entered  it  two  or  three  times  in  the  course  of  the  civil
wars.  Afterwards  the  president,  Pedro  de  la  Gasca,  sent
the  captain  Diego  Palomino,  a  citizen  of  the  town  of  San
Miguel,  to  undertake  this  discovery.  When  I  was  in
the  City  of  the  Kings,  certain  conquerors  arrived  to  give
an  account  of  what  they  had  done  for  the  said  president
and  the  judges.  As  the  doctor  Bravo  de  Seravia,  a  judge
of  the  Eoyal  Audience,  is  very  curious,  they  gave  him
a  particular  account  of  what  had  been  discovered.  In
truth,  any  captain  who  set  out  in  that  direction  with  a  suf-
ficient force,  would  bring  to  light  a  very  rich  land,  as
I  learn  from  the  reports  I  have  heard.  But,  although  I
have  heard  that  the  captain  Diego  Palomino  settled  in  those
parts,  yet  I  shall  say  no  more,  as  I  have  not  obtained  any
certain  intelligence,  and  what  I  have  already  said  is  sufiicient
for  the  understanding  of  what  may  have  been  done.

The  distance  from  the  province  of  Canaris  to  the  city  of
Loxa  (which  is  also  called  La  Sarza)  is  seventeen  leagues,
the  whole  road  being  rugged  or  boggy,  and  half  way  is  the
town  of  the  Paltas,  as  I  have  already  said.  Soon  after
leaving  the  building  of  "  the  stones,^'  an  ascent  commences
which  lasts  a  little  more  than  ten  leagues.  Here  it  is  very
cold,  and  at  the  end  of  the  descent  there  is  another  build-
ing called  Tamboblanco,  whence  the  royal  road  leads    to  a


206  THE    TRAVELS    OF

river  called  Catamaya.  On  the  rig]it-hand  side,  near  the
same  river,  is  the  city  of  Loxa,  which  was  founded  by  the
captain  Alonzo  de  Mercadillo,  in  the  name  of  his  Majesty,
in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1546.^

There  are  numerous  villages  around  the  city  of  Loxa,
and  the  natives  have  almost  the  same  customs  as  those  in
the  neighbouring  districts.  They  wear  a  particular  fringe,
or  band,  on  their  heads  to  distinguish  them.  They  per-
formed sacrifices,  and  worshipped  the  sun  as  well  as  other
more  common  objects,  but,  like  the  other  Indians,  they
believed  in  a  Creator  of  all  things.  As  regards  the  im-
mortality of  the  soul,  they  all  understand  that  man  is
composed  of  something  more  than  the  mere  mortal  body.
When  their  chiefs  die,  deceived  by  the  devil,  in  common
with  all  the  other  Indians,  they  bury  women  alive  with  the
bodies.  Now,  however,  as  some  of  them  understand  that
it  profits  nothing  to  persevere  in  their  ancient  evil  prac-
tices, they  will  not  kill  women  by  burying  them  with  dead
bodies,  nor  are  they  now  so  particular  in  this  matter  of
sepulture.  Indeed,  they  laugh  at  those  who  still  continue
the  customs  which  their  ancestors  considered  of  such  im-
portance. Not  only  do  they  refrain  from  spending  so  much
time  in  making  these  tombs,  but,  on  the  approach  of  death,
they  desire  to  be  interred  like  Christians  in  small  and
humble  graves.  This  is  done  by  those  who,  having  been
washed  in  the  most  holy  water  of  baptism,  deserve  to  be
called  the  sei-vants  of  God  and  the  sheep  of  his  pasture.
But  there  are  many  thousands  of  old  Indians  who  are  now
as  bad  as  they  ever  were,  and  will  continue  to  be  so  until

'  Loxa  afterwards  became  fanioiiij  for  its  forests  of  Chinchona  trees
yielding  Peruvian  bark ;  the  healing  virtues  of  which  were  not  made
known  to  the  Spaniards  until  fifty  years  after  the  time  of  Cieza  de  Leon.
M.  Jussieu  tells  us  that  the  first  fever  cured  by  means  of  Chinchona  bark
was  that  of  a  Jesuit  at  Malacotas,  some  leagues  south  of  Loxa,  in  the
year  IGOO.  The  countess  of  Chinchon,  wife  of  the  viceroy  of  Peru,
was  cured  of  a  fever  by  a  dose  of  Loxa  bark,  in  the  year  1(538.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  20 7

the  goodness  and  mercy  of  God  brings  them  to  a  true
knowledge  of  his  laws.  These  desire  their  bodies  to  be
placed  in  secret  places,  far  from  the  roads  and  villages
frequented  by  Christians,  on  lofty  mountains,  or  amidst
snow-covered  rocks,  wrapped  in  richly-coloured  mantles,
with  all  the  gold  they  possess.

Most  of  the  villages  subject  to  the  city  of  Loxa  were
under  the  rule  of  the  Yncas,  ancient  lords  of  Peru,  who
(as  I  have  said  in  many  parts  of  this  history)  had  their
court  in  the  city  of  Cuzco,  which  was  always  the  capital  of
these  provinces ;  and,  notwithstanding  that  many  of  the
natives  were  dull  and  stupid,  they  abandoned  their  bar-
barous ways,  and  became  more  civilised  by  contact  with
the  Yncas.  The  cHmate  of  these  provinces  is  pleasant  and
healthy,  and  in  the  valleys  and  on  the  banks  of  rivers  it  is
more  temperate  than  on  the  mountains.  The  cultivated
part  of  the  mountains  is  good  land,  but  rather  cold,  and
the  snowy  rocks  and  desert  places  are  intensely  so.  There
are  many  guanacos  and  vicunas,  which  are  like  their  sheep ;
and  partridges,  some  a  little  smaller  than  domestic  fowls,
and  others  larger  than  doves.  On  the  banks  of  the  rivers
there  are  flowering  shrubs,  and  many  fruit  trees  of  the
country.  The  Spaniards  have  now  planted  pear,  fig,
orange,  and  other  trees  of  Spain,  In  the  district  of
Loxa  they  also  breed  large  herds  of  swine  of  the  Spanish
sort,  goats,  and  sheep,  for  there  is  excellent  pasture  and
many  streams  of  water  flowing  in  all  directions,  which
descend  from  the  mountains.  There  are  hopes  that  the
district  may  contain  rich  mines  of  gold  and  silver,  and  some
have  already  been  discovered.  The  Indians,  now  that  they
are  secure  from  the  turmoils  of  war,  and  are  the  masters  of
their  persons  and  property,  raise  many  Spanish  fowls,
pigeons,  and  other  birds.  Pulses  grow  well  in  the  dis-
trict.

The  natives   of   the   countrv  round  Loxa  are  of  middle


208  THE    TRAVELS    OF

height,  and  dress  in  shirts  and  mantles,  both  men  and
women.  Within  the  forests,  it  is  affirmed  by  the  natives
that  there  are  numerous  tribes  rich  in  gold,  and  some  large
rivers.  These  tribes  go  naked,  both  men  and  women,  for
the  country  is  hotter  than  Peru,  and  was  never  subjugated
by  the  Yncas.  The  captain  Alonzo  de  Mercadillo,  with  a
force  of  Spaniards,  set  out  in  the  year  1550  to  verify  these
reports.^

The  situation  of  the  city  of  Loxa  is  the  best  and  most
convenient  that  could  be  found  within  the  province.  The
repartimientos  of  Indians  held  by  the  citizens  were  first
obtained  in  encomienda  by  those  who  were  in  Quito  and
San  Miguel.  As  the  Spaniards  who  travelled  by  the  roj^al
road,  to  go  to  Quito  and  other  parts,  ran  risks  from  the
Indians  of  Carrochamba  and  Chaparra,  this  city  was  founded ;
and,  notwithstanding  that  Gonzalo  Pizarro  had  ordered  it
to  be  peoi3lcd  while  he  was  engaged  in  his  rebellion,  still  the
president  Pedro  de  la  Gasca,  considering  that  it  would  be
for  the  service  of  his  Majesty  that  it  should  not  be  aban-
doned, approved  of  its  being  founded,  and  after  the  judg-
ment on  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  he  gave  Indians  to  the  settlers.
It  appears  to  me  that  I  have  now  said  enough  concerning
this  city,  so  I  shall  pass  on,  and  treat  of  the  other  cities
in  this  kingdom.

"  He  explored  the  course  of  the  IMarauon  as  far  as  the  pongo  or  rapid
of  Manseriche,  in  1548.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  209


CHAPTER    LVIII.

Concerning  the  pro\4nces  between  Tamboblanco  and  tlie  city  of  San
^liguel,  the  first  city  founded  by  the  Christian  Spaniards  in  Peru  ;
and  what  there  is  to  be  said  of  tlie  natives.

As  I  have  undertaken  in  this  work  to  satisfy  the  reader  on
all  points  worthy  of  note  concerning  the  kingdom  of  Peru,
although  it  will  be  great  trouble  to  me  to  stop  at  one  place
and  return  to  another,  still  I  shall  not  fail  to  do  so  when  it
is  necessary.  In  this  place  I  shall  treat  of  the  foundation
of  San  Miguel/  the  first  city  founded  by  Christian  Spaniards
in  Peru,  and  of  the  valleys  and  sandy  deserts  in  this  great
kingdom,  leaving  the  grand  road  over  the  mountains
once  more.  I  shall  fully  describe  these  provinces  and
valleys  on  the  coast,  along  which  runs  another  grand  road
made  by  the  Kings  Yncas,  of  the  same  magnitude  as  that  in
the  mountains.  I  shall  give  an  account  of  the  Yuncas,'^
and  of  their  great  edifices,  as  well  as  of  the  information  I
obtained  concerning  the  secret  of  its  never  raining  in  these
valleys  and  sandy  deserts,  and  of  the  great  abundance  of
things  necessary  for  the  support  of  man.  Having  done
all  this,  I  shall  return  to  my  mountain  road,  and  follow  it
until  I  come  to  the  end  of  this  first  part.  But,  before
descending  to  the  coast,  travelling  along  the  same  royal
mountain  road,  we  come  to  the  provinces  of  Calva  and
Ayavaca,  which  have  the  forests  of  Bracamoros  on  the  east,
and  the  city  of  San  Miguel,  of  which  I  shall  treat  presently,
on  the  west.

In  the  province  of  Caxas  there  are  great  buildings,
erected  by  the  orders  of  the  Yncas,  and  formerly  occupied
by  a  governor  and  a  number  of  Mifimaes,  who  had  charge
of  the  collection  of  tribute.     Beyond  Caxas  is  the  province

'  Xow  better  known  as  Piiira.

-  Inhabitants  of  tlie  warm  valleys  on  the  coast.

P


210  THE   TRAVELS    OF

of  Huancabamba,  where  tliere  were  still  larger  buildings  than
in  Caxas,  for  here  the  Yncas  had  their  forces^  and  amongst
the  buildings  there  is  a  great  fortress  which  I  saw^  but  it
was  then  in  ruins.  In  Huaucabamba  there  was  a  temple
of  the  suuj  with  a  number  of  women.  The  people  of  the
surrounding  districts  came  to  worship  and  offer  gifts  at  this
temple,  and  the  virgins  and  priests  were  held  in  great
reverence  and  esteem.  The  tribute  of  the  chiefs  of  all
these  provinces  was  brought  here,  and  was  forwarded  to
Cuzco  when  orders  came  to  that  effect.  Beyond  Huau-
cabamba there  are  other  buildings  and  villages,  some  of
them  under  the  jurisdiction  of  Loxa,  while  the  natives  of
others  have  been  granted  in  eMcomienda  to  the  citizens  of
San  Miguel.  In  times  past  these  Indians  had  wars  amongst
themselves,  and  for  very  slight  causes  they  killed  each
other  and  seized  the  women.  It  is  even  said  that  they
went  naked,  and  that  some  of  them  ate  human  flesh,  like
the  natives  of  the  province  of  Popayan.  Wlien  the  Yncas
conquered  and  subjugated  them,  they  lost  many  of  these
customs,  and  adopted  the  polity  which  they  now  have.
Thus  their  villages  were  ordered  after  a  different  fashion  to
that  which  had  formerly  prevailed.  They  wear  clothes
made  of  fine  wool  from  their  flocks,  and  now  instead  of  eat-
ing hvmian  flesh,  they  detest  the  practice  and  hold  it  to  be
a  great  sin.  Although  they  are  so  near  the  tribes  of
Puerto  Viejo  and  Guayaquil,  they  do  not  commit  the
abominable  sin.  They  declare  that,  before  they  were  sub-
jugated by  the  Ynca  Yupanqui  and  by  Tupac  Ynca  his
son,  who  was  father  of  Huayna  Ccapac,  and  grandfather
of  Atahualpa,  they  defended  their  liberties  so  resolutely,
that  many  thousands  were  killed,  and  as  many  of  the
Orcjones  of  Cuzco ;  but  they  were  so  closely  pressed  that,
to  escape  dcstructi(m,  certain  of  their  chiefs,  in  the  name  of
the  rest,  gave  in  their  submission  to  the  Lords  Yncas.
The  men  of  these  districts  arc  dark,  and  good  looking,  and


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  211

botli  they  and  tlio  women  clothe  themselves  in  the  way
they  learnt  from  the  Yncas^  their  ancient  lords.  In  some
parts  they  wear  the  hair  very  long,  and  in  others  short  and
plaited  in  very  small  plaits.  If  any  hairs  grow  on  the  chin,
they  pull  them  out,  and,  strange  to  say,  this  is  done
wherever  Indians  are  met  with  in  these  lands.  They  all
understand  the  general  language  of  Cuzco,  but  they  also
have  their  own  particular  languages,  as  I  have  already
said.  There  used  to  be  great  flocks  of  llamas,  the  sheep  of
Peru,  but  now  there  are  very  few,  owing  to  the  way  the
Spaniards  have  destroyed  them.  The  clothes  of  these
Indians  are  of  llama  wool,  and  also  of  vicuna  wool,  which  is
better  and  finer.  There  are  also  some  guanacos,  which
frequent  the  desert  heights.  Those  who  cannot  get  clothes
made  of  wool,  use  cotton.  In  the  valleys  and  inhabited
meadows  there  are  many  rivers  and  small  brooks,  and  some
fountains  with  good  and  wholesome  water.  In  all  parts
there  is  herbage  for  flocks  and  plenty  of  provisions  for  man.
There  are  priests  in  most  of  these  districts,  who,  if  they
live  well  and  abstain  from  evil,  as  their  religion  requires,
will  reap  great  fruits.  By  the  will  of  God,  this  is  done  in  the
greater  part  of  the  kingdom,  and  many  Indian  lads  have
become  Christians,  who,  by  their  example,  attract  others.

The  ancient  temples,  which  are  generally  called  huacas,
are  now  ruined  and  desecrated,  the  idols  are  broken,  and
the  devil  is  thus  badly  wounded  in  these  places.  Where  he
was  once,  for  the  sins  of  men,  so  reverenced  and  esteemed,
the  cross  is  now  planted.  Truly  we  Spaniards  should  ever
give  infinite  praise  to  our  Lord  Grod  for  this.


p2


212  THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    LIX.

In  wliich  the  narrative  is  continued  down  to  the  foundation  of  the  city
of  San  Miguel,  and  who  was  the  founder.  Also  of  the  difference  of
the  seasons  in  this  kingdom  of  Peru,  wliich  is  a  notable  tiling ;  and
how  it  does  not  rain  along  the  whole  length  of  these  plains,  which
are  on  the  coast  of  the  South  Sea.

The  city  of  San  Miguel  is  the  first  tliat  was  founded  in
this  kingdom^  by  the  marquis  Don  Francisco  Pizarro;  and
here  the  first  temple  was  raised  in  honour  of  God  our
Lord.  To  describe  the  coast  valleys,  I  must  begin  with
the  valley  of  Tumbez,  through  which  flows  a  river  which
rises  (as  I  have  before  said)  in  the  province  of  Paltas,
and  falls  into  the  South  Sea.  The  land  of  this  vaUey
of  Tumbez  is  naturally  very  dry  and  sterile,  but  it  some-
times rains,  and  showers  even  extend  to  near  the  city
of  San  Miguel.  But  these  showers  take  place  in  the  parts
nearest  to  the  mountains,  and  it  never  rains  in  the  vicinity
of  the  sea  coast.  The  valley  of  Tumbez  was  formerly
thickly  peopled  and  well  cultivated,  full  of  beautiful  fresh
watercourses  drawn  from  the  river  to  irrigate  the  land,  and
yielded  maize  and  other  things  necessary  for  the  support  of
man,  besides  plenty  of  delicious  fruit.  The  ancient  chiefs
of  the  valley,  before  they  were  subjugated  by  the  Yncas,
were  dreaded  and  obeyed  by  their  subjects  in  a  greater
degree  than  any  other  chiefs  of  whom  I  have  yet  written,
as  is  notorious  to  all,  and  they  were  served  with  much  cere-
mony. They  dressed  in  mantles  and  shirts,  and  wore  an
ornament  on  their  heads,  consisting  of  a  circlet  of  wool
adorned  with  pieces  of  gold  and  silver,  and  very  small
beads,  called  cliaqnira.  These  Indians  were  addicted  to
their  religion,  and  were  groat  sacrificers,  as  is  stated  at
large  in  my  account  of  the  founding  of  the  cities  of  Puerto
Viejo  and  Guaytujuil.     They  are  very  industrious  labourers


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  213

in  the  fieldsj  and  carry  heavy  burdens.  They  till  the  ground
in  concert,  with  beautiful  regularity,  and  raise  maize  and
many  kinds  of  well-tasted  roots.  The  maize  yields  a  harvest
twice  in  the  year,  and  the  beans  and  peas  also  come  up
abundantly  when  they  are  sown.  Their  clothes  are  made
of  cotton,  which  they  grow  in  the  valley,  according  to  the
quantity  they  require.  These  natives  of  Tumbez  also  have
a  great  fishery,  from  which  they  derive  no  small  profit,  for
with  it,  and  their  trade  to  the  mountains,  they  have  always
been  rich.  From  this  valley  of  Tumbez  a  journey  of  two
days  brings  the  traveller  to  the  valley  of  Solana,  which
was  thickly  peopled  in  former  days,  and  contained  edifices
and  store-houses.  The  royal  road  of  the  Yncas  passes
through  these  valleys,  with  pleasant  shady  trees  on  either
side.  Leaving  Solana,  the  road  next  comes  to  Pocheos,  on
a  river  also  called  Pocheos,  though  some  call  it  the  Mayca-
huilca,  because  there  is  a  chief  or  lord  of  that  name  in  the
valley.  This  valley  was  once  very  thickly  populated  indeed,
as  we  are  led  to  suppose  from  the  numerous  remains  of  great
buildings.  These  buildings,  though  now  in  ruins,  prove
that  the  valley  was  as  populous  as  the  natives  describe,  and
they  also  show  the  great  estimation  in  which  the  Kings
Yncas  held  this  place,  for  here  there  were  royal  palaces  and
other  buildings.  Time  and  wars  have  so  entirely  obliterated
them  that  nothing  can  be  seen  noAV  but  vast  numbers  of
great  tombs  of  those  dead  who  once  cultivated  all  the  fields
in  this  valley.  Two  more  days^  journey  beyond  Pocheos
bring  us  to  the  great  and  wide  valley  of  Piura,  where  two
or  three  rivers  unite,  which  is  the  reason  why  this  valley  is
so  broad.  In  it  is  built  the  city  of  San  Miguel.  Although  this
city  is  now  held  in  little  estimation,  the  rejjartimientos  being
small  and  poor,  it  is  just  to  remember  that  it  deserves
privileges  and  honour,  because  it  was  the  beginning  of  all  the
cities  that  have  since  been  built,  and  is  on  the  site  selected
by  the  brave   Spaniards,  before  the  great  lord  Atahualpa


214  THE    TRAVELS    OF

was  seized  by  them.  At  first  the  city  was  founded  on  the
site  called  Tangarara^  which  was  abandoned  on  account  of
its  unhealthiness.  It  is  now  built  between  two  very  plea-
sant level  valleys,  full  of  trees.  It  is  said  to  be  rather
unhealthy,  and  the  people  suffer  in  their  eyes  from  the
wind  and  dust  of  summer  and  the  dampness  of  winter.
They  say  that  it  never  rains  in  this  district,  but  some
dew  falls  from  heaven,  and,  at  intervals  of  a  few  years,
a  heavy  shower  of  rain  comes  down.  The  valley  is  like
that  of  Tumbez,  and  there  are  many  vines,  figs,  and  other
trees  of  Spain  growing  in  it.  This  city  of  San  Miguel  was
founded  by  the  Adelantado  Don  Francisco  Pizarro,  governor
of  Peru,  then  called  New  Castile,  in  the  name  of  his  Majesty,
and  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1531.

Before  going  any  further,  it  seems  well  that  I  should  say
what  I  have  learnt  in  the  matter  of  there  being  no  rain.
In  the  mountains  summer  commences  in  April,  and  lasts
during  May,  June,  July,  August,  and  September.  In  Oc-
tober winter  begins,  and  lasts  during  November,  December,
January,  February,  and  March,  so  that  there  is  little  dif-
ference in  the  seasons  between  this  land  and  our  Spain.
The  fields  are  ploughed  in  the  proper  seasons,  and  the  days
and  nights  are  almost  equal.  The  time  when  the  days
increase  a  little  and  are  longest,  is  during  the  month  of
November.  But  in  the  coast  valleys  bordering  on  the
South  Sea,  the  seasons  are  opposite  to  what  I  have  here
described;  for  when  it  is  summer  in  the  mountains  it  is
winter  on  the  coast,  where  we  begin  the  summer  in  October,
lasting  till  April,  and  then  the  winter  commences.  It  is
truly  a  strange  thing  to  consider  this  great  difference  in  the
same  country.  What  is  still  more  worthy  of  note  is,  that
you  may  start  in  the  morning  from  a  country  where  it  is
raining,  and,  before  vespers,  you  will  find  yourself  in  another
where  it  never  rains.     From  the  beg-innina:  of  October  it


*  PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  215

never  rains  in  any  of  the  coast  valleys,  except  in  such  small
showers  as  scarcely  to  lay  the  dust.  For  this  reason  the
inhabitants  are  dependent  upon  irrigation,  and  do  not
cultivate  more  land  than  what  the  rivers  can  irrigate,  for
everywhere  else  (by  reason  of  the  sterility)  not  even  a  blade
of  grass  will  grow,  but  all  is  an  intensely  dry,  stony,  or
sandy  waste,  where  nothing  is  seen  but  a  tree  with  few
leaves  and  no  fruit.  In  some  parts  there  are  thorn  bushes
and  cacti,  in  others  nothing  but  sand.  What  they  call
winter  on  the  coast  is  nothing  more  than  the  season  when
clouds  arise,  which  look  as  if  they  were  charged  with  plenty
of  rain,  but  nothing  comes  of  it  save  a  drizzle  so  light  that
it  barely  damps  the  ground.  It  is  a  strange  thing  that
though,  as  I  have  said,  the  heavens  are  well  charged  with
clouds,  yet  it  does  not  rain  more  than  these  slight  showers.
At  the  same  time,  some  days  pass  during  which  the  sun  is
not  seen,  being  concealed  by  the  thickness  of  the  clouds.
As  the  mountains  are  so  high,  and  the  coast  valleys  so  low,
it  would  appear  that  the  former  attract  the  clouds  to  them-
selves without  allowing  them  to  abide  in  the  low  lands.
And  when  it  is  the  natural  time  for  rain,  it  falls  in  the
mountains,  while  there  is  none  in  the  plains,  but,  on  the
contrary,  great  heat.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Kght  showers
fall  on  the  coast  when  the  region  of  the  mountains  is  clear
and  rainless.

There  is  another  curious  thing,  which  is  that  there  is
only  one  wind  on  this  coast,  and  that  is  from  the  south ;
and  although  the  wind  from  that  quarter  is  moist  and
attracts  rain  in  other  countries,  it  is  not  so  here,  and  this
wind  prevails  continually  along  the  coast  as  far  as  Tumbez.
Further  up  the  coast,  as  there  are  other  winds,  it  rains,  and
the  winds  are  accompanied  by  heavy  showers.  I  do  not
know  the  natural  reason  for  these  things,  but  it  is  clear  that
this  sterile  rainless  region  extends  from  4°  south  of  the
equinoctial  Hue  to  beyond  the  tropic  of  Capricorn.


216  THE    TRAVELS    OP

Another  thing,  very  worthy  of  note,  is,  that  on  the
equinoctial  line  in  some  parts  it  is  hot  and  moist,  and  in
others  cold  and  dry;  but  this  land  of  the  coast  of  Peru
is  hot  and  dry,  while  on  either  side  it  rains.  I  have  gathered
all  this  from  what  I  have  myself  seen,  and  he  who  can
assign  natural  reasons  for  these  things,  let  him  do  so.  As
for  me,  I  have  said  what  I  saw,  and  can  do  no  more.^


CHAPTER   LX.


Concerning  the  road  which  the  Yncas  ordered  to  be  made  along  these
coast  valleys,  with  buildings  and  depots  like  those  in  the  mountains ;
and  why  these  Indians  are  called  Yuncas.

That   my   writings   may   be   conducted   with   all   possible
regularity,  I  wish,  before  returning,  to  conclude  what  there

'  Nearly  all  travellers,  from  Cieza  de  Leon  downwards,  who  have  been
on  the  west  coast  of  South  America,  have  had  something  to  say  concern-
ing the  rainless  region  of  Peru:  but  "the  natural  reasons  for  these
things,"  for  which  our  author  asks,  are  given  in  the  most  agreeable  form
in  Captain  INIaury's  charming  book.  "  Though  the  Peruvian  shores  are
on  the  verge  of  the  great  South  Sea  boiler,  yet  it  never  rains  there.  The
reason  is  plain.  The  south-east  trade  winds  in  the  Atlantic  ocean  strike
the  water  on  the  coast  of  Africa.  They  blow  obliquely  across  the  ocean
until  they  reach  the  coast  of  Brazil.  By  tliis  time  they  are  heavily  laden
with  vapour,  which  they  continue  to  bear  along  across  the  continent,
depositing  it  as  they  go,  and  supplying  with  it  the  sources  of  the  Rio  de
la  Plata  and  the  southern  tributaries  of  the  Amazon.  Finally  they  reach
the  snow  capped  Andes,  and  here  is  -wrung  from  them  the  hist  jiarticle  of
moisture  that  the  very  low  temperature  can  extract.  Reaching  the
summit  of  that  range,  they  now  tumble  down  as  cool  and  dry  winds  on
the  Pacific  slopes  beyond.  ]\Ieeting  wdth  no  evaporating  surface,  and
with  no  temperature  colder  than  that  to  which  they  are  subjected  on  the
mountain  tops,  they  reach  the  ocean  before  they  again  become  charged
with  fresli  vapom-,  and  before,  therefore,  they  have  any  which  the  Peru-
vian climate  can  extract.  The  last  they  had  to  spare  was  deposited  as
snow  on  the  tops  of  the  Cordilleras,  to  feed  mountain  streams  under  the
heat  of  the  sun,  and  irrigate  the  valleys  on  the  western  slopes."  Physical
G'eocjraphi/  of  the  Sea,  para.  195.    See  also  Acosta's  way  of  accounting  for


TEDKO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  217

is  to  be  said  about  the  provinces  in  the  mountains,  and
to  relate  what  is  worthy  of  remark  on  the  coast,  which,  as
I  have  said  in  other  parts,  is  important.  In  this  place  I
will  give  an  account  of  the  grand  road  which  the  Yncas
ordered  to  be  made  along  the  coast  valleys,  which,  although
now  it  is  in  ruins  in  many  places,  still  shows  how  grand  a
work  it  once  was,  and  how  great  was  the  power  of  those
who  ordered  it  to  be  made.

Huayna  Ccapac,  and  Tupac  Ynca  Yupauqui,  his  father,
were  those  who,  according  to  the  Indians,  descended  to  the
coast  and  visited  all  the  valleys  and  provinces  of  the  Yuncas,
although  some  say  that  Ynca  Yupanqui,  the  grandfather  of
Huayna  Ccapac  and  father  of  Tupac  Ynca,  was  the  first
who  saw  the  coast  and  traversed  its  deserts.  The  Caciques
and  officers,  by  order  of  the  Yncas,  made  a  road  fifteen
feet  wide  through  these  coast  valleys,  with  a  strong  wall
on  each  side.  The  whole  space  of  this  road  was  smooth
and  shaded  by  trees.  These  trees,  in  many  places,  spread
their  branches  laden  with  fruit  over  the  road,  and  many
birds  fluttered  amongst  the  leaves.  In  every  valley  there
was  a  principal  station  for  the  Yncas,  with  depots  of  pro-
visions for  the  troops.  If  anything  was  not  ready,  a  severe
punishment  was  inflicted,  and  if  any  of  those  whose  duty  it
was  to  traverse  the  road,  entered  the  fields  or  dwellings
of  the  Indians,  although  the  damage  they  did  was  small,
they  were  ordered  to  be  put  to  death.  The  walls  on  each
side  extended  from  one  place  to  another,  except  where  the
sand  drifted  so  high  that  the  Indians  could  not  pave  the
road  with  cemeut,  when  huge  posts,  hke  beams,  were  driven
in  at  regular  intervals  to  point  out  the  way.  Care  was
taken  to  keep  the  road  clean,  to  renew  any  part  of  the  walls
that  was  out  of  repair,  and  to  replace  any  of  the  posts
which   might    be    displaced   by   the  Avind   in    the    deserts.

the  absence  of  rain  on  the  Peruvian  coast,  in  Ms  Historla  jVcUural  y  Moral
de  las  Indias^  a.d.  1608,  lib.  iii,  cap.  23.


218  THE    TRAVELS    OF

This  coast  road  was  certainly  a  great  work,  though  not  so
difficult  as  that  over  the  mountains.^  There  were  some
fortresses  and  temples  of  the  sun,  which  I  shall  mention  in
their  proper  places.  As,  in  many  parts  of  the  work,  I  shall
have  to  use  the  words  Ynca  and  Ytinca,  I  will  satisfy  the
reader  as  to  the  meaning  of  Yiinca,  as  I  have  already  done
with  regard  to  Ynca.  He  vdll  understand,  then,  that  the
towns  and  provinces  of  Peru  are  situated  in  the  manner  I
have  already  described,  many  of  them  in  the  openings
formed  by  the  snowy  mountains  of  the  Andes.

All  those  who  hve  in  these  mountains  are  called  8erranos,
and  those  who  inhabit  the  coast  are  called  Yuncas ;  and  in
many  parts  of  the  mountains  where  the  rivers  flow,  as  the
mountains  are  very  high,  the  plains  are  sheltered  and  warm,
and  in  some  of  them  there  is  as  much  heat  as  there  is  on
the  coast.  The  inhabitants  who  live  in  these  warm  valleys
and  plains,  although  they  are  strictly  in  the  mountains,  are
also  called  Yuncas.  Throughout  Peru,  when  they  speak  of
these  warm  and  sheltered  places  between  the  mountains,
they  call  them  Yuncas,  and  the  inhabitants  have  no  other
name,  though  they  may  have  in  their  own  districts.  Thus,
those  who  live  in  the  parts  already  mentioned,  and  all  who
live  in  the  coast  valleys  of  Peru,  are  called  Yuncas,  because
they  live  in  a  warm  land.

>  Zarate  thus  describes  this  coast  road  of  the  Yncas.  "  Tlirough  all
the  valleys  of  the  coast  which  are  refreshed  by  rivers  and  trees  (which
are  generally  about  a  league  in  breadth)  they  made  a  road  almost
forty  feet  broad,  with  very  thick  embankments  on  either  side.  After
leaving  the  valleys  the  same  road  was  continued  over  the  sandy  deserts,
posts  being  driven  in  and  fastened  by  cords,  so  that  the  traveller  might
not  lose  his  way,  neither  turning  to  one  side  nor  to  the  other.  Tlie  road,
like  that  in  the  Sierra,  is  five  hundred  leagues  long.  Although  the  posts
in  the  desert  are  now  broken  in  many  parts,  because  the  Spaniards,  both
in  time  of  war  and  peace,  used  them  for  lighting  fires,  yet  the  embank-
ments in  tlie  valleys  are  still  for  the  most  part  entire."  Hlstoria  del  Peru.,
lib.  i,  caj).  X.  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega^  in  his  account  of  the  Ynca  roads,
merely  coi)ies  from  Zarate  and  Cieza  de  Leon  (i,  lib.  ix,  cap.  U?).  See
also  Gomara  (cap.  194).


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  219


CHAPTER    LXI.

How  these  Yuncas  -were  very  superstitious,  and  how  they  were  divided
into  nations  and  lineages.

Before  I  proceed  to  describe  the  valleys  of  the  coast,  and
the  founding  of  the  three  cities,  of  the  Kings,  of  Truxillo,
and  of  Arequipa,  I  will  here  recount  a  few  things,  that  I
may  not  have  to  repeat  them  over  again,  both  those  I  saw
myself,  and  those  which  I  learned  from  Fray  Domingo  de
Santo  Tomas.  This  friar  is  one  of  those  who  understand
the  language  well,  and  he  has  been  a  long  time  among  the
Indians,  teaching  them  the  truths  of  our  holy  catholic
faith.  Thus,  my  account  of  these  coast  valleys  will  be
founded  on  what  I  saw  and  learned  when  I  travelled
through  them  myself,  and  on  the  information  given  me  by
Fray  Domingo.^

The  native  lords  of  these  valleys  were,  in  ancient  times,
feared  and  obeyed  by  their  subjects,  who  served  them  with
much  ceremony,  according  to  their  usage.  These  lords
were  attended  by  buffoons  and  dancers,  who  were  always
jesting,  while  others  played  and  sang.  They  had  many
wives,  taking  care  that  they  should  be  the  prettiest  that
could  be  found.  Each  lord  had  a  great  building  in  his
valley,  with  many  adobe  pillars,  extensive  terraces,  and
doorways  hung  with  matting.  Round  the  building  there
was  an  open  space  where  they  had  their  dances.  When
the  lord  ate,  a  great  concourse  of  people  assembled,  and
drank  their  beverage  made  from  maize  or  from  roots.

In  these  buildings  there  were  porters,,  whose  duty  it  was
to  guard  the  doors  and  see  who  entered  or  came  out.  All
were  clothed  in  cotton  shirts  and  long  mantles,  the  women
as  well  as  the  men,  except  that  the  dress  of  the  women  was

•  Fray  Domingo  de  Santo  Tomas  was  the  author  of  the  first  Quichua
grammar,  which  was  printed  at  Yalladohd  in  1660,  with  a  vocabulary.


220  THE    TKAVELS    OF

large  and  broad  like  a  morning  gown,  with  openings  at  the
sides  for  the  arms.  Some  of  the  lords  waged  war  upon
each  other,  and  in  some  parts  the  people  were  never  able
to  learn  the  language  of  Cuzco.  Although  there  were
three  or  four  tribes  of  these  Yuncas,  they  all  had  the  same
rites  and  customs.  They  spent  many  days  and  nights  at
their  banquets  and  drinking  bouts ;  and  certainly  it  is
marvellous  the  quantity  of  chicha  that  these  Indians  drink,
indeed  the  glass  is  scarcely  ever  out  of  their  hands.  They
used  to  receive  the  Spaniards  with  great  hospitality  when
they  passed  near  their  dwellings,  and  to  treat  them  honour-
ably. Now  they  do  not  do  so,  because,  when  the  Spaniards
broke  the  peace,  and  contended  with  each  other  in  civil
wars,  they  were  detested  by  the  Indians  on  account  of  the
cruel  way  in  which  they  treated  them,  and  also  because
some  of  the  governors  have  been  guilty  of  such  meanness,
that  the  Indians  no  longer  treat  those  well  who  pass  near
their  dwellings,  pretending  to  think  that  those  are  servants
whom  they  used  to  treat  as  lords.  The  fault  lies  in  those
who  have  been  sent  here  to  govern,  some  of  whom  have
considered  that  the  old  order  of  things  was  bad,  and  that
it  was  wrong  to  keep  the  natives  under  their  ancient  polity,
which,  if  it  had  been  preserved,  would  neither  have  destroyed
their  hberties,  nor  failed  to  bring  them  nearer  to  the  way
of  good  hving  and  conversion ;  for  it  appears  to  me  that
few  nations  in  the  world  had  a  better  government  than
these  Yncas.  I  approve  of  nothing  in  the  present  rule,  but
rather  deplore  the  extortion,  cruel  treatment,  and  violent
deaths  with  which  the  Spaniards  have  visited  these  Indians,
without  considering  the  nobility  and  great  virtue  of  their
nation.

Nearly  all  the  rest  of  these  valleys  are  now  almost
deserted,  having  once  been  so  densely  peopled,  as  is  well
known  to  many  persons.


PEDRO    ])K    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  221


CHAPTER    LXII.


How  the  Indians  of  these  valleys  and  of  other  pai'ts  of  tlic  conntiy
believe  that  souls  leave  the  bodies,  and  do  not  die  :  and  why  tliey
desired  their  wives  to  be  buried  with  them.

Many  times  in  tliis  history  I  have  said  that,  in  the  greater
part  of  the  kingdom  of  Peru,  it  is  a  custom  much  used  and
observed  by  all  the  Indians  to  inter,  with  their  dead,  all
their  precious  things,  and  some  of  the  most  beautiful  and
best-beloved  of  their  wives.  It  appears  that  this  custom
was  observed  in  other  parts  of  the  Indies,  from  which  it
may  be  inferred  that  the  devil  manages  to  deceive  one  set
of  people  in  the  same  way  as  he  does  another.  I  was  in
Genu,  which  falls  within  the  province  of  Carthagena,  in  the
year  1535,  when  so  vast  a  quantity  of  burial  places  were
found  on  a  level  plain,  near  a  temple  raised  in  honour  of  the
accursed  devil,  that  it  was  a  thing  worthy  of  admiration.
Some  of  them  were  so  ancient,  that  there  were  tall  trees
growing  on  them,  and  they  got  more  than  a  milhon  from
these  sepulchres,  besides  what  the  Indians  took,  and  what
was  lost  in  the  ground.  In  other  parts  great  treasure  has
been,  and  is  every  day,  found  in  the  tombs.  It  is  not  many
years  since  Juan  de  la  Torre,  who  was  Gonzalo  Pizarro^s
captain  in  the  valley  of  Yea,  which  -is  one  of  the  Peruvian
coast  valleys,  found  one  of  these  tombs,  from  which  those
who  entered  it  affirm  that  he  took  more  than  50,000  dollars.^

•  Juan  de  la  Torre  was  one  of  the  famous  thirteen  who  crossed  the  Une
which  Pizarro  clrew  on  the  sandy  sliore  of  the  isle  of  Gallo,  and  re-
solved to  face  any  hardsliips  rather  than  abandon  the  enterprise.  He
afterwards  became  a  staunch  adlierent  of  Pizarro's  younger  brother  Gon-
zalo, to  whom  he  deserted,  when  serving  under  the  ill-fated  Blasco  Xufiez
de  Vela,  and  he  carried  liis  ferocious  enmity  to  the  viceroy  so  far  as  to
insult  the  dead  body,  and,  pulUng  the  hairs  out  of  the  beard,  to  stick
them  in  his  hat  band.  He  married  the  daughter  of  an  Indian  chief  in  the
province  of  Puerto  Yiejo,  and  gained  so  much  influence  among  the  followers
of  his  father-in-law  that  they  revealed  to  hkn  a  tomb  containing,  as  Cieza


222  THE    TRAVELS    OF

The  custom  of  these  Indians,  in  ordering  magnificent  and
lofty  tombs  to  be  made,  adorned  with  tiles  and  vaulted
roofs,  and  in  burying  with  the  dead  all  his  goods,  his  wives,
great  store  of  victuals,  and  no  small  quantity  of  cliicha  (or
wine  used  by  them),  with  their  arms  and  ornaments,  leads
us  to  believe  that  they  had  some  knowledge  of  the  im-
mortality of  the  soul,  and  of  there  being  more  in  man  than
his  mortal  body.  Deceived  by  the  devil,  they  obey  his
commands,  and  he  (according  to  their  own  account)  gives
them  to  understand  that,  after  death,  they  will  be  brought
to  life  in  another  place  which  is  prepared  for  them,  where
they  wiU  eat  and  drink  at  their  pleasure,  as  they  did  before
they  died.  In  order  that  they  may  believe  that  what  he
tells  them  is  true,  and  not  false  and  deceitful,  he  sometimes,
when  the  will  of  God  is  served  by  giving  him  the  power
and  permitting  it,  takes  the  form  of  some  one  of  the  dead
chiefs,  and,  showing  himself  in  the  chief's  proper  shape  and
figure,  such  as  he  had  when  in  this  world,  gives  them  to
understand  that  the  said  chief  is  in  another  pleasant  world
in  the  form  in  which  they  there  see  him.     Owing  to  these

de  Leon  says,  more  than  fifty  thousand  dollars  worth  of  gold  and  emeralds.
Thus  enriched,  he  meditated  a  retreat  to  Spain,  where  he  might  enjoy  his
wealth,  but  the  fear  of  punislmient  for  liis  treason  to  the  viceroy,  and
other  considerations,  deterred  him.  He  first  proposed  to  Vela  Xuiiez,
the  viceroy's  brother,  that  they  shovild  seize  a  ship  and  escape  from  Peru ;
and,  afterwards,  hearmg  a  false  report  that  Gonzalo  Pizarro  had  been
appointed  governor  by  the  king,  he  changed  liis  mind  in  the  hope  of
receiving  great  favours  from  his  old  commander.  But  Vela  Nuuez  knew
of  his  earlier  project  to  desert,  so,  mindful  of  the  adage  that  "  dead
men  tell  no  tales,"  La  Torre  invented  such  a  story  against  the  vice-
roy's brother  as  induced  Gonzalo  to  cut  off  his  head.  The  villain  was
appointed  captain  of  arquebusiers  in  the  army  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  and
acted  a  conspicuous  and  cruel  part  in  the  subsequent  war  down  to  the
final  overthrow  of  Gonzalo  by  Pedro  de  la  Gasca  in  1548.  Then  at  last
he  received  a  reward  more  in  accordance  v.-ith  his  deserts.  After  liiding
for  four  months  in  an  Indian's  hut  near  Cuzco,  he  was  at  last  accidentally
found  out  l)y  a  Spaniard,  and  met  the  fate  whicli  lie  so  riclily  deserved.
lie  was  hung  ]iy  order  of  La  (rasc-a.


PEDRO    UE    CTKZA    DE    LEON.  223

sayings  and  illusions  of  tlio  devil,  certain  of  these  Indians,
holding  all  these  false  appearances  to  be  realities,  take  more
pains  in  adorning  their  sepulchres  or  tombs  than  in  any-
other  thing.

When  a  ctief  dies,  they  bury  him  with  his  treasure;  and
his  wives,  youths,  and  persons  with  whom  he  had  much
friendship  when  alive,  are  also  buried.  From  what  I  have
said,  it  seems  that  it  was  the  general  opinion  of  all  these
Indians  Yuncas,  and  even  of  those  in  the  territory  of  this
kingdom  of  Peru,  that  the  souls  of  the  dead  did  not  die,
but  lived  for  ever,  and  that  they  would  all  meet  each  other,
and  eat  and  drink,  which  is  their  chief  delight.

Holding  these  opinions  for  certain,  they  buried  with  dead
men  their  most  beloved  wives  and  most  trusted  servants,
together  with  all  their  arms,  treasures,  plmnes,  and  other
personal  ornaments.  Many  of  the  companions  of  a  dead
chief,  for  whom  there  was  no  room  in  the  tomb,  would  make
holes  in  the  fields  belonging  to  him,  or  in  the  places  where
he  used  generally  to  hold  festivals,  and  there  be  buried,
thinking  that  his  soul  would  pass  by  these  places  and  take
them  in  his  company  to  do  him  service.  And  some  of  the
women,  in  order  that  their  faithful  service  might  be  held  in
more  esteem,  finding  that  there  was  delay  in  completing  the
tomb,  would  hang  themselves  up  by  their  own  hair,  and  so
kill  themselves.

We  believe  that  all  these  things  are  done,  because  the
accounts  of  the  Indians  concerning  them  are  confirmed  by
the  contents  of  the  tombs,  and  because,  in  many  parts,  the
Indians  believe  in  and  retain  their  accursed  customs.  I
recollect,  when  I  was  in  the  government  of  Carthagena,
more  than  twelve  or  thirteen  years  ago,  the  hcentiate  Juan
de  Vadillo  being  then  governor  and  judge,  that  a  boy  came
from  a  village  called  Pirina,  and  fled  to  the  place  where
Vadillo  then  was,  because  they  wanted  to  bury  him  ahve
with  the  chief  of  the  village,  who  died  at  that  time.


224  THE    TRAVELS    OF

Alaya^  who  was  lord  of  the  greater  part  of  the  valley  of
Xauxa,  died  about  two  years  ago,  and  they  say  that  a  great
number  of  women  and  servants  were  buried  alive  with  him.
If  I  am  not  deceived,  they  told  this  to  the  president  Grasca,
and  though  he  gave  the  other  chiefs  to  understand  that
they  had  committed  a  great  sin,  his  discourse  was  without
fruit.

All  over  Peru  they  call  the  devil  Snjjay}  I  have  heard
that  he  has  been  seen  by  them  many  times.  They  even
affirm  that  in  the  valley  of  Lile  he  entered  the  bodies
stuffed  with  cinders  that  are  there,  saying  many  things  to
the  people.

Friar  Domingo,  who  is  (as  I  have  already  said)  a  notable
searcher  into  these  secrets,  relates  that  when  a  certain  person
was  sent  to  call  Don  PauUu,^  the  son  of  Huayna  Ccapac,
whom  the  people  received  as  Ynca,  he  heard  a  servant  say
that,  near  the  fortress  of  Cuzco,  there  were  loud  voices  crying
with  a  great  noise,  "Why,  0  Ynca,  dost  thou  not  observe
the  customs  that  thou  art  bound  to  observe.    Eat  and  drink,

•  Supay  is  the  Quichua  word  for  the  evil  spirit  in  which  the  ancient
Peruvians  beheved.

2  Paullu  was  a  son  of  the  great  Ynca  Huayna  Ccapac.  lie  escaped
from  his  half-brother  Atahualpa,  when  many  of  the  royal  family  were
killed  by  that  usurper,  and,  soon  after  the  arrival  of  the  Spaniards,  was
baptized  under  the  name  of  Clu-istoval.  He  accompanied  Almagroin  his
expedition  to  Chile,  and  his  services  on  that  occasion  were  of  the  utmost
importance  to  the  Spaniards.  While  in  Chile  he  received  tidings  from
his  brother  ]\Ianco  of  his  resolution  to  rise  in  arms  and  expel  the  invaders;
but  Paullu  deemed  it  most  prudent  to  dissimulate  until  the  expedition,
in  which  he  was  serving,  returned  to  Peru.  He  afterwards  lived  for
many  years  at  Cuzco,  in  the  palace  built  by  Manco  Ccapac,  the  founder
of  liis  house,  on  a  hill  called  the  Colcampata.  The  ruins  of  this  edifice
are  still  very  perfect.  After  the  death  of  his  brother  IManco,  Paullu  was
looked  upon  by  the  Indians  as  their  legitimate  Ynca.  His  son,  named
Carlos,  was  a  schoolfellow  of  the  historian  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  and
afterwards  married  a  Spanish  lady  whose  parents  were  settled  at  Cuzco ;
and  his  gi-andi-on  Don  IMolchior  Carlos  Ynca  went  to  Spain  in  1602,  and
became  a  knight  of  Santiago.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  225

for  soon  thou  must  cease  .to  eat  and  drink."  These  voices
were  heard  by  him  who  was  sent  to  Don  PauUu,  during  five
or  six  nights.  Such  are  the  wiles  of  the  devil,  and  the  nooses
with  which  he  arms  himself,  to  catch  the  souls  of  those  who
esteem  sorcerers  so  highly.

All   the   chiefs  and  Indians  of  the   coast   valleys   have
peculiar  head-dresses,  by  which  one  tribe  is  known  from

another ^    In  our  time  they  are  abandoning  their  old

rites,  and  the  devil  has  neither  influence,  nor  temple,  nor
public  oracle  among  them,  for  they  are  finding  out  his
deceitfulness ;  so  that  they  are  not  now  so  bad  as  they  were
before  they  heard  the  word  of  the  holy  gospel.  But  this
will  not  avail  if  the  grace  of  God  does  not  lessen  their
eating,  drinking,  and  lasciviousness,  in  which  they  are
engaged  day  and  night  without  tiring.


CHAPTER    LXIII.


How  they  buried  their  dead,  and  how  they  moiu-ned  for  them,  at  the
performance  of  their  obsequies.

In  the  previous  chapter  I  recounted  all  there  is  to  be  said
concerning  the  belief  of  these  Indians  in  the  immortality  of
the  soul,  and  what  the  enemy  of  the  human  race  makes
them  think  concerning  it.  It  now  seems  good  to  me  that
in  this  place  I  should  give  some  account  of  their  mode  of
burying  their  dead.

In  this  there  are  great  difiereuces,  for  in  some  parts  they
make  holes,  in  others  they  place  their  dead  on  heights,  in
others  on  level  ground,  and  each  nation  seeks  some  new
way  of  making  tombs.  Certain  it  is  that,  though  I  have
made  many  inquiries,  and  talked  with  learned  and  curious

'  Unfit  for  translation.


22b  THE    TRAVELS    OF

men,  I  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  the  origin  of  these
Indians,  nor  of  their  customs.

These  Indians,  then,  have  various  ways  of  constructing
their  tombs.  In  the  Collao^  (as  I  shall  relate  in  its  place)
they  make  them  in  the  cultivated  land  in  the  form  of
towers,  some  large  and  others  small,  and  some  built  with
great  skill.  These  towers  have  their  doors  opening  towards
the  rising  sun,  and  near  them  (as  I  will  also  relate  pre-
sently) they  were  accustomed  to  make  sacrifices  and  to
burn  certain  things,  sprinkling  the  towers  with  the  blood  of
lambs  and  of  other  animals.

In  the  district  round  Cuzco  they  bury  their  dead  in  a
sitting  posture,  on  cei'tain  seats  called  diihos,  dressed  and
adorned  with  their  most  precious  ornaments.^

^  The  Collao  Ls  the  great  plateau  of  the  Andes,  including  the  basin  of
lake  Titicaca,  between  two  chains,  the  maritime  cordillera,  and  the  east-
ern range,  out  of  which  rise  the  lofty  peaks  of  Illunani  and  Yllampu
(Sorata).

2  The  obsequies  of  the  Yncas  at  Cuzco  were  celebrated  with  great
pomp.  The  bodies  were  embahned  with  such  extraordinary  skill  that  they
appeared  to  be  alive,  and  were  seated  on  thrones  within  the  great  temple
of  the  sun.  The  bowels  were  deposited  in  golden  vases,  and  preserved  in
a  temple  at  Tanipu  (twelve  miles  from  the  capital)  ;  just  as  the  Emperors
of  Austria  have  their  bodies  biu-ied  in  one  church  at  Vienna,  their  hearts
kept  in  silver  pots  in  another,  and  their  bowels  deposited  in  St.  Stephen's.
The  corregidor  Polo  de  Ondegardo  found  five  bodies  of  Yncas  at  Cuzco,
three  of  men  and  two  of  women,  said  to  have  been  those  of  the  Ynca
Huira-ccocha,  with  hair  white  as  snow,  of  the  great  Tupac  Ynca  Yupan-
(jui,  of  Huayna  Ccapac,  of  Huira-ccocha's  queen  Mama  Runtu,  and  of
Ccoya  Mama  OcUo,  the  mother  of  Huayna  Ccapac.  These  bodies  were
so  well  preserved  that  all  the  haii",  eyebrows,  and  even  eyelashes  re-
mained intact.  They  were  dressed  in  royal  robes,  with  the  Umotii,  or  royal
fringe  round  their  foreheads.  They  seem  to  have  excited  much  curiosity,
were  conveyed  by  order  of  the  viceroy  INIarquis  of  Canete  to  Lima,  and
finally  buried  in  the  coiu-tyard  of  the  hospital  of  San  Andres  in  that  city.

The  chiefs  were  buried  in  tombs  of  stone  masonry  on  the  mountain
heiglits  round  Cuzco.  A  very  peculiar  kind  of  maize  is  often  found  in
the  tombs,  now  little  cultivated,  called  Zea  rostraia.  The  bodies,  which
are  in  a  squatting  i)osture  with  the  knees  forced  up  to  the  head,  are  found
enveloped  in  many  folds  of  cloth,  over  which  is  placed  a  mat  of  reeds,


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  227

In  the  province  of  Xauxa,  which  is  a  very  important  part
of  these  kingdoms  of  Peru,  they  sew  their  dead  up  in  fresh
sheep  skins,  with  the  face  exposed,  and  thus  they  are  kept
in  their  own  houses.  The  bodies  of  chiefs  and  principal
men  are,  at  certain  seasons  of  the  year,  taken  out  by  their
sons,  and  carried  to  the  cultivated  fields  and  homesteads  in
a  litter  with  great  ceremony,  and  sacrifices  of  sheep  and
lambs,  and  even  of  women  and  boys,  are  offered  up.  When
the  archbishop  Don  Hieronymo  de  Loaysa^  heard  of  this,
he  sent  strict  orders  to  the  Indians  of  the  district,  and  to
the  clergy  who  were  there  teaching  the  doctrine  of  the
church,  that  all  the  bodies  were  to  be  immediately  buried.

In  many  other  provinces,  through  Avhich  I  have  passed,
they  bury  their  dead  in  very  deep  holes,  while  in  others,  as

secured  by  a  strong  net.  The  covering  next  the  body  is  generally  of  fine
cotton  ;  round  the  neck  there  is  almost  invariably  a  small  household  god,
called  Co7iopa  in  Quichua,  made  of  clay,  stone,  silver,  or  gold  ;  and  a
piece  of  copper,  gold,  or  silver  is  often  found  in  the  mouth.  The  hair  is,
in  most  instances,  well  preserved,  but  the  skin  is  withered  up.  None  of
the  thousands  of  bodies  that  have  been  examined,  show  any  signs  of
having  been  embalmed.  It  seems  clear  that  tliis  operation  was  only  re-
sorted to  in  the  case  of  the  Yncas  themselves.  G.  de  la  Vega;  Rivero,
Antiq.  Per. ;  Personal  Observation.

'  Fray  Geronimo  Loayza  was  appointed  bishop  of  Lima  in  1540,  and  was
the  first  archbishop  from  1548  to  1575.  When  Gonzalo  Pizarro  rebelled,
he  sent  the  archbisliop  as  his  envoy  to  Spain,  but,  meeting  La  Gasca
at  Panama  on  his  way,  that  prelate  returned  with  him,  and  accompanied
him  tlu-oughout  the  campaign,  which  ended  in  the  overthrow  of  Gonzalo
Pizarro  in  1548.  This  Friar  Loayza  was  a  cruel  fanatic.  The  inquisition
was  not  introduced  into  Peru  until  1569,  but  the  archbishoiJ  had  pre-
viously held  tlu'ee  autos  clefe  at  Luna  on  his  own  account,  at  one  of  which
John  IMillar,  a  Fleming,  was  burnt  as  a  Lutheran  heretic.  The  first
auto  defe  held  by  the  inquisition  at  Lima  took  place  in  1573,  two  years
before  the  death  of  Loayza,  when  a  Frenclmian  was  burnt  as  a  heretic.
Loayza  presided  over  two  provincial  comicils,  one  in  1552  and  the  other
in  1567.  There  have  been  twenty-two  archbishops  of  Lima  since  the
death  of  Loayza.  The  present  one,  Dr.  Don  Sebastian  de  Goyeneche,
who  succeeded  in  I860,  is  probably  the  oldest  bishop  in  Clu-istendom,
having  been  consecrated  bishop  of  Arequipa  in  1817,  and  is  also  one  of
the  richest  men  in  South  America.    He  is  now  seventy-nine  years  of  age.

q2


228  THE    TRAVELS    OF

those  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  city  of  Antioquia,  they
pile  up  such  masses  of  earth  in  making  their  tombs,  that
they  look  like  small  hills.  A  door  is  left  through  which
they  pass  in  the  body,  the  live  women,  and  all  the  things
that  are  buried  with  it.  In  Genu  many  of  the  tombs  are
level  and  large,  with  courtyards,  and  others  are  like  rocks
or  small  hills.

In  the  province  of  Chincha,  which  is  one  of  the  coast
valleys  of  Peru,  they  bury  their  dead  on  beds  made  of  canes.'
In  another  of  these  valleys,  called  Runa-huanac,~  they  bury
their  dead  sitting.  These  Indians  also  differ  in  the  way
they  inter  the  bodies,  some  of  them  putting  them  feet  first,
and  others  in  a  sitting  posture.

The  Indians  of  many  of  these  coast  valleys  have  great
walls  made,  where  the  rocks  and  barren  mountains  com-
mence, in  the  way  from  the  valleys  to  the  Sierra.  In  these
places  each  family  has  its  established  place  for  burying  its
dead,  where  they  dig  great  holes  and  excavations,  with
closed  doors  before  them.  It  is  certainly  a  marvellous
thing  to  see  the  great  quantity  of  dead  bodies  that  there  are
in  these  sandy  and  barren  mountains,  with  their  clothes
now  worn  out  and  mouldering  away  with  time.  They  call
these   places,  which   they  hold   to   be    sacred,    Huaca,^   a

'  The  nation  of  the  Chinchas,  and  others  on  the  coast,  bnried  their
dead  on  the  surface  of  the  ground,  covered  with  a  light  coat  of  sand,  so
tliat  the  place  is  only  indicated  by  a  very  slight  inequality.    Rivero,  p.  199.

'  Now  corrupted  into  Luna-huana ;  near  the  rich  sugar  estates  of
Canete,  between  Lima  and  Pisco.

'  Iluaca  is  a  word  of  many  significations  in  Quichua  {e.g.^  idol,  temple,
sacred  place,  tomb,  figures  of  men,  anunals,  etc.,  hill),  but  its  most  ordi-
nary meaning  is  a  tomb.  Cieza  de  Leon  probably  calls  it  a  "  mournful
name,"  partly  from  its  being  the  word  for  a  tomb,  and  partly  from  his
having  confused  it  -with  the  nearly  similar  word  huaccani^  "  I  mourn."
The  mummy  or  dead  body  was  called  malqui.  There  were  holes  in  the
tombs,  leading  from  the  exterior  sides  to  the  vases  placed  round  the
bodies,  through  which  the  Indians  poured  liquor,  on  the  days  when  festi-
vals were  held  in  honour  of  the  malquis.     Rivero.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  229

mournful  name.  Many  have  been  opened,  and  the  Span-
iards, when  they  conquered  the  country,  found  a  great
quantity  of  gold  and  silver  in  them.  In  these  valleys  the
custom  is  very  general  of  burying  precious  things  with  the
dead,  as  well  as  many  women  and  the  most  confidential
servants  possessed  by  the  chief  when  alive.  In  former
times  they  used  to  open  the  tombs,  and  renew  the  clothes
and  food  which  were  placed  in  them  ;  and  when  a  chief  died
the  principal  people  of  the  valley  assembled,  and  made  great
lamentations.  Many  women  cut  off  their  hair  until  none
was  left,  and  came  forth  with  drums  and  flutes,  making
mournful  sounds,  and  singing  in  those  places  where  the
dead  chief  used  to  make  merry,  so  as  to  make  the  hearers
weep.  Having  made  their  lamentations,  they  offered  up  more
sacrifices,  and  had  superstitious  communion  with  the  devil.
Having  done  this,  and  killed  some  of  the  women,  they  put
them  in  the  tomb,  with  the  treasure  and  no  small  quantity
of  food ;  holding  it  for  certain  that  they  would  go  to  that
country  concerning  which  the  devil  had  told  them.  They
had,  and  still  have,  the  custom  of  mourning  for  the  dead
before  the  body  is  placed  in  the  tomb,  during  four,  five,  or
six  days,  or  ten,  according  to  the  importance  of  the  deceased,
for  the  greater  the  lord  the  more  honour  do  they  show  him,
lamenting  with  much  sighing  and  groaning,  and  playing
sad  music.  They  also  repeat  all  that  the  dead  man  had
done  while  living,  in  their  songs ;  and  if  he  was  valiant  they
recount  his  deeds  in  the  midst  of  their  lamentations.  When
they  put  the  body  into  the  tomb,  they  burn  some  ornaments
and  cloths  near  it,  and  put  others  with  the  body.

Many  of  these  ceremonies  are  now  given  up,  because
God  no  longer  permits  it,  and  because  by  degrees  these
people  are  finding  out  the  errors  of  their  fathers,  and  how
little  these  vain  pomps  and  honours  serve  them.  They  are
learning  that  it  suffices  to  inter  the  bodies  in  common
graves,  as  Christians  are  interred,  without  taking  anything


230  THE    TRAVELS    OP

with  them  other  than  good  works.  In  truth^  all  other  things
but  serve  to  please  the  devil,  and  to  send  the  soul  down  to
hell  more  heavily  weighted.  Nevertheless,  most  of  the  old
chiefs  order  that  their  bodies  are  to  be  buried  in  the  manner
above  described,  in  secret  and  hidden  places,  that  they  may
not  be  seen  by  the  Christians ;  and  that  they  do  this  is
known  to  us  from  the  talk  of  the  younger  men.


CHAPTER    LXIV.


CHAPTER    LXV.

How  tlicy  have  a  custom  of  naming  children,  in  most  of  these  provinces,
and  how  they  sought  after  sorceries  and  charms.

One  thing  that  I  observed  during  the  time  that  I  was  in
these  kingdoms  of  Peru  was,  that  they  are  accustomed  to
name  their  children,  in  most  of  the  provinces,  when  they  are
fifteen  or  twenty  days  old.  This  name  is  retained  until
they  are  ton  or  twelve  years  old,  when  they  receive  another,
the  relations  and  friends  of  the  father  having  previously
been  assembled  on  a  certain  day  which  is  set  apart  for  such
purposes.  They  dance  and  drink  according  to  their  usual
custom,  and  then  one  of  them,  who  is  the  oldest  and  most
respected,  cuts  the  hair  and  nails  of  the  boy  or  girl  who
receives  the  new  name.  The  hair  and  nails  arc  preserved
with  great  care.  The  names  which  they  receive  are  those
of  villages,  birds,  plants,  or  fish.-

'  This  chapter  is  unfit  for  translation.

2  'riu'  children  were  weaned  at  two  years  of  age,  when  their  heads  were


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  231

1  learnt  these  particulars  because  an  Indian  servant  whom
I  employed  was  called  Urco,^  which  means  sheep ;  another
was  called  Llama,  also  a  name  for  sheep ;  and  another
P'lscu,  which  means  a  bird.  Some  of  the  Indians  are  care-
ful to  retain  the  names  of  their  fathers  and  grandfathers.
The  chiefs  and  principal  men  seek  out  names  according  to
their  pleasure.  For  Atahualita  (the  Ynca  whom  the  Span-
iards captured  in  the  province  of  Caxamarca)  means  "  a
fowl,"  and  his  father  was  called  Htiaijita  Gcapac,  which
signifies  "a  rich  youth." -

shaved,  and  they  received  a  name.  On  these  occasions  all  the  relations
assembled,  and  one  was  selected  as  godfather,  who  cut  off  the  first  lock  of
hair  with  an  instrument  made  of  stone.  Each  relation  followed,  accord-
ing to  his  age  or  rank,  and  cut  off  a  few  hairs.  The  name  was  then  given,
and  the  relations  presented  gifts,  such  as  cloth,  llamas,  arms,  or  drinking
vessels.  Then  followed  singing,  dancing,  and  drinking  until  nightfall,
and  these  festivities  were  continued  for  three  or  four  days.  G.  de  la  Vega,
lib.  iv,  cap.  11  ;  Rivero,  p.  177.

'  Urco  is  a  word  denoting  masculine  gender,  in  Quichua,  when  applied
to  animals,  and  china  is  female.  For  mankind  the  words  denoting  gender
are  ccari  (male)  and  huarmi  (female).

2  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  says  that,  as  they  had  no  domestic  fowls  in
Peru  before  the  Spanish  conquest,  so  there  was  no  word  for  them,  and
that  hualiM  was  not  originally  the  name  for  a  fowl,  but  a  corruption  of
Atahual'pa,  the  name  of  the  usurping  Ynca.  It  seems,  however,  that
domestic  fowls  were  the  first  things  that  the  Spaniards  introduced  into
Peru ;  and  the  Indians,  finding  some  resemblance  between  the  crowing  of
the  cocks  and  the  sound  of  Atahualpa,  gave  them  that  name,  which  was
afterwards  corrupted  into  hualpa.  Garcilasso  adds,  "  I  confess  that  many
of  my  schoolfellows  at  Cuzco,  the  sons  of  Spaniards  by  Indian  mothers,
and  myself  amongst  them,  imitated  this  sound  in  the  streets,  together
with  the  little  Indians."

The  names  of  the  Yncas,  and  those  of  their  Avives,  have  a  meaning  in  the
Quichua  language ;  with  the  exception,  however,  of  Manco,  Mayta,  and
Rocca,  which  seem  to  have  been  borrowed  from  some  other  source.
Ccapac  means  "  rich,  grand,  illustrious."  Sinchi  signifies  '^  strong."
Lloqxie  is  "  left-handed."  Yupanqui  is  "  vii-tuous."  It  is  the  second
person  singular,  future,  indicative  of  Yupani,  and  means  literally,  "  you
wdU  count,"  that  is — "  he  who  bears  this  title  will  count  as  one  who  is
excellent  for  his  virtue,  clemency,  and  piety."  Yahuar-huaccac  signifies
•'  weeping  tears  :"  it  was  the  name  of  an  Ynca  whose  reign  was  imfor-


232  THE    TRAVELS    OP

These  Indians  hold  it  to  be  unlucky  for  a  mother  to
bring  forth  two  babes  at  once,  or  when  a  child  is  boru
with  any  natural  defect,  such  as  having  six  fingers  on
one  hand.i  If  these  things  happen,  the  man  and  his
wife  become  sad,  and  fast,  without  eating  ay'r  or  drinking
chicha,  which  is  their  wine,  and  they  do  other  things  ac-
cording to  their  customs,  as  they  have  learnt  them  from
their  fathers.

These  Indians  also  believe  much  in  signs  and  wonders.
If  a  star  falls,  the  noise  they  make  is  prodigious.  There
are  many  sorcerers  among  them,  and  they  take  great  note
of  the  moon  and  the  planets.  There  are  some  Christians
now  alive  who  were  with  the  Marquis  Don  Francisco  Pizarro
when  he  seized  Atahualpa  in  the  province  of  Caxamarca,
and  they  saw  a  green  sign  in  the  sky,  in  the  middle  of  the
night,  as  broad  as  a  cubit,  and  as  long  as  a  lance.  When
Atahualpa  heard  that  the  Spaniards  were  looking  at  it,  he
requested  that  he  also  might  be  allowed  to  see  it  j  and  when
he  beheld  it,  he  became  very  sad,  and  continued  so  during
the  next  day.  The  governor  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  asked
him  why  he   continued  to  be   so  sad,  and  he  replied,  "  I

tunate.  Huira-ccocha  means  "  foam  of  a  lake,"  and  Garcilasso  gives  the
legend  from  which  the  name  is  said  to  have  originated.  Pacha-cutec
means  "  overturning  the  world,"  a  name  given  to  one  of  the  Yncas  who
was  a  great  reformer.  Tupac  is  anything  royal,  resplendent,  honourable.
Huayna  means  a  "  youth,"  a  name  given  to  the  great  Ynca  Huayua
Ccapac,  possibly  from  his  youthful  aj^pearance.  Huascar  is  a  "  chain,"
from  the  golden  chain  which  was  made  to  celebrate  his  birth.  Cusi  is
"  joy."  Titu  is  "  liberal,  magnanimous."  Sayri^  a  "  tobacco  plant."
Ama,ru,  a  "•  serpent,"  etc.

1  Twins,  called  chuchu^  and  children  born  feet  first,  called  chacpa^  were
offered  up  to  the  huacas,  in  some  districts.     Rivero,  p.  173.

^  Aji  or  uchu^  a  Chile  pepper  -with  a  very  peculiar  flavour  (Capsicum
frutescens,  Lin.),  is  the  favoxu-ite  condiment  of  the  Peruvian  Indians,
sometimes  eaten  green,  and  sometimes  dried  and  pounded.  The  con-
sumption of  ajl  is  greater  than  that  of  salt ;  for  with  two-thirds  of  the
dishes,  more  of  the  former  than  of  the  latter  is  used.  The  aji  pejiper  was
introduced  into  India  by  ^Irs.  Clements  Markham  in  1861.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  233

have  seen  a  sign  in  the  sky,  and  I  tell  you  that  when
my  father,  Huayua  Ccapac,  died  he  saw  a  similar  sign."^
Within  fifteen  days  Atahualpa  was  dead.


CHAPTER    LXVI.


(Jf  the  fertility  of  the  land  in  these  coast  valleys,  and  of  the  many  fruits
and  roots  they  contain.  Also  concerning  their  excellent  system  of
ii-rigating  the  fields.

Now  that  I  have  given  as  brief  an  account  as  possible  of
several  things  connected  with  our  subject,  it  will  be  well  to
return  to  the  valleys,  treating  of  each  one  separately,  as  I
have  already  done  of  the  provinces  and  villages  of  the
Sierra."  But  first  I  will  say  somewhat  concerning  the
fruits,  other  food,  and  works  of  irrigation  which  are  to  be
found  in  them.

All  the  land  of  these  valleys,  which  is  not  reached  by  the
sand,  forms  one  of  the  most  fertile  and  abundant  regions  in
the  world,  and  the  one  best  suited  for  cultivation.  I  have
already  mentioned  that  it  does  not  rain,  and  that  the  water
for  irrigation  is  drawn  from  the  rivers  which  descend  from
the  mountains  and  fall  into  the  South  Sea.  In  these  valleys
the  Indians  sow  maize,^  which  is  reaped  twice  in  the  year,
and  yields  abundantly.     In  some  parts  they  grow  yucas,'^

1  Before  the  death  of  Huayna  Ccapac,  fearful  comets  appeared  in  the
ah-,  one  of  them  very  large  and  of  a  green  coloiu-,  and  a  thunder-bolt  fell
on  the  house  of  the  Ynca.  The  amautas  or  leai-ned  men  prognosticated
that  these  a-n^ul  signs  were  the  forerunners,  not  only  of  the  death  of
Huayna  Ccapac,  but  of  the  destruction  of  the  empire.  G.  de  la  Vega,
i,  lib.  ix,  cap.  15.

^  Or  moimtainous  region.

^  Zea  Mais  Lin. :  culled  sara  in  Quichua.

••  Jatropha  Manihot  Lin. :  called  aslpa  or  runm  in  Quichua.  The
yucii  is  still  the  edible  root  most  used  in  the  coast  valleys  of  Peru.  It
grows  to  a  great  size,  and  is  excellent  when  roasted.


234  THE    TRAVELS    OF

whicli  are  useful  for  making  bread  and  liquor  wlien  there  is
want  of  maize.  They  also  raise  sweet  potatoes,^  the  taste
of  which  is  almost  the  same  as  that  of  chesnuts,  besides
potatoes,  beans,  and  other  vegetables.

Throughout  all  the  valleys  there  is  also  one  of  the  most
singular  fruits  I  ever  saw,  called  jjeiyinos,  of  very  pleasant
smell  and  taste.-  There  are  great  quantities  of  guayavas,^
guavas,^  and  paltas,^  which  are  like  pears,  guanavanas,^
caymitos,^  and  the  pines  of  those  parts.  About  the  houses
of  the  Indians  many  dogs  are  seen,  which  are  very  different

^  Batatas  eduHs,  Chois.  :  called  apichu  in  Quichua,  and  cumar  in  the
Quito  dialect.  Dr.  Seemann  has  pointed  out  to  me  the  curious  and  inter-
esting fact  that  kumara  is  also  the  word  for  sweet  potatoe  in  Tahiti,  the
Fiji  Islands,  and  New  Zealand.

'^  The  pepino  (a  cucurbitacea)  is  grown  in  great  abundance  in  the  fields.
The  plant  is  only  a  foot  and  a  haK  high,  and  it  creeps  on  the  gi"ound.
The  fruit  is  from  four  to  five  inches  long,  cylindrical,  and  somewhat
pointed  at  both  ends.  The  husk  is  of  a  yellowish  green  colour,  with  long
rose  coloured  stripes.  The  edible  part  is  soHd,  juicy,  and  well  flavoured,
but  very  indigestible.     Tschudi^  p.  192.

^  Psidium  guayavn  Raddi.  *  Inga  spectahilis  "Willd.

^  Persea  gratissima  R.  P.     See  note  at  p.  16.

^  The  guanavana  is  called  sour  sop  in  the  West  Indies  {Anona  muri-
cata  Lin.),  where  Cieza  de  Leon  must  have  seen  it.  It  has  long  been
naturalized  in  India,  as  well  as  the  A.  squamosa  (custard  apple)  and
A.  reticulata  (sweet  sop),  and  on  occasions  of  famine  these  fruits  have
literally  proved  the  staff  of  life  to  the  natives  in  some  parts  of  the  coun-
try.   (Drury's  Useful  Plants  of  India,  p.  41.)

But  the  fruit  which  Cieza  de  Leon  here  mistakes  for  the  guanavana  or
sour  sop  is,  no  doubt,  the  delicious  chirimoya  {^Anona  ckerhnolia  ISIill.)
Von  Tschudi  says  of  it :  "It  would  certainly  be  diflicult  to  name  any
fruit  possessing  a  more  exquisite  flavour.  The  fruit  is  of  a  roundish
form,  somewhat  pyramidal  or  heart-shaped,  the  broad  base  uniting  with
the  stem.  Externally  it  is  green,  covered  with  small  knobs  and  scales.
The  skin  is  rather  tluck  and  tough.  Internally  tlie  fruit  is  snow-white
and  juicy,  and  provided  with  a  number  of  black  seeds.  The  taste  is  in-
comparable. Both  the  fruit  and  flowers  of  the  chirimoya  emit  a  fine
fragi-ance.  The  tree  which  bears  this  finest  of  all  fruits  is  from  fifteen
to  twenty  feet  high."  Mrs.  Clements  Markham  introduced  the  culti-
vation of  this  delicious  fruit  into  Southern  India  in  ISGl.

^  Chrysophillum  Caimito  Lin.,  or  star  apple.


PKDliO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  235

from  the  Spanish  kind,  and  about  the  size  of  ordinary  curs ;
they  call  them  rJionos}  The  Indians  breed  many  ducks.
In  the  thickets  of  these  valleys  there  are  algarohas,  some-
what long  and  narrow,  and  not  so  thick  as  the  pods  of
beans.-  In  some  parts  they  make  bread  of  these  algarobas,
and  it  is  considered  good.  They  are  very  fond  of  drying
such  of  their  fruits  and  roots  as  are  adapted  for  it,  just  as  we
make  preserved  figs,  raisins,  and  other  fruits.-^  Now  there
are  many  great  vineyards  in  these  valleys,  where  large
harvests  of  grapes  are  gathered.  No  wine  has  yet  been
made  from  them,  and  I  cannot,  therefore,  certify  to  its
quality;  but,  as  the  land  is  irrigated,  it  will  probably  be
weak.*  There  are  now  also  fig-trees  and  pomegranates,
and  I  believe,  and  hold  for  certain,  that  all  the  fruits  of
Spain  may  be  grown  here.

Wheat  is  raised,  and  it  is  a  beautiful  sight  to  see  the  fields
covered  with  crops,  in  a  region  devoid  of  natural  supplies
of  water.  Barley  grows  as  well  as  wheat,  and  lemons,  limes,
oranges,  and  citrons  are  all  excellent  and  plentiful.  There
are  also  large  banana  plantations ;  and  besides  those  which  I
have  already  enumerated,  there  are  many  other  luscious
fruits  which  I  do  not  mention,  because  it  seems  sufficient  to
enumerate  the  principal  ones.

As  the  rivers  descend  from  the  mountains  and  flow
through  these  valleys,  and  as  some  of  the  valleys  are  broad,
while  their  whole  extent  is,  or  was,  when  the  country  was

'  The  name  for  the  ordinary  Permian  dog,  in  Quichua,  is  allco  (Canis


^  The  algaroba  or  giiaranga  {Prosopis  horrida,  Willd).  A  tree  the
bean  of  wliich  furnishes  food  for  mules,  donkeys,  and  goats.

3  The  dulces  or  preserves  of  Peru  are  still  the  most  dehcious  in  the
world,  especially  those  made  at  Cuzco.  No  confectionary  in  London  or
Paris  can  be  compared  with  them.

*  Tlie  vineyards  of  the  Peruvian  coast  valleys  have  become  famous  for
the  delicious  grape  spirits  called  italia  and  pisco.  In  1860  the  valleys  of
Ycii  and  Pisco  alone  yielded  seventy  thoi^md  botijas  or  j;irs  of  spirits,
and  ten  thousand  barrels  of  excellent  wine.


236  THE    TRAVELS    OF

more  thickly  populated,  covered  with  flocks,  they  led  chan-
nels of  water  in  all  directions,  which  is  a  remarkable  thing,
for  these  channels  were  conducted  over  high  and  low  places,
along  the  sides  of  hills  and  over  them,  some  in  one  direction,
some  in  another,  so  that  it  is  a  great  enjoyment  to  travel
in  these  valleys,  and  to  pass  through  their  orchards  and
refreshing  gardens.

The  Indians  had,  and  still  have,  great  works  for  drawing
off  the  water,  and  making  it  flow  through  certain  channels.
Sometimes  it  has  chanced  that  I  have  stopped  near  one
of  these  channels,  and  before  we  had  finished  pitching  the
tent  the  channel  was  dry,  the  water  having  been  drawn  off
in  another  direction,  for  it  is  in  the  power  of  the  Indians  to
do  this  at  their  pleasure.  These  channels  are  always  very
green,  and  there  is  plenty  of  grass  near  them  for  horses.^

'  Next  to  the  wonderful  roads,  these  irrigating  channels  are  the  most
convincing  proofs  of  the  advanced  civihsation  of  the  Yncas.  Once  nearly
all  the  coast  valleys  were  suppUed  with  them,  and  thousands  of  acres
were  reclaimed  from  the  desert ;  but,  owing  to  the  barbarism  or  neglect
of  the  Spaniards,  they  nearly  all  went  to  ruin  very  soon  after  the  con-
quest. In  one  valley  alone,  that  of  Xasca  (or,  more  properly,  Nanasca^
"  pain"),  the  irrigating  works  of  the  Yncas  are  still  in  working  order,
and  from  them  an  idea  may  be  formed  of  the  extent  and  grandeur  of  the
pubhc  works  of  the  Yncas  throughout  the  coast  region  of  Peru.

The  valley  of  Nasca  descends  from  the  Andes  by  an  easy  and  gradual
slope,  widening  as  it  descends,  and  is  hemmed  in  by  lofty  mountains  on
either  side.  It  is  covered  with  cultivation,  consisting  of  vineyards,  cotton
plantations,  fields  of  a;'i,  maize,  wheat,  pmnpkins,  melons,  and  other
vegetables,  and  fruit  gardens.  In  1853  I  examined  the  irrigation  chan-
nels of  this  valley  very  carefully.  All  that  nature  has  supplied,  in  the
way  of  water,  is  a  small  water  course,  which  is  frequently  dry  for  six
years  together ;  and,  at  the  best,  only  a  httle  streamlet  trickles  down
during  the  month  of  February.  ITie  engineering  skill  displayed  by  the
Yncas,  in  remedying  this  defect,  is  astonishing.  Deep  trenches  were  cut
along  the  whole  length  of  the  valley,  and  so  far  into  the  mountains  that  the
present  inhabitants  have  no  knowledge  of  the  place  where  they  commence.
High  up  the  valley  the  main  trenches  or  puquios  are  some  fom-  feet  in
height,  with  the  floor,  sides,  and  roof  lined  -ftdth  stones.  Lower  down  they
are  sejiarated  into  smaller  pu(juios^  which  ramify  in  every  direction  over
the  valley,  and  supply  all  the  estates  with  delicious  water  throughout  the


PEDRO    DE    CIE/A    DE    LEON.  237

In  the  trees  and  bushes  many  birds  fly  about;  there  are
pigeons,  doves,  turkeys,  pheasants,  and  some  partridges,
besides  many  deer  in  the  thickets.  But  there  are  no  evil
things,  such  as  serpents,  snakes,  and  wolves.  There  are,
however,  many  foxes,  which  are  so  cumiing  that,  although
great  care  is  taken  to  watch  the  things  where  the  Spaniards
or  Indians  encamp,  they  come  to  steal,  and  when  they  can
find  nothing  better,  they  make  off  with  the  bridles  or
switches  for  the  horses.^  In  many  parts  of  the  valleys  there
are  extensive  fields  of  sweet  cane,  and  they  make  sugar,
treacle,  and  other  things  from  it.

All  these  Yunca  Indians  are  great  labourers,  and  when
they  carry  loads  they  strip  to  the   skin,  until  they  have

year,  feeding  the  little  streams  which  irrigate  the  fields.  The  larger
puquios  are  several  feet  below  the  surface,  and  at  intervals  of  about  two
hundred  yards  there  are  man-holes,  called  QJos^  by  which  workmen  can
get  down  into  the  channels,  and  clear  away  any  obstructions.

Further  on  Cieza  de  Leon  describes  other  works  of  irrigation  in  the
valley  of  Yea,  on  the  same  magnificent  scale,  which,  even  when  he  wrote,
had  already  been  destroyed  by  the  barbarian  Spaniards.

The  subterranean  channels  were  called  huirca  in  Quichua,  and  those
flowing  along  on  the  surface  rarca.  In  aU  parts  of  the  Sierra  of  Peru
the  remains  of  irrigating  channels  are  met  with,  which  the  Spaniards
destroyed  and  neglected,  and  thus  allowed  the  once  fertile  fields  to  retm-n
to  their  natural  sterility.  The  principal  remains  of  works  of  irrigation,
in  the  Sierra,  are  to  be  found  at  Caxamarca  and  at  Cerro  Pasco.  Garci-
lasso  de  la  Vega  relates  how  the  Ynca  Huira-ccocha  caused  an  aqueduct
to  be  constructed,  twelve  feet  in  depth,  and  more  than  one  hundred  and
twenty  leagues  in  length.  Another  aqueduct  was  made  in  the  province
of  Condesuyos  (Cunti-suyu),  which  was  more  than  fifty-five  leagues  long.
The  Ynca  historian  justly  exclaims :  "  These  are  works  worthy  of  the
grandeur  of  such  princes.  They  are  equal  to  the  finest  works  of  the  kind
in  the  world,  considering  the  enormous  rocks  which  were  cut  through  to
form  them,  without  iron  or  steel  tools.  When  a  deep  ravine  crossed  the
intended  course  of  the  aqueduct,  it  was  led  round  to  the  head.  The
channels  were  cut  out  of  the  living  rock  in  many  places,  the  outer  side
being  formed  of  a  stone  wall  of  large  six-sided  slabs,  fitting  exactly  into
each  other,  and  banked  up  with  earth."

'  There  is  a  fox  {Canis  Azarce,  Pr.  Max.)  which  abounds  in  the  coast
valleys,  where  it  preys  on  the  lambs.


238  THE    TRAVELS    OF

nothing  on  save  a  bit  of  clotli  between  tbe  legs,  and  so  they
run  with  their  loads.  They  took  great  care  in  irrigating  their
land,  and  also  in  sowing,  which  was  done  by  many  in  con-
cert together.  I  will  now  speak  of  the  road  from  the  city
of  San  Miguel  to  that  of  Truxillo.


CHAPTER    LXVII.


Of  the  road  from  San  Miguel  to  Truxillo,  and  of  the  valleys  between
those  cities.

In  a  former  chapter  I  described  the  foundation  of  the  city
of  San  Miguel,  the  first  settlement  made  by  the  Spaniards
in  Peru.  I  will  now  treat  of  what  there  is  between  this
city  and  Truxillo,  the  distance  between  the  two  cities  being
seventy  leagues,  a  little  more  or  less.  On  setting  out  from
San  Miguel  there  is  a  distance  of  twenty-two  leagues  over
a  sandy  waste  before  reaching  the  valley  of  Motupe.  The
road  is  very  wearisome,  especially  by  the  route  which  is  now
used.  There  are  certain  Httle  ravines  on  this  road,  but,
although  some  streams  descend  from  the  mountains,  they
do  not  reach  these  ravines,  but  are  lost  in  the  sand,  in  such
sort  that  no  use  can  be  made  of  the  water.  To  go  over
these  twenty-two  leagues  it  is  necessary  to  set  out  in  the
afternoon,  and,  travelling  all  night,  some  springs  are  reached
early  in  the  morning,  where  the  traveller  can  drink,  and  go
on  without  feeling  the  heat  of  the  sun.  It  is  usual  for
travellers  to  carry  calabashes  of  water  and  bottles  of  wine
with  them.

In  the  valley  of  Motupe  the  royal  road  of  the  Yncas  is
seen,  broad  and  constructed  in  the  manner  described  in  a
former  chapter.  This  valley  is  broad  and  very  fertile,  and
although  a  good  sized  river  flows  down  into  it  from  the
monntnins,   all   the  Avatei'  is  lost  before  roachino-   the  sea.


PEDRO    1)E    f'lEZA    1)E    LEON.  239

The  algnrohas^  and  other  trees  f^row  well^  on  account  of  the
moisture  which  they  find  under  their  roots.  In  the  lower
part  of  the  valley  there  are  villages  of  Indians,  who  are
supported  by  water  which  they  obtain  from  deep  wells.
They  get  all  that  they  require  by  exchanging  one  thing  for
another  amongst  themselves,  for  they  do  not  use  money,  nor
is  any  die  for  coining  to  be  found  in  these  parts.  They  say
that  there  were  great  buildings  for  the  Yncas  in  this  valley ;
and  the  people  had,  and  still  have,  their  huacas,  or  burial-
places  in  the  barren  heights  and  stony  places  leading  to  the
Sierra.  The  late  wars  have  reduced  the  numbers  of  the
Indians,  and  the  buildings  have  fallen  into  ruins,  the  pre-
sent inhabitants  living  in  small  huts,  built  in  the  same  way
as  those  described  in  a  former  chapter.  At  certain  seasons
they  trade  with  the  people  of  the  Sierra ;  and  in  the  valley
there  are  great  fields  of  cotton,  with  which  they  make  their
clothes.

Four  leagues  from  Motupe  is  the  fresh  and  beautiful
valley  of  Xayanca,  which  is  nearly  four  leagues  broad.  A
pleasant  river  flows  through  it,  whence  they  lead  channels
which  serve  to  irrigate  all  the  land  that  the  Indians  choose
to  sow.  In  former  times  this  valley  was  thickly  peopled.
Like  all  the  others,  and  it  contained  great  buildings  and
store-houses  belonging  to  the  principal  chiefs,  where  their
ofl&cers  were  stationed.  The  native  chiefs  of  these  valleys
were  reverenced  by  their  subjects,  and  those  who  survive
still  are  so.  They  go  about  with  a  retinue  of  servants  and
women,  and  have  their  porters  and  guards.

From  this  valley  the  road  leads  to  that  of  Tuqueme,
which  is  also  large,  pleasant,  and  full  of  trees  and  bushes.
It  contains  vestiges  of  edifices,  which  are  now  ruined  and

1  Prosopis  horrida,  Willd.  This  tree  grows  to  a  large  size.  The  wood
is  very  hard,  the  leaf  small,  and  the  branches  bear  an  abundance  of
clusters  of  pods,  which  form  excellent  food  for  mules  and  cattle,  and  for
immense  herds  of  eoats.


240  THE    TRAVELS    OF

abandoned.  A  short  journey  further  on  brings  us  to  another
very  beautiful  valley  called  Cinto.  And  the  reader  is  to
understand  that  from  valley  to  valley  the  way  is  over  sandy
and  parched-up  stony  wastes,  where  no  living  thing  is  to  be
seen,  neither  grass  nor  tree ;  nothing  but  a  few  birds  that
may  be  seen  flying.  Those  who  travel  over  the  broad
sandy  deserts,  and  catch  sight  of  the  valley  (although  still
far  off)  are  much  cheered,  especially  if  they  are  on  foot,
under  a  hot  sun,  and  suffering  from  thirst.  Men  who  are
new  to  the  country  should  not  travel  over  these  wastes,
except  with  good  guides  who  know  the  way.

Further  on  is  the  valley  of  Collique,  through  which  flows
a  river  of  the  same  name,  so  broad  that  it  cannot  be  forded
except  in  the  season  when  it  is  summer  in  the  Sierya,  and
winter  on  the  coast.  Nevertheless  the  natives  are  so  well
practised  in  the  management  of  irrigation  channels  that,
even  when  it  is  winter  in  the  Sierra,  they  sometimes  leave
the  main  stream  dry.  This  valley,  like  the  others,  is  broad
and  full  of  trees,  but  there  is  a  want  of  inhabitants,  for  most
of  them  have  been  carried  off  by  the  wars  with  the  Span-
iards, and  by  the  evils  which  these  wars  brought  with  them.


CHAPTER    LXVIII.


In  which  the  same  road  is  followed  as  has  been  treated  of  in  the  former
chapter,  until  the  city  of  Truxillo  is  reached.

Beyond  the  valley  of  Collique  there  is  another  valley  called
Sana,  which  resembles  the  others.  Further  on  is  the  valley
of  Pacasmayu,  which  is  the  most  fertile  and  populous  of  any
that  I  have  yet  mentioned.  The  natives  of  this  valley,
before  they  were  conquered  by  the  Yncas,  were  powerful,
and   respected  by   their   neighbours,    and   they  had  great


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  241

temples  where  they  offered  sacrifices  to  their  gods.  They
are  all  now  in  ruins.  In  the  rocks  and  hills  of  the  surround-
ing desert  there  are  a  great  quantity  of  Huacas,  which  are
the  burial-places  of  these  Indians.  In  all  these  valleys  there
are  clergymen  or  friars  who  look  after  the  conversion  and
teaching  of  the  Indians,  not  permitting  them  to  practise
their  ancient  religious  customs  or  usages.

A  very  fine  river  flows  through  this  valley  of  Pacasmayu,
whence  they  lead  many  large  channels,  sufiicient  to  irrigate
all  the  fields  that  are  cultivated  by  the  Indians,  and  they
raise  the  fruits  and  roots  already  enumerated.  The  royal
road  of  the  Yncas  passes  through  this  valley,  as  it  does
through  all  the  others,  and  here  there  were  great  buildings
for  the  Yncas^  use.  The  natives  tell  some  ancient  traditions
of  their  fathers,  which,  being  fables,  I  shall  not  wi'ite  down.
The  lieutenants  of  the  Yncas  collected  the  tribute,  and
stored  it  in  the  buildings  which  were  made  to  receive  it,
whence  it  was  taken  to  the  chief  station  in  the  province,  the
place  selected  for  the  residence  of  the  captain-general,  and
where  the  temple  of  the  sun  was  erected.

In  this  valley  of  Pacasmayu  they  make  a  great  quantity  of
cotton  cloth ;  the  land  is  suited  for  breeding  cows,  still
better  for  pigs  and  goats,  and  the  climate  is  healthy.  I
passed  through  this  valley  in  the  month  of  September,  in
the  year  1548,  to  join  the  other  soldiers  who  had  come  from
the  government  of  Popayan  to  reinforce  the  royal  camp,  and
chastise  the  late  rebellion.  It  then  appeared  to  me  to  be
extremely  pleasant,  and  I  praised  God  on  seeing  its  fresh-
ness, with  so  many  trees  and  flowers,  and  branches  full  of  a
thousand  kinds  of  birds.

Further  on  is  the  valley  of  Chacama,^  not  less  fertile  and

1  "  Formerly  the  valley  of  Chacama  was  called  the  granary  of  Peru,
and,  imtil  the  great  earthquake  of  1687,  the  wheat  produced  its  seed  two
huncbed  fold.  This  valley  alone  harvested  two  hundred  thousand  bushels
of  this  grain."     Stevemon,  ii,  p.  124-5.


242  THE    TRAVELS    OF

abundant  than  that  of  Pascamayu,  and  in  addition  it  con-
tains great  quantities  of  sweet  cane,  of  which  they  make
much  excellent  sugar,  and  other  conserves.  There  is  here
a  Dominican  monastery,  which  the  reverend  father  Friar
Domingo  de  Santo  Tomas  founded.

Four  leagues  further  on  is  the  valley  of  Chimu,^  which  is
broad  and  very  large,  and  here  the  city  of  Truxillo  is  built.
Some  Indians  relate  that,  in  ancient  times,  before  the
Yncas  extended  their  sway  so  far,  there  was  a  powerful
lord  in  this  valley,  who  was  called  Chimu,  as  the  valley  is
now.  He  did  great  things,  was  victorious  in  many  battles,
and  built  certain  edifices  which  even  now,  though  so  ancient,
clearly  appear  to  have  been  very  grand.  When  the  Kings
Yncas  made  themselves  lords  of  these  coast  valleys,  they
held  that  of  Chimu  in  great  estimation,  and  ordered  large
buildings  and  pleasure-houses  to  be  erected  in  it.  The
royal  road,  built  with  its  walls,  also  passes  through  the
valley.  The  native  chiefs  of  this  valley  were  always  esteemed
and  held  to  be  rich.  This  is  known  to  be  true,  for  in  the
tombs  of  the  principal  men  much  gold  and  silver  have  been
found."     But  at  present  there  are  few  Indians  in  the  valley,

'  "  The  valleys  of  Chimu,  Chacama,  and  Viru,  may  be  considered  as
one,  being  separated  from  each  other  only  by  the  branches  of  the  Chacama
river.  United  they  are  about  twenty-eight  leagues  long  and  eleven  broad.
Their  soil,  irrigated  by  the  waters  of  the  river,  is  very  fertile."  Steveiison^
ii,  p.  124.

■^  Tlie  rviins  in  the  valley  of  Chimu  or  Truxillo  are  a  league  and  a  half
from  the  port  of  Huanchaco.  It  is  not  known  when  they  were  built,  but
in  the  time  of  Pachacutec,  the  ninth  Ynca  (about  a.d.  134:0  to  1400),  a
powerful  chief  reigned  in  this  valley,  called  Chunu-Canchu.  After  a
long  war  with  the  Ynca's  son  Yupanqui,  the  Cliunu  consented  to  worship
the  sun,  and  to  abandon  his  OA\ai  idols,  consisting  of  figures  of  fish  and
other  animals.

The  ruins  of  the  Cliimu's  city  cover  a  space  of  three  quarters  of  a
league,  exclusive  of  the  great  squares.  These  squares,  seven  or  eight  in
number,  vary  from  two  hundred  to  two  hundred  and  seventy  yards  in
length,  and  from  one  hundred  to  one  hundred  and  sixty  in  breadth.  They
are  on  the  north  side  of  the  large  edifices  or  palaces.     The  walls  sur-


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA-DE    LEON.  243

most  of  the  land  being-  divided  a"inongst  Spaniards  who  arc
citizens  of  the  new  city  of  Truxillo,  to  form  their  estates.
The  sea  port,  called  the  roadstead  of  Truxillo,  is  not  very
far  from  the  valley,  and  all  along  the  coast  they  kill  much
fish  for  the  supply  of  the  city  and  of  the  Indians  them-
selves.

rounding  the  palaces  are  of  great  solidity,  formed  of  adobes  (bricks  baked
in  the  sun)  ten  or  twelve  yards  long  and  five  or  six  broad  in  the  lower
part  of  the  wall,  but  gradually  diminishing  until  they  terminate  in  a
breadth  of  one  yard  at  the  top.  Each  palace  was  completely  siu-rounded
by  an  exterior  wall.  One  of  them,  built  of  stone  and  adobes,  is  fifty
yards  liigh,  five  yards  broad  at  the  bottom,  and  gradually  tapering  to  one
at  the  top.  In  the  first  palace  there  is  an  interior  court,  in  which  are
chambers  built  of  stone,  and  plastered  within.  The  lintels  of  the  door-
ways consist  of  a  single  stone  about  two  yards  long.  Some  of  the  walls
are  adorned  with  panels  and  tastefid  patterns,  and  ornaments  sculptured
on  the  adobes.  There  is  also  a  large  reservoir,  which  was  formerly  sup-
pHed  with  water,  by  subterranean  aqueducts,  from  the  river  Moche,
about  two  miles  to  the  north-east.  The  second  palace  is  one  hundred  and
twenty-five  yards  east  of  the  first.  It  contains  several  courts  and  chambers,
with  narrow  lanes  between  them.  At  one  of  the  extremities  is  the  hnaca
of  J/i'sa,  surrounded  by  a  low  wall.  This  huaca  is  traversed  by  small  pas-
sages about  a  yard  wide,  and  it  also  contains  some  large  chambers,  con-
taining cloths,  mummies,  pieces  of  gold  and  silver,  tools,  and  a  stone  idol.
Besides  these  palaces  there  are  the  ruins  of  a  great  number  of  smaller
houses,  forming  an  extensive  city.     Rivera  Antiq.  Per.

In  1566  one  Garcia  Gutierrez  de  Toledo  paid  85,547  castellanos  de  oro
(£222,422)  as  the  fifth  or  royal  share  of  the  treasure  fomid  by  him  in  the
huacas  of  the  grand  Chimu  ;  and  in  1592  the  royal  fifth  of  further  trea-
sure discovered  in  these  tombs  amounted  to  4:1  .,i)2Q  castellanos  (£122,252).
The  value  of  the  whole  was  £1,724,220  of  our  money.  This  will  give  some
idea  of  the  wealth  concealed  in  these  burial  places.  There  is  a  tradition
that  there  were  two  priceless  treasures  in  the  form  of  fishes  of  gold,
known  as  the  great  and  httle  peje.,  in  one  of  the  huacas.

The  curiosities  that  have  been  found  in  the  Chimu  ruins  are  very  inter-
esting : — such  as  mmnmies  in  strange  iJostiu-es,  one  in  an  attitude  as  if
about  to  ckink,  with  a  monkey  on  his  shoulder,  whispering  into  his  ear.


244  .  THE   TEAVELS    OF

CHAPTER    LXIX.

Of  the  founding  of  the  city  of  Truxillo,  and  who  was  the  founder.

The  city  of  Truxillo  is  founded  in  the  valley  of  Chimu,  near
a  large  and  beautiful  river,  whence  they  draw  channels  by
which  the  Spaniards  irrigate  their .  orchards  and  flower
gardens.  This  city  of  Truxillo  is  situated  in  a  region  which
is  considered  healthy,  and  on  all  sides  it  is  surrounded  by
estates  which  the  Spaniards  call  granges  and  farms,  where
the  citizens  have  their  flocks  and  crops.  All  the  land  is
irrigated,  and  in  all  parts  there  are  many  vines,  fig  and
pomegranate  trees,  and  other  fruits  of  Spain,  great  abun-
dance of  wheat,  and  many  orange  trees,  and  it  is  a  pleasant
thing  to  see  the  flowers.  There  are  also  lemons,  limes,  and
citrons,  besides  plenty  of  excellent  fruits  of  the  country,
and  they  breed  many  fowls  and  rear  capons.  It  may  be
said  that  the  Spanish  inhabitants  of  this  city  are  provided
with  all  they  require,  having  abundance  of  all  the  things
which  I  have  enumerated.  There  is  no  want  of  fish,  as
they  have  the  sea  not  much  more  than  half  a  league  off".
The  city  is  built  in  a  level  part  of  the  valley,  in  the  midst  of  a
refreshing  grove  of  trees.  It  is  well  built,  with  broad  streets
and  a  large  open  square.^  The  Indians  of  the  Sierra  come
down  from  their  provinces  to  serve  those  Spaniards  who
hold  them  in  encomienda,^  and  they  supply  the  town  with
the  things  they  have  in  their  own  villages.  Vessels  sail
from  the  port,  laden  Avith  cotton  cloth  made  by  the  Indians,
for  sale  in  other  parts.  The  Adelantado  Don  Francisco
I'izarro,  governor  and  captain-general  in  the  kingdoms  of
Vqvw,  founded  this  city  of  Truxillo,  in  the  name  of  the
Emperor  Charles  our  Lord,  in  the  year  of  the  birth  of  our
Saviour  Jesus  Christ  1535.

'  'I'he  city  of  Tnixillo  stands  on  a  sandy  plain,  in  lat.  8°  ()'  o"  S.
-'  Sec  note  at  p.  I'l.


I'EDRO    DE    CIEZA   DE    LEON.  245


CHAPTER    LXX.

Of  the  other  valleys  and  villages  along  the  coast  road,  as  far  as  the
City  of  the  Kings.

In  the  mountains^  before  reaching  the  City  of  the  Kings,
are  the  cities  of  the  frontier  of  Chachapoyas,  and  that  of
Leon  de  Huanuco.  I  have  determined  that  I  will  say  nothing
of  these  until  I  begin  to  give  an  account  of  the  villages  and
provinces  in  the  mountains^  which  still  await  my  notice.  I  will
then  write  conceiving  their  foundation,  with  as  much  brevity
as  I  can,  but  at  present  we  must  pass  forward  on  our  road.

The  distance  from  the  city  of  Truxillo  to  that  of  the
Kings  is  eighty  leagues,  over  sandy  deserts  and  intervening
valleys.^  After  leaving  Truxillo  the  first  village  is  Guanape,
being  seven  leagues  on  the  road.  This  valley  was  no  less
noted  among  the  natives  in  times  past  for  the  chiclia  which
was  brewed  there,  than  Madrigal  or  San  Martin  in  Castillo
are  for  the  good  wine  that  they  yield.  In  ancient  times  the
valley  of  Guanape  was  very  populous,  and  was  the  residence
of  chiefs,  who  were  honourably  and  well  treated  by  the
Yncas  after  they  submitted  to  their  rule.  The  Indians  who
have  survived  the  wars  and  troubles  are  skilful  in  their
labour,  drawing  channels  of  water  from  the  river  to  irrigate
their  fields.  The  remains  may  be  clearly  seen  of  the  build-
ings and  store-houses  erected  by  the  Kings  Yncas.  There
is  a  useful  port  at  this  valley,  where  many  of  the  ships
which  sail  on  the  South  Sea,  from  Panama  to  Peru,  call  for
supplies.

From  Guanape  the  road  leads  to  the  valley  of  Santa,  but
before  reaching  it  there  is  a  valley  with  no  river,  but  a  small
well  at  which  travellers  quench  their  thirst.  This  well  may
be  caused  by  some  river  which  flows  through  the  bowels  of
the  earth.  In  former  days  the  valley  of  Santa  was  very
'  The  distance  is  one  hundred  and  eight  leagues  by  the  road.


246  THE    TRAVELS   OP

populous,  and  there  were  great  cliiefs  who,  at  first,  even  defied
the  Yncas.  They  say  of  them  that  it  was  more  by  intrigue
and  a  display  of  friendship  than  by  force  of  arms,  that  they
were  induced  to  acknowledge  the  Yncas  as  their  lords.
Afterwards  the  Yncas  honoured  them,  and  held  them  in
great  esteem,  and  the  chiefs  erected  grand  edifices  by  order
of  the  Yncas.  This  valley  is  one  of  the  largest  of  any  we
have  passed.  A  great  and  rapid  river  flows  through  it,
which  is  much  swollen  when  the  season  in  the  8ierra  is
winter,  so  that  some  Spaniards  have  been  drowned  in  cross-
ing from  one  side  to  the  other.^  There  are  now  halsas  for
crossing  in.  The  valley  contained  many  thousands  of  Indians
in  former  times,  but  now  there  are  only  four  hundred ;  and
this  is  a  lamentable  thing  to  contemplate.  That  which  I
most  admired,  in  passing  through  this  valley,  was  the  great
number  of  burial-places,  and  that  in  all  parts  of  the  barren
hills  above  the  valley  there  were  quantities  of  tombs  made
according  to  the  custom  of  the  Indians,  and  full  of  the
bones  of  the  dead.  Thus  the  things  that  are  most  worthy
of  notice  in  the  valley  are  the  tombs  of  the  dead  and  the
fields  which  they  cultivated  when  alive.  They  used  to  take
great  channels  of  water  from  the  river,  with  which  they
irrigated  the  land.  But  now  there  are  few  Indians,  and
most  of  the  fields  which  were  once  cultivated,  are  converted
into  woods,  ground  overgrown  with  brambles,  and  such
dense  thickets  that,  in  some  places,  it  is  difficult  to  make  a
way  through  them.  The  natives  go  dressed  in  shirts  and
mantles,  and  the  women  also.  They  wear  a  head-dress  on
their  heads  to  distinguish  them  from  other  tribes.  AU  the
fruits  I  have  already  mentioned  grow  well  in  this  valley,

'  The  river  of  Santa  is  about  eighteen  huncbed  yards  across  at  the
mouth,  and  its  current,  during  the  rainy  season,  sometimes  flows  at  the
rate  of  seven  miles  an  hour.  In  1795  a  rope  bridge  was  tlirown  across  it,
about  a  league  from  the  mouth,  but  it  was  destroyed  by  a  sudden  rise  of
the  water  in  1806.     Stevenson.


PEDEO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  247

and  tlio  pulses  of  Spain ;  and  tho  Indians  kill  much  fish.
The  ships  sailing  along  the  coast  always  take  in  water  at
the  river  of  Santa.  And  as  there  are  many  thickets  and
few  inhabitants,  the  mosquitos  swarm  in  such  numbers  as
to  be  grievous  to  those  who  pass  through  or  sleep  in  this
valley.

Two  days'  journey  further  on  is  the  valley  of  Huambacho,
of  which  I  shall  say  no  more  than  that  it  resembles  those
already  described,  that  there  were  buildings  in  it  erected  by
its  chiefs,  and  that  the  inhabitants  drew  channels  of  water
from  the  river  which  flows  through  it,  to  irrigate  their  crops.

1  went  in  a  day  and  a-half  from  this  valley  to  that  of
'jruarmay,  which  was  likewise  very  populous  in  former  days.^
At  present  they  breed  great  quantities  of  cattle,  horses,  and
pigs  in  it.

From  Guarmay  the  road  leads  to  Parmonga,  which  is  no
less  pleasant  than  the  other  valleys,  but  I  beHeve  that  it
contains  no  Indians  at  aU  who  avail  themselves  of  its  fer-
tihty.  If,  by  chance,  a  few  remain,  it  must  be  in  the  upper
parts  near  the  foot  of  the  mountains,  for  we  saw  nothing
but  trees  and  wild  thickets.  There  is  one  thing  worth
seeing  in  this  valley,  which  is  a  fine  well-built  fortress,  and
it  is  certainly  very  curious  to  see  how  they  raised  water  in
channels  to  irrigate  higher  levels.  The  buildings  were  very
handsome,  and  many  wild  beasts  and  birds  were  painted  on
the  walls,  which  are  now  all  in  ruins  and  undermined  in
many  places  by  those  who  have  searched  for  buried  gold
and  silver.  In  these  days  the  fortress  only  serves  as  a
witness  to  that  which  has  been.^

>  Guarmay  is  a  small  Indian  viUage,  famous  for  its  chicha^  which  is
remarkably  strong.

2  These  are  the  ruins  of  a  fortress  defended  by  the  Chimu  against  the
army  of  the  Yncas,  the  outer  waUs  being  tlu-ee  hundred  yards  long  by
two  hundred.  The  interior  is  divided  into  small  houses,  separated  by
lanes.  It  is  partly  covered  -nnth  a  kind  of  plaster,  on  wliich  Proctor  saw
tho  uncouth  coloured  representations  of  birds  and  beasts  mentioned  in  the


248  THE    TRAVELS    OF

Two  leagues  from  tliis  valley  is  tlie  river  Huaman,  a  word
whicli,  in  our  laug-uage,  means  "  falcon/'  but  it  is  usually
called  "the  ravine/'^  When  it  rains  mucli  in  tlie  Sierra,
this  river  is  dangerous,  and  some  people  have  been  drowned
in  crossing  it.  One  day's  journey  further  on  brings  us  to
the  valley  of  Huara,  whence  we  pass  to  that  of  Lima.


CHAPTER    LXXI.


Of  the  situation  of  the  City  of  Kings,  of  its  founding,  and  who  was
the  founder.

The  valley  of  Lima  is  the  largest  and  broadest  of  all  those
of  which  I  have  written  between  it  and  Tumbez ;  and,  as  it
was  large,  so  it  was  very  populous.  But  now  there  are  few
native  Indians,  for,  as  the  city  was  built  on  their  land,  and
as  their  fields  and  water-courses  were  taken  from  them,
some  have  now  gone  to  one  valley  and  some  to  another.
If  by  chance  some  have  remained,  they  continue  to  irrigate
their  fields.  At  the  time  when  the  Adelantado  Don  Pedro
de  Alvarado  came  to  this  kingdom,  the  Adelantado  Don
Francisco  Pizarro,  who  was  his  Majesty's  governor,  was  in
Cuzco ;  and,  while  the  marshal  Don  Diego  de  Almagro  was
doing  those  things  which  I  mentioned  in  my  chapter  on
Riobamba,  he  came  down  to  the  coast,  and  determined  to

text.  The  ruined  fortress  stands  at  the  extremity  of  a  plain,  close  to  the
foot  of  some  rugged  movmtains,  about  a  league  from  the  sea.  Faz  Sol-
dan  :  Proctor^  p.  175.

'  La  Barranca.  Tlie  river  is  approached  by  a  precipitous  descent
down  a  high  bank  of  large  pebbles  and  earth.  The  breadth  of  the  chan-
nel is  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  and,  during  the  rains  in  the  Andes,  it  is
completely  full,  running  furiously,  and  carrying  along  with  it  trees  and
even  rocks,  which  render  it  impassable.  In  the  dry  season  it  merely  con-
sists of  three  separate  torrents  about  as  deep  Jts  the  saddle,  but  imsafe.


PEDRO    UE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  249

found  a  city  in  this  valley.  At  that  time  neither  Truxillo,
Arequipa,  Guamanga,  nor  any  of  the  other  cities  were  com-
menced. While  the  governor  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  was
thinking-  of  founding  this  city^  after  having  inspected  San-
gallan^  and  other  sites  on  the  coast,  he  one  day  came  with
some  Spaniards  to  the  place  where  the  city  now  stands,  and
it  appeared  to  him  a  convenient  site,  possessing  all  neces-
sary advantages.  He,  therefore,  soon  afterwards  laid  out  a
plan,  and  built  the  city  on  a  level  part  of  the  valley,  two
short  leagues  from  the  sea.  Above  this  site  a  river  flows
from  the  east,  which  has  little  water  when  it  is  summer  in
the  Sierra,  but  which  is  somewhat  swollen  when  it  is  winter.
The  city  is  so  near  the  river  that  a  strong  arm  may  throw  a
small  stone  into  it  from  the  ])laza,  and  on  that  side  it
cannot  be  enlarged.  After  Cuzco  it  is  the  largest  city  in
the  whole  kingdom  of  Peru,  and  the  most  important.^  It
contains  very  fine  houses,  and  some  ornamental  buildings
with  towers  and  terraces.  The  plaza  is  large"  and  the
streets  broad,  and  through  every  street  a  channel  of  water
flows,  which  is  no  small  convenience.  The  water  from  these
channels  serves  to  irrigate  the  orchards  and  gardens,  which
are  numerous,  refreshing,  and  delightful.  At  this  time  the
Court  and  Royal  Chancellory  is  estabhshed  in  the  city,  for
which  reason,  and  because  all  the  business  of  the  country
is  done  here,  there  are  always  many  people  in  the  city,  and
rich  shops  for  the  sale  of  merchandise.  In  the  year  that  I
departed  from  tliis  kingdom  there  were  many  inhabitants  of
this  city  who  possessed  encomicndas  of  Indians,  and  were  so
rich  and  prosperous,  that  they  valued  their  estates  at  150,000

1  The  city  of  Lima  is  about  two  miles  long  and  a  mile  and  a  half  broad.
Its  circmuference  is  about  ten  miles,  but  many  gardens,  orchards,  and
fields  of  alfalfa  are  included  within  the  walls.  The  best  and  fullest
account  of  Lima  is  contained  in  a  work  called  Estadistica  de  Lima,  by
Don  Manuel  A.  Fuentes.

2  Each  side  of  the  grand  square  of  Lima  is  five  himch-ed  and  ten  feet
long.     It  contains  the  cathedral  and  palace.


250  THE    TRAVELS    OF

ducats  and  upwards.  In  fiue^  I  left  them  very  ricli  and
prosperous,  and  sMps  often  sail  from  the  port  of  this  city,
each  carrying  800,000  ducats,  and  some  more  than  a  million.
I  pray  to  Almighty  God  that,  as  it  will  be  for  his  service,
for  the  spread  of  our  holy  faith,  and  for  the  salvation  of  our
souls,  he  will  allow  this  wealth  to  increase  continually.

On  the  east  side  of  the  city  there  is  a  great  and  lofty  hill,
on  the  top  of  which  a  cross  is  planted.^  Outside  the  city
there  are  many  farms  and  estates  on  all  sides,  where  the
Spaniards  have  their  flocks  and  pigeon-cotes,  vineyards,
and  refreshing  orchards  full  of  the  fruits  of  the  country^
figs,  bananas,  sugar-canes,  melons,  oranges,  lemons,  limes,
citrons,  and  beans  brought  from  Spain.  All  is  so  good,
that  no  fault  can  be  found,  but  rather  thanks  should  be
offered  up  to  the  great  God  our  Lord,  who  made  all  these
things.  Certainly,  if  all  commotions  and  wars  were  at
an  end,  this  would  be  one  of  the  best  countries  in  the
world  to  pass  a  life  in,"  for  we  see  in  it  neither  hunger,  nor
pestilence,  nor  rain,  nor  thunder  and  lightning,  but  the
heavens  are  always  serene  and  very  beautiful.  I  could  have
mentioned  some  other  particulars,  but  as  it  seems  to  me
that  I  have  said  enough,  I  shall  pass  on,  concluding  by
saying  that  the  Adelantado  Don  Francisco  Pizarro,  governor
and  captain-general  in  these  kingdoms,  founded  the  city  in
the  name  of  his  Majesty  the  Emperor  Charles  our  lord,  in
the  year  of  our  salvation  1535.^

'  This  is  the  hill  of  San  Cristobal,  a  rocky  height  rising  abruptly  from
the  plain,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river  Rimac,  near  the  bull-ring.
There  is  still  a  cross  planted  on  its  summit.

^  One  does  not  always  hear  such  praise  from  those  who  have  visited
the  City  of  the  Kings ;  but  at  least  the  feelings  of  the  editor  of  this  work
agree  with  those  of  the  author.  Some  of  tlie  happiest  days  in  the  editor's
life  were  passed  on  the  banks  of  the  Runac ;  and  he,  therefore,  will  not
criticize  the  enthusiastic  and,  as  some  will  think,  exaggerated  praise  of
Cieza  de  Leon.

3  The  city  of  Lima  was  founded  by  Pizarro  on  the  Gth  of  January,
1535.  As  it  was  the  day  of  Epiphany,  Lima  received  the  title  of  Cludad
de  los  Reijes  (City  of  the  Kings).


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  251


CHAPTER    LXXII.


Of  the  valley  of  Pachacamac,  and  of  the  very  ancient  temijle  in  it,  and
liow  it  was  reverenced  by  the  Yncas.

Four  leagues  from  the  City  of  the  Eangs,  travelling  do\vn
the  coast,  is  the  valley  of  Pachacamac,  which  is  very  famous
among  these  Indians.  This  valley  is  fruitful  and  pleasant,
and  in  it  there  v/as  one  of  the  grandest  temples  that  is  to
be  seen  in  these  parts.  They  say  of  it  that,  although  the
Kings  Yncas  built  many  temples  besides  the  temple  of
Cuzco,  and  enriched  them  greatly,  yet  none  were  equal  to
this  temple  of  Pachacamac.  It  was  built  on  the  top  of  a
small  hill,  entirely  made  of  earth  and  adobes  (bricks  baked
in  the  sun).  The  edifice  had  many  doors,  and  the  doors
and  walls  Avere  painted  over  with  wild  beasts.  Within  the
temple,  where  they  placed  the  idol,  were  the  priests,  who
feigned  no  small  amount  of  sanctity.  When  they  performed
sacrifices  before  the  people,  they  went  with  their  faces  to-
wards the  doors  and  their  backs  to  the  idols,  with  their  eyes
to  the  ground,  and  they  were  filled  with  a  mighty  trembling.
Indeed,  their  perturbation  was  so  great,  according  to  the
accounts  of  those  Indians  who  are  stiU  living,  that  it  may
almost  be  compared  with  that  of  which  we  read  concerning
the  priests  of  ApoUo  when  the  gentiles  sought  for  their  vain
rephes.  The  Indians  further  relate  that  they  sacrificed
animals,  and  some  human  blood  of  persons  whom  they  had
killed,  before  the  figure  of  this  devil,  which,  at  their  most
solemn  festivals,  gave  replies,  and  when  the  people  heard
them,  they  believed  them  to  be  true.  In  the  terraces  and
lower  parts  of  this  temple  a  great  sum  in  gold  and  silver  was
buried.

The  priests  were  much  reverenced,  and  the  chiefs  obeyed
them  in  many  of  the  things  which  they  ordered.  Near  the
temple  many  great  buildings  were  erected  for  the  use  of


'lOZ  THE    TRAVELS    OF

those  who  came  on  pilgrimage,  and  no  one  was  considered
worthy  to  be  buried  in  the  vicinity  of  the  temple  except  the
chiefs,  or  those  who  came  as  pilgrims  bringing  offerings
to  the  temple.^  When  the  annual  festivals  of  the  year
were  celebrated,  a  great  concourse  of  people  assembled,
rejoicing  to  the  sound  of  such  instruments  of  music  as
they  use.

When  the  Lords  Yncas,  in  extending  their  sway,  came  to
this  valley  of  Pachacamac,  and  saw  the  grandeur  and  great
antiquity  of  the  temple,  and  the  reverence  paid  to  it  by  all
the  people  in  the  neighbourhood,  they  knew  that  it  would  be
very  difficult  to  put  aside  this  feeling,  although  it  was  their
general  practice  to  order  temj^les  to  the  sun  to  be  built  in
all  the  countries  they  conquered.  They,  therefore,  agreed
with  the  native  chiefs  and  with  the  ministers  of  this  god  or
devil,  that  the  temple  of  Pachacamac  should  continue  with
the  authority  and  reverence  it  formerly  possessed,  and  that

'  Great  nvuiibers  of  bodies  have  been  dug  up  at  the  foot  of  the  temple
of  Pachacamac,  the  extreme  dryness  of  the  cHmate  having  i^reserved  the
long  hair  on  the  skulls,  and  even  the  skin.  There  are  as  many  as  one
hundred  and  foui-  Pachacamac  skulls  in  European  museums,  which  have
been  carefully  examined.  "  They  exliibit  a  vertically  flattened  occiput,
a  narrow  and  receding  forehead,  the  glabella  being  slightly  prominent.
The  acrocephahc  or  sugar-loaf  form  predominates.  The  range  of  skulls
from  Pachacamac  varies  from  the  globular  or  oval  type,  with  a  shghtly
depressed  coronal  suture,  which  Tschudi  terms  the  '  Chincha'  skulls,  to
the  pyramidal  brachyceiAalic  cranium,  with  a  high  and  vertical  occiput,
ordinarily  termed  the  '  Inca  cranium.'"  C.  C.  Blake,  Esq.,  O71  the  Cranial
Characters  of  the  Peruvian  Races.  Transactions  of  the  Ethnological
Society.  Vol.  ii.  New  Series,  p.  227.  Cieza  de  Leon  states,  in  the  text,
that  only  chiefs  and  pilgrims  were  allowed  to  be  buried  near  the  temple
of  Pachacamac ;  and,  if  this  was  really  the  case,  it  would  be  natural  to
expect  that  the  fact  would  be  corroborated,  to  some  extent,  by  an  exami-
nation of  the  skulls.  Accordingly  I  am  informed  by  Mr.  Carter  Blake,
that  ]\Ir.  CUft  and  others  have  spoken  of  Pachacamac  as  being  the  depo-
sitory of  more  than  one  type  of  skull,  which  may  be  the  remains  of  pil-
gruns  from  various  localities.  ]\Ir.  Clift  mentions  bodies  at  Pachacamac
with  heads  depressed  hke  those  of  the  people  near  lake  Titicaca,  and
others  with  heads  properly  formed.


PKDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  253

the  loftiest  part  should  be  set  aside  as  a  temple  of  the  sun.
This  order  of  the  Yncas  having  been  obeyed,  the  temple  of
the  sun  became  very  rich,  and  many  virgins  were  placed  in
it.  The  devil  Pachacamac  was  delighted  with  this  agree-
ment, and  they  affirm  that  he  showed  great  satisfaction  in
his  replies,  seeing  that  his  ends  were  served  both  by  the
one  party  and  the  other,  while  the  souls  of  the  unfortunate
simpletons  remained  in  his  power.

Some  Indians  say  that  this  accursed  demon  Pachacamac
still  talks  with  the  aged  people.  As  he  sees  that  his  autho-
rity and  credit  are  gone,  and  that  many  of  those  who  once
served  him  have  now  formed  a  contrary  opinion,  he  declares
that  he  and  the  God  of  whom  the  Christians  preach  are  one,
and  thus  with  other  false  and  deceitful  words  induces  some
to  refuse  the  water  of  baptism.  Nevertheless  God,  taking
pity  on  the  souls  of  these  sinners,  is  served  by  many  coming
to  His  knowledge  and  calling  themselves  sons  of  the  church.
Thus  every  day  some  are  baptised.  The  temple  is  now  so
completely  dismantled  that  the  principal  edifice  is  gone  alto-
gether, and  in  the  place  where  the  devil  was  once  so  served
and  adored,  a  cross  is  planted  to  increase  his  terror,  and  to
be  a  comfort  to  the  faithful.

The  name  of  this  devil  is  intended  to  signify  "  creator
of  the  world,"  for  camac  means  "  creator,^'  and  paclia,  "  the
world."  When  the  governor  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  (God
permitting  it)  seized  Atahualpa  in  the  province  of  Caxa-
marca,  he  heard  wonderful  reports  of  this  temple,  and  of  its
great  riches.  He,  therefore,  sent  his  brother,  the  captain
Hernando  Pizarro,  with  some  Spanish  troops,  with  orders  to
seek  out  the  valley,  and  take  all  the  gold  he  could  find  in
the  accursed  temple,  with  which  he  was  to  return  to  Caxa-
marca.  Although  the  captain  Hernando  Pizarro  succeeded
in  reaching  the  temple  of  Pachacamac,  it  is  notorious  among
the  people  that  the  priests  had  already  taken  away  four  hun-
dred loads  of  gold,  which  have  never  yet  appeared,  nor  do


254  THE    TRAVELS    OF

any  Indians  now  living  know  where  they  are.  Never-
theless Hernando  Pizarro  (the  first  Spanish  captain  who
came  to  this  place)  found  some  gold  and  silver.  As  time
passed  on,  the  captain  Eodrigo  Orgofiez,  Francisco  de  Godoy,
and  others,  took  a  large  sum  of  gold  and  silver  from  the
burial  places.  It  is  considered  that  there  is  much  more,  but
as  the  place  where  it  was  buried  is  unknown,  it  was  lost.
From  the  time  that  Hernando  Pizarro  and  his  Christians
entered  the  temple,  the  devil  has  had  little  power,  the  idols
have  been  destroyed,  and  the  temple  and  other  edifices  have
fallen  into  ruins.  Insomuch  that  very  few  Indians  now  re-
main in  the  place.  This  valley  is  as  full  of  trees  as  the  other
valleys,  and  many  cows  and  other  stock  are  reared  in  the
fields,  besides  mares,  from  which  come  some  good  horses.^

1  The  niins  of  Pacliacamac  are  about  twenty  miles  south  of  Lima,  on
the  sea-coast.  The  temple  was  on  the  summit  of  a  hiU  about  four  hun-
dred feet  above  the  sea,  and  half  a  mile  from  the  beach.  Tlie  view  from
the  platform,  where  the  temple  once  stood,  is  exceedingly  striking.  Half
the  horizon  is  occupied  by  the  ocean,  and  the  other  haH  is  divided  into
two  widely  different  scenes.  One  is  an  arid  desert,  with  no  object  on
which  the  eye  can  rest  save  the  ruined  city ;  the  other  is  a  lovely  valley,
covered  with  fields  of  maize  and  sugar  cane,  and  dotted  with  houses  half
hidden  by  the  encircling  fruit  gardens.  The  little  town  of  Lurin  stands
in  its  centre.  A  narrow  stream  separates  this  enchanting  valley  from  the
dreary  expanse  of  sand,  while  the  glorious  Andes  bound  the  inland  view.

The  upper  part  of  the  temple  hill  is  ai'tiiicially  formed  of  huge  adobes
or  bricks  baked  in  the  sun,  rising  in  three  broad  terrace^,  the  walls  of
which  are  thirty-two  feet  high.  Towards  the  sea  the  terraces  are  sup-
ported by  buttresses  of  ordinary  sized  sun-dried  bricks,  and  the  red  paint,
with  which  the  walls  were  originally  coated,  may  still  be  seen  in  several
places.  The  temple  stood  on  a  level  platform  on  the  top,  facing  the  sea.
The  door  is  said  to  have  been  of  gold  plates,  richly  inlaid  with  coral  and
precious  stones,  but  the  interior  was  rendered  filthy  by  the  sacrifices.
Garcilasso  says  that  the  Yunca  Indians  had  idols  in  the  form  of  fish  and
other  annuals,  and  that  they  sacrificed  animals,  and  even  the  blood  of
men  and  women  ;  but  that  these  idols  were  destroyed  by  the  Yncas.

At  the  foot  of  the  temple  hill  are  the  remains  of  houses  for  pilgrims ;
and  it  is  here  that  the  numerous  skulls  are  found,  with  long  flowdng  hair,
which  are  to  be  met  with  in  European  museiuns.  Further  on  are  the
ruins  of  an  extensive  city.     The  streets  are  very  narrow,  and  the  princi-


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.


CHAPTER    LXXIII.


Of  the  valleys  between  Pachacamac  and  the  fortress  of  Iluarco,  and  of  a
notable  thing  which  is  done  in  the  valley  of  Huarco.

From  this  temple  of  Pachacamac,  where  the  temple  is,  the
road  leads  to  Chilca,  and  at  that  place  there  is  a  thing  well
worthy  of  note,  for  it  is  very  strange.  It  is  this, — that
neither  rain  falls  from  heaven,  nor  does  any  river  or  spring
flow  through  the  land,  and  yet  the  greater  part  of  the  valley
is  full  of  crops  of  Indian  corn,  of  roots,  and  of  fruit  trees.
It  is  a  marvellous  thing  to  hear  what  the  Indians  do  in  this
valley.  In  order  to  secure  the  necessary  moisture,  they
make  broad  and  very  deep  holes  where  they  sow  their  crops,
and  God  is  served  by  their  growing  with  the  aid  of  dew
alone ;  but  by  no  means  could  they  make  the  maize  grow  if
they  did  not  put  two  heads  of  sardines  to  each  grain,  these
sardines  being  small  fish  which  they  catch  with  nets  in  the
sea.  At  the  time  of  sowing,  these  fishes  heads  are  put  with
the  maize  in  the  same  hole  that  is  made  for  the  grain,  and
in  this  manner  the  grain  grows  and  yields  abundantly.  It
is  certainly  a  notable  thing  that  in  a  land  where  it  does  not
rain,  and  where  nothing  but  a  very  fine  dew  falls,  people
should  be  able  to  live  at  their  ease.  The  water  which  the
natives  of  this  village  drink  is  taken  from  very  deep  wells,
and  they  catch  so  many  sardines  in  the  sea,  that  the  supply
is  sufiicient  to  maintain  all  the  inhabitants,  besides  using

pal  houses  or  palaces  generally  consist  of  halls  of  gi-and  proportions,  with
a  number  of  small  apartments  at  each  end  :  all  now  choked  with  Sfiud.
The  foundations  are  frequently  of  stone.

It  is  said  by  some  old  writers  that  this  temple  was  erected  for  the
worsliip  of  Pachacamac — the  Supreme  Being,  the  "  Creator  of  the  world"
— by  an  ancient  race,  long  before  the  time  of  the  Yncas,  and  of  whom
the  Yunca  Indians  were  degenerate  descendants.  Its  great  antiquity  is
proved  by  the  fact  that,  when  Hernando  Pizarro  first  arrived  at  it,  a  con-
siderable portion  of  the  city  was  already  in  ruins.


ZOt>  THE    TRAVELS    OF

many  for  manuring  the  crops.  There  were  buildings  and
store-houses  of  the  Yncas  in  this  valley^  for  their  reception
when  they  visited  the  provinces  of  their  kingdom.'

Three  leagues  beyond  Chilca  is  the  valley  of  Mala,  where
the  devil,  for  men's  sins,  completed  the  evil  which  had
commenced  in  this  land,  and  secured  the  breaking  out  of
war  between  the  two  governors,  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  and
Don  Diego  de  Almagro.  First,  a  number  of  events  took
place,  and  at  last  they  left  the  decision  of  the  dispute  (as  to
which  of  the  governments  the  city  of  Cuzco  belonged)  in
the  hands  and  power  of  Francisco  de  Bobadilla,  a  friar  of
the  order  of  our  Lady  of  Mercy.  After  a  solemn  oath  had
been  taken  by  one  captain  and  by  the  other,  the  two
Adelantados  Pizarro  and  Almagro  met,  but  no  result  came
of  the  interview,  and  Don  Diego  de  Almagro  returned,  with
great  dissimulation,  to  his  own  troops  and  captains."  The
umpire  Bobadilla  then  pronounced  his  judgment  on  the
dispute,  and  declared  that  which  I  shall  write  in  the  fourth
]3art  of  this  history,  in  the  first  book,  entitled  '^  The  war  of
Las  Salinas."

'  The  plain  of  Cliilca  is  a  broad  sandy  waste,  with  a  thin  Une  of  vege-
tation rmining  from  the  Andes  to  the  sea.  The  village  is  a  collection  of
cane  flat-roofed  houses,  with  a  handsome  church.  It  is  about  two  miles
from  the  beach,  where  there  is  an  abrupt  headland  called  Chilca  Point.
There  are  none  of  the  maize  fields  described  by  Cieza  de  Leon,  and  the
land  is  no  longer  manured  with  saixline  heads,  but  there  are  several  palm
and  fig  trees,  and  holes  where  crops  of  reeds,  for  making  matting  to  cover
the  house  tops,  are  raised.  A  little  scanty  herbage  grows  on  the  sand  hills,
where  mules  and  donkeys  graze.  The  inhabitants  of  Chilca  are  all  pure
Indians,  and  they  allow  no  whites  to  reside  in  their  village.  Tliey  employ
themselves  in  plaitmg  straw  for  hats  and  cigar  cases  of  great  beauty.  In
the  time  of  the  Yncas  this  valley  was  very  populous,  as  is  clear  from  the
numerous  ruins  in  various  directions  ;  but  Spanish  occupation  has  acted
as  a  bhght  on  every  corner  of  this  once  happy  land.

-  Here  Cieza  de  Leon  shows  his  strong  prejudice  against  Almagro.     It
is  well  known  that  Pizarro  formed  a  plot  to  seize  him  after  the  interview
at  Alala,  and  that  he  was  warned  of  the  meditated  treachery  by  the  voice
of  an  old  comrade,  who  sang  a  coujilet  iu  the  verandah —
''  Tiempo  cs  de  andar,  Cavallero !
Ticmpo  cs  dc  andar  de  aqui."


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  257

A  fine  river,  bordered  by  thickets  of  trees  and  bushes,
flows  through  this  valley  of  Mala.^

A  little  more  than  five  leagues  beyond  the  valley  of  Mala
is  that  of  Guarco,  which  is  highly  spoken  of  in  this  king-
dom, being  large,  broad,  and  full  of  fruit  trees. ^  Especially
there  are  many  guayavas,  which  are  very  delicious  and
fragrant,  and  still  more  guavas.  The  wheat  and  maize
yield  plentifully,  and  all  other  things  that  are  sown,  as  well
those  of  the  countiy  as  the  trees  of  Spain.  There  are  also
pigeons,  doves,  and  other  kinds  of  birds.  The  thickets
of  bushes  in  this  valley  are  very  shady,  and  irrigating
channels  flow  through  them.  The  inhabitants  say  that,  in
times  past,  the  valley  was  very  populous,  and  that  the
people  contended  with  their  neighbours,  and  with  those  of
the  Sierra.

When  the  Yncas  advanced  their  conquests  and  extended
their  sway  over  all  the  provinces  they  came  in  contact  with,
the  natives  of  this  valley  had  no  wish  to  become  vassals,
seeing  that  their  fathers  had  left  them  free.  They  showed
great  valour,  and  maintained  the  war  with  no  less  spirit
than  virtue  for  more  than  four  years,  during  which  time
many  notable  things  fell  out  between  the  combatants.  It
was  a  protracted  war,  and  although  the  Ynca  himself
retired  to  Cuzco  in  the  summer,  on  account  of  the  heat,  his
troops  continued  fighting.  On  account  of  the  length  of  the
war,  which  the  Ynca  desired  to  bring  to  a  close,  he  came
down  with  his  nobles  to  build  a  new  city  which  he  called
Cuzco,  after  his  principal  seat  of  government.  The  Indians
relate  that  he  ordered  that  the  difierent  di%asions  of  the  new

>  The  valley  of  Mala  is  six  miles  from  that  of  Chilca.  It  is  covered
with  rich  vegetation — bananas,  figs,  oranges,  fields  of  maize,  vines,  and
willow  trees,  and  is  weU  suppUed  with  water  by  a  large  river.  In  the
southern  part  there  are  extensive  ptxstures,  where  some  of  the  bulls  are
bred  for  the  Lima  bull  fights.

■  This  is  the  rich  modern  valley  of  Caneta,  containmg  six  very  exten-
sive and  flourishing  sugar  estates,  and  two  villages.


258  THE    TRAVELS    OP

city  should  liave  the  same  names  as  those  of  Cuzco.  Finally,
but  not  until  they  had  fought  to  the  last  extremity,  the
natives  of  the  valley  of  Guarco  were  subdued,  and  subjected
to  the  yoke  of  the  tyrant  king,  who  had  no  other  right  to
be  their  lord  than  that  which  the  fortune  of  war  had  given
him.i     Having  brought  the  enterprise  to  a  successful  con-
clusion, the  Ynca  returned  with  his  troops  to  Cuzco,  and
the  name  of  the  new  city  was  lost.    Nevertheless  he  ordered
the   most   handsome   and   imposing  fortress  in  the  whole
kingdom   to   be    erected  on  a  high  hill  commanding  the
valley,  to  commemorate  his  victory.     It  is  built  on  great
square  slabs,  the  portals  are  very  well  made,  and  the  halls
and  courts  are  very  large.     From  the  upper  part  of  this
royal  house  a  stone  flight  of  steps  leads  down  to  the  sea,
and  the  waves  dash  with  such  force  against  the  base  of  the
edifice,  that  it  causes  wonder  to  think  how  it  could  have
been  built  with   such  strength  and  solidity.     In  its  time
this  fortress  was  richly  adorned  with  paintings,  and  it  con-
tained   great   treasure   in   the    days  of  the  Kings  Yncas.
Although  the  building  is  so  strong,  and  the  stones  so  large,
there  does  not  appear  to  be  any  mortar  or  other  cement  by
which  they  were  joined  together.     When  the  edifice  was
built  they  say  that,  on  reaching  the  interior  of  the  rock,
they  made  holes  with  their  picks  and  other  tools,  and  filled
them  with  gi-eat  slabs  and  stones,  and  thus  it  is  that  the
building  is  so  strong.     Considering  that  it  is  built  by  these
Indians,  the  building  is  worthy  of  praise,  and  must  cause
admiration  to  those  who  see  it,  although  now  it  is  ruined
and  deserted.     It  may  still  be  seen  to  have  been  a  great
work  in  times  past.     It  seems  to  me  that  both  Spaniards

'  AVliat  otluT  rii;lit  had  our  autlior's  countrymen?  or  does  he  mean
more  than  meets  tlie  eye,  in  writing  this  sentence.  Cieza  de  Leon  was
evidently  impressed  with  the  excellence  of  the  government  of  the  Yncas,
and  deplores,  in  almost  every  chapter,  the  destruction  and  ruin  brought
upon  the  country  by  the  Spaniards.  Ts  this  a  covert  thrust  at  tlie  justice
of  the  Si)anish  conquest  ?


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON,  259

and  Indians  should  bo  forbidden,  under  heavy  penalties,
from  doing  further  injury  either  to  this  building  or  to  the
remains  of  the  fortress  at  Cuzco ;  for  these  two  edifices  are
those  which  should  cause  most  admiration  in  all  Peru,  and,
as  time  rolls  on,  they  may  even  be  made  use  of  for  some
good  purpose.^

»  The  ruins  of  tliis  great  edifice,  liaK  fortress  half  palace,  are  still  to  be
seen  on  an  elevated  point  of  land  overhanging  the  sea,  on  the  south  side
of  the  river  of  Caiiete.  I  examined  these  ruins  very  carefully  in  1853.
They  are  divided  into  two  parts.  Those  furthest  from  the  sea  consist  of
nine  chambers.  Entering  from  a  breach  in  the  wall,  I  passed  along  a
gallery  broad  enough  for  two  men  to  walk  abreast,  with  a  parapet  five
feet  high  on  one  side,  and  a  wall  sixteen  feet  high  on  the  other.  The
parapet  is  on  the  edge  of  a  hill  partly  faced  with  adobes.  At  the  end  of
about  twenty  yards  the  gallery  tm-ns  at  right  angles  into  the  centre  of  the
building.  Here  there  is  a  doorway  about  ten  feet  high,  three  feet  across
at  the  base,  and  narrovidng  as  it  ascends,  with  a  lintel  of  willow  beams.
It  leads  into  a  spacious  haU,  and,  on  the  opposite  side,  there  is  a  deep
recess  corresponding  with  the  door.  The  walls  are  sixteen  feet  high,
built  of  moderate  sized  adobes.,  formerly  plastered  over,  and,  as  Cieza  de
Leon  tells  us,  painted  with  figures.  At  the  sides  of  the  hall  there  are
small  chambers  with  recesses  in  the  walls,  communicating  with  each  other
by  passages  in  the  rear.  There  is  a  distance  of  two  hundred  yards,  strewn
with  ruined  walls,  between  this  portion  of  the  ruins  and  that  overhang-
ing the  sea.  The  latter  is  entered  by  a  doorway,  which  leads  into  a  large
square  hall,  nearly  a  hundred  feet  each  way.  The  sides  towards  the
north  and  west  are  smooth,  but  the  eastern  wall  is  pierced  by  fifteen  small
recesses.  On  the  south  side  two  doorways  lead  by  passages  into  smaller
chambers,  also  with  recesses  in  the  walls.  In  the  upper  part  of  the  walls
of  the  great  hall  the  holes,  for  the  beams  which  sup^jorted  the  roof,  are
distinctly  \'isible.  The  walls  throughout  are  three  to  four  feet  thick.  The
doorways,  from  the  lintel  to  the  ground,  are  eight  feet  high.  On  the
whole,  this  is  one  of  the  best  presei-ved  ruins  in  the  land  of  the  Yncas.
The  portions  of  the  fortress  which  were  built  of  stone,  were  barbarously
destroyed  by  order  of  the  Spanish  viceroy  Count  of  Moucloa,  and  the
materials  were  used  for  building  the  castles  at  CaUao.


260  THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    LXXIV.

Of  the  great  province  of  Chincha,  and  how  much  it  was  vahied  in
ancient  times.

About  two  leagues  beyond  the  fortress  of  Guarco  is  a  rather
large  river  called  Lunahuana,  and  the  valley  which  it  forms
is  like  all  the  rest.  Six  miles  further  on  is  the  large  and
beautiful  valley  of  Chincha^  so  far  famed  throughout  Peru^
as  well  as  feared  in  former  days  by  the  other  natives.
When  the  Marquis  Don  Francisco  Pizarro^  with  his  thirteen
companions,  discovered  the  coast  of  this  kingdom,  it  was
said  on  all  sides  that  Chincha  was  the  fairest  and  best  part
of  it.  Thus  it  was  that,  by  reason  of  the  fame  borne  by  the
place,  and  without  knowing  the  secrets  of  the  soil,  he
sought  from  his  Majesty  the  government  of  a  territory
extending  from  the  river  of  Santiago  or  Tempulla  to  this
valley  of  Chincha.^

As  to  the  origin  of  the  Indians  of  Chincha,  they  say  that,
in  time  past,  a  quantity  of  them  set  out  under  the  banner
of  a  valiant  captain  of  their  own  tribe  and  arrived  at  this
valley  of  Chincha,  where  they  found  many  inhabitants,  but
all  of  such  small  stature  that  the  tallest  was  barely  two
cubits  high.  The  new  comers  being  valiant,  and  the  natives
cowardly  and  timid,  the  former  gained  possession.  They
also  affirm  that  all  the  natives  perished,  and  that  the  fathers
of  the  grandfathers  of  men  now  alive  saw  their  bones  in
certain  tombs  which  were  as  small  as  has  been  described.

These   Indians  thus   became  lords  of  the  valley;    they

'  From  the  great  gate  of  the  hacienda  of  Laran,  in  the  valley  of  Chincha,
a  broad  road  leads  towards  the  Andes.  This  road  formed  the  division
between  the  governments  of  Pizarro  and  Ahnagro  on  the  sea-coast,  and
the  question  as  to  whether  Cuzco  was  on  the  north  or  south  side  of  the
imaginary  line  continued  east  from  Laran,  was  the  cause  of  a  quarrel
which  ended  in  the  defeat  and  death  of  Ahnagro.  Laran  now  belongs  to
the  hospitable  Don  Antonio  Prada,  marquis  of  the  towers  of  Oran.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  261

flourished  and  multiplied,  and  built  their  villages  close
together.  They  say  that  they  heard  a  certain  oracle  near  a
rock,  and  that  they  all  hold  the  place  to  be  sacred.  They
call  it  ChincJia  and  Camay.  They  constantly  made  sacri-
fices, and  the  devil  held  converse  with  the  older  men,  and
deceived  them  as  he  did  all  the  other  Indians.  The  prin-
cipal chiefs  of  the  valley,  and  many  other  Indians,  have  now
become  Christians,  and  a  monastery  of  the  glorious  Saint
Dominic  has  been  founded  in  the  valley.

But  to  return  to  our  subject.  They  affirm  that  the  Indians
of  this  valley  increased  so  rapidly  in  numbers  and  in  power,
that  those  of  the  other  neighbouring  valleys  sought  friend-
ship and  alliance  with  them  as  a  great  honour  and  advan-
tage. Finding  themselves  so  powerful,  they  are  said  to
have  set  out  to  rob  the  provinces  of  the  Sierra  at  the  time
that  the  first  Yncas  were  founding  the  city  of  Cuzco.  They
are  said  to  have  done  much  mischief  in  Soras  and  Lucanas,
and  to  have  got  as  far  as  the  great  province  of  the  CoUao,
whence,  after  having  taken  great  spoils,  and  gained  many
victories,  they  returned  to  their  valley.  Here  they  and
their  descendants  Uved,  given  up  to  their  pleasures  and
amusements,  with  over  many  women,  and  following  the  same
rites  and  customs  as  the  other  tribes.  The  valley  was  so
populous,  that  many  Spaniards  say,  that  when  the  Marquis
conquered  it,  it  contained  more  than  25,000  men.  At  pre-
sent, I  believe,  that  there  are  barely  5000,  such  have  been  the
strifes  and  misfortunes  they  have  gone  through.  The  lord-
ship of  this  valley  was  also  safe  and  prosperous  until  the
valiant  Ynca  Yupanqui  extended  his  rule  in  this  direction.
Wishing  to  bring  the  chiefs  of  Chincha  under  his  rule,  he
sent  a  captain  of  his  own  lineage,  named  Ccapac  Ynca
Yupanqui,  with  an  army  of  many  Orejones  and  others,
who  reached  the  valley,  and  had  several  encounters  with
the  natives.  Not  being  able  to  subjugate  them,  the  Orejones
passed    on;    but  in    the    time   of  Tupac    Ynca    Yupanqui,


262  THE    TRAVELS    OF

father  of  Huayna  Ccapac,  tliey  were  finally  conquered,  and
from  that  time  they  obeyed  the  laws  of  the  Lords  Yncas ;
the  villages  of  the  valley  were  ruled  by  them,  and  great
buildings  and  storehouses  were  erected  for  the  King.  The
Yncas  did  not  deprive  the  chiefs  of  their  lordship,  but  his
delegate  lived  in  the  valley,  and  the  natives  were  ordered
to  worship  the  sun.  Thus  a  temple  was  built,  and  many
virgins  and  priests  to  celebrate  festivals  resided  in  it.  But,
notwithstanding  that  this  temple  of  the  sun  was  so  pre-
eminently established,  the  natives  did  not  cease  to  worship
also  in  their  ancient  temple  of  Chinchaycama.  The  Kings
Yncas  also  sent  Mitimaes  into  this  great  valley,  and  ordered
that,  during  certain  months  in  the  year,  the  native  chiefs
should  reside  at  the  court  of  Ouzco.  The  chief  of  Chincha,
who  is  still  living,  was  in  most  of  the  wars  which  were
waged  during  the  time  of  Huayna  Ccapac.  He  is  a  man  of
ability  and  good  understanding  for  an  Indian.

This  valley  is  one  of  the  largest  in  all  Peru,  and  it  is  a
beautiful  thing  to  see  its  channels  of  water  and  groves  of
trees,  and  the  great  abundance  of  fruit,  more  especially  the
luscious  and  fragrant  ■pepinos,  not  Hke  those  of  Spain,
although  they  bear  some  resemblance.  These  are  yellow
when  the  peel  is  taken  oflP,  and  so  delicious  that  it  is  neces-
sary to  eat  many  of  them  before  a  man  is  satisfied.  In  the
thickets  there  are  the  same  birds  as  have  already  been
mentioned.  There  are  scarcely  any  sheep  of  the  country,
because  the  wars  between  the  Christians  have  caused  their
destruction.  This  valley  yields  plenty  of  wheat,  and  they
cultivate  vines  which  they  have  planted.  The  valley  yields
all  the  other  things  which  have  been  planted  by  the
Spaniards.

There  were  an  immense  quantity  of  burial-places  made  on
the  surrounding  arid  heights.  The  Spaniards  opened  many
of  them,  and  obtained  a  great  quantity  of  gold.  The  native
Indians  were  fond  of  dancino-,  and  the  chiefs  went  about


TRDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  263

witli  much  ceremony  und  parade,  and  were  reverenced  Ly
their  vassals.  After  the  Yncas  estabhshcd  their  rule,  the
natives  copied  many  customs  from  them,  adopted  their
dress,  and  imitated  them  in  all  other  things  as  their  sole
lords.

The  large  population  of  this  great  valley  has  been  reduced
by  the  long  civil  wars  in  Peru,  and  because  many  natives
have  been  taken  away  to  carry  burdens  for  the  Spaniards
(as  is  well  known).


CHAPTER    LXXV.

Of  the  other  valley,  <as  far  as  the  province  of  Tarapaca.

After  leaving  the  beautiful  province  of  Chincha,  and  tra-
velling over  sandy  wastes,  the  traveller  reaches  the  refresh-
ing valley  of  Yea,  which  was  not  less  rich  and  populous
than  the  others.  A  river  flows  through  it,  which,  during
some  months  in  the  year  when  the  season  is  summer  in  the
Sierra,  has  so  little  water  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  valley
feel  the  want  of  it.  In  the  days  of  their  prosperity,  before
they  were  subdued  by  the  Spaniards,  and  when  they  enjoyed
the  government  of  the  Yncas,  besides  the  channels  with
which  they  irrigated  the  valley,  they  had  one  much  larger
than  the  rest,  brought  with  great  skill  from  the  mountains
in  such  wise  that  it  flowed  without  reducing  the  quantity  of
water  in  the  river.^  Now  that  this  great  channel  is  de-
stroyed, they  make  deep  holes  in  the  bed  of  the  river  when
it  is  diy,  and  thus  they  obtain  water  to  drink,  and  for
watering  their  crops.  In  this  valley  of  Yea  there  were
great  lords  in  former  times  who  were  much  feared  and
reverenced.  The  Yncas  ordered  palaces  and  other  buildings
to  be  made  in  the  valley.  The  inhabitants  had  the  same
'  Another  great  public  work  of  the  Yncas,  now  utterly  destroyed.


264  THE    TRAVELS    OF

customs  as  the  other  Indians,  burying  live  women  and  great
treasure  with  their  dead.

In  this  valley  there  are  very  large  woods  of  algaroba
trees,  and  many  fruit  trees  of  the  kinds  already  described ;
besides  deer,  pigeons,  doves,  and  other  game.  The  people
breed  much  cattle.^

From  this  valley  of  Yea  the  road  leads  to  the  beautiful
rivers  and  valleys  of  Nasca,^  which  were  also  very  populous
in  times  past,  and  the  streams  were  made  to  irrigate  the
fields.  The  late  wars  destroyed  by  their  cruelty  (as  is  well
known)  all  these  poor  Indians.  Some  Spaniards  of  credit
told  me  that  the  greatest  harm  to  the  Indians  was  done
during  the  dispute  of  the  two  governors  Pizarro  and  Al-
magro,  respecting  the  boundaries  of  their  jurisdictions,  which
cost  so  dear,  as  the  reader  will  see  in  the  proper  place.

In  the  principal  valley  of  those  of  Nasca  (which  by  another
name  is  called  Caxamalca)  there  were  great  edifices  built
by  order  of  the  Yncas.^     I  have  nothing  more  to  say  of  the

>  The  valley  of  Yea  forms  a  delightful  contrast  to  the  surroundmg
deserts.  The  traveller,  leaving  the  sandy  waste  beliind  liim,  finds  him-
self riding  through  vineyards  and  cotton  plantations,  Avith  hedges  of  fig
trees,  jessamine  and  roses  on  either  hand.  Yea  is  a  large  town  about  two
leagues  from  the  foot  of  the  Andes,  in  the  middle  of  a  fertile  and  beauti-
ful valley  ;  but  it  has  suffered  fearfully  from  earthquakes.  The  river  is
crossed  by  a  bridge  of  ropes  and  willow  branches,  and  during  January
and  February  it  dashes  impetuously  down  the  valley,  but  it  is  dry  for  the
rest  of  the  year,  and,  as  Cieza  de  Leon  says,  the  people  dig  holes  in  its
bed,  to  get  water.  There  are  some  very  extensive  woods  of  giiaranrja  or
algaroba  trees  {^Prosopis  horrida)  in  the  valley  of  Yea,  generally  on  the
skirts  of  the  deserts.

2  lie  includes  the  rich  valleys  of  Palj^a,  San  Xavier,  and  Nasca  under
the  same  name.

3  I  carefully  examined  these  ruined  edifices  when  I  was  at  Nasca.
They  are  built  in  terraces  up  the  sides  of  the  mountains,  wliich  hem  in  the
valley  on  the  south.  The  houses  contained  spacious  halls,  with  niches  in
the  walls.  About  forty  feet  higher  up  the  mountain,  and  immechately
overhanging  the  ruined  palaces,  there  was  a  fortress  with  a  semicircular
wall  in  front,  and  a  high  adobe  breastwork  in  the  rear.  Its  only  apjiroach
was  by  a  steep  ramp  leading  up  from  the  edifices  below.  The  walls  of  the
buildings  are  all  of  stone.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  205

natives  than  that  they  also  assert  that  their  ancestors  were
valiant,  and  esteemed  by  the  Kings  of  Cuzco.  I  have  heard
that  the  Spaniards  took  a  quantity  of  treasure  from  the
burial-places,  or  hiiacas.  These  valleys  being  so  fertile,  as
I  have  said,  a  great  quantity  of  sweet  canes  have  been
planted  in  one  of  them,  of  which  they  make  much  sugar  for
sale  in  the  cities  of  this  kingdom.  The  great  road  of  the
Yncas  passes  through  all  these  valleys,  and  in  some  parts  of
the  desert  signs  may  be  seen  to  indicate  the  road  that
should  be  taken.

Beyond  these  valleys  of  Nasca  is  that  of  Acari,  and  fur-
ther on  are  those  of  Ocoiia,  Camana,  and  Quilca,  in  which
there  are  great  rivers.^  Notwithstanding  that  at  the  pre-
sent time  these  valleys  contain  few  inhabitants,  in  former
times  they  were  populous,  but  the  wars  and  calamities  have
reduced  their  numbers  of  late  years  until  there  are  now  few
left.  These  valleys  are  as  fruitful  and  abundant  as  the
others,  and  are  well  adapted  for  breeding  stock.

Beyond  this  valley  of  Quilca,^  which  is  the  port  of  the
city  of  Arequipa,  are  those  of  Chuli,  Tambopalla,  and  Ylo.
Further  on  are  the  rich  valleys  of  Tarapaca.  Out  of  the  sea,
in  the  neighbourhood  of  these  valleys,  rise  some  islands
much  frequented  by  seals.  The  natives  go  to  them  in
halsas,  and  bring  a  great  quantity  of  the  dung  of  birds  from

•  I  know  of  only  one  modern  traveller  who  has  visited  and  described
the  coast  valleys  of  Acari,  Ocoua,  and  Camana  ;  namely,  that  noble  old
warrior  General  JNIiller,  who  led  his  patriot  troops  from  Quilca  to  Pisco
in  1823,  a  most  difficult  march  over  trackless  deserts,  and  through  a
country  then  in  possession  of  the  Si>aiiiards.

The  Camana  valley,  which  ia  its  upper  part  is  called  Majes,  has  a  con-
siderable river ;  and  contains  olive  yards,  vineyards,  and  sugar  planta-
tions. It  is  in  1.5'  57'  S.  The  yellow  aji  or  capsicum  of  Camana  is  also
famous,  and  guano  has  been  used  as  mamu-e  in  its  cultivation  from  time
immemorial.

-  Quilca  Avas  the  port  of  Arequipa  until  the  year  1827,  when  it  was
supplanted  by  its  present  successful  rival  Islay,  some  leagues  further  down
the  coast.


266  THE    TRAVELS    OP

tlie  rocks,  to  apply  to  tlieir  crops  of  maize,  and  they  find  it
so  efficacious  that  the  land,  which  formerly  was  sterile,  be-
comes very  rich  and  fruitful.  If  they  cease  to  use  this
manure  they  reap  little  maize.  Indeed  the  people  could
not  be  supported  if  the  birds,  lodging  on  the  rocks  round
these  islands,  did  not  leave  that  which  is  afterwards  col-
lected, and  considered  so  valuable  as  to  become  an  article  of
trade  between  the  natives.^

It  does  not  appear  to  me  necessary  to  dwell  longer  on
the  things  concerning  these  valleys,  for  I  have  already
written  down  the  principal  things  I  saw  or  was  able  to
obtain  notice  of.  I  will  conclude,  therefore,  by  sapng  that
there  are  now  few  natives,  and  that  in  ancient  times  there
were  palaces  and  store-houses  in  all  the  valleys,  the  tribute
rendered  to  the  Kings  Yncas  being  conveyed  partly  to
Cuzco,  partly  to  Hatuncolla,  partly  to  Vilcas,  and  partly  to
Caxamalca.  The  principal  grandeur  of  the  Yncas  was  in
the  Sierro.     I  now  pass  on  to  the  valleys  of  Tarapaca.

It   is    certain  that  there  are  very  rich   mines   in   these

'  This  account  of  the  use  of  guano  by  the  ancient  Peruvians  is  exceed-
ingly curious.  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  also  describes  the  use  made  by
them  of  the  deposits  of  guano  on  the  coast.  He  says:  "  On  the  shores
of  the  sea,  from  below  Arequipa  to  Tarapaca,  which  is  more  than  two
hundred  leagTies  of  coast,  they  use  no  other  manure  than  that  of  sea  birds,
which  abound  in  all  the  coasts  of  Peru,  and  go  in  such  great  flocks  that
it  would  be  incredible  to  one  who  had  not  seen  them.  They  breed  on
certain  uninhabited  islands  which  are  on  that  coast ;  and  the  manure  which
they  deposit  is  in  such  quantities  that  it  would  ahnost  seem  incredible.
In  the  time  of  the  kings,  who  were  Yncas,  such  care  was  taken  to  guard
these  birds  in  the  breeding  season,  that  it  was  not  laA\'ful  for  any  one  to
land  on  the  isles,  on  pain  of  death,  that  the  birds  might  not  be  frightened,
nor  driven  from  their  nests.  Neither  was  it  lawful  to  kill  them  at  any
time,  either  on  the  island  or  elsewhere,  also  on  pain  of  death.  Each
island  was,  by  the  Yncas,  set  apart  for  the  use  of  a  particular  province,
and  the  guano  was  fairly  divided,  each  village  receiving  a  due  portion"
(ii,  lib.  V,  cap.  iii).     See  also  Antiguedades  Feruanax,  p.  77.

Frezier  mentions  that,  when  he  was  on  the  coast  in  1713,  guano  was
brought  from  Iquique,  and  other  ports  along  the  coast,  and  landed  at
Arica  and  Ylo,  for  the  aji  and  other  crops.     Frezier's  South  Sea,  p.  152.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  267

valleys  of  Tarapaca,  of  white  and  resplendent  silver.  Fur-
ther on,  I  am  told  by  those  who  have  travelled  in  these
parts,  there  are  some  deserts  which  extend  to  the  borders
of  the  government  of  Chile.^  Along-  all  this  coast  they  kill
fish,  some  of  them  good,  and  the  Indians  make  balsas  of
sealskin  for  their  fisliing ;  and  in  some  parts  there  are  so
many  seals  that  the  noise  they  make  when  congregating
too:ether  is  a  thino-  worth  hearing.


CHAPTER    LXXVI.


Of  the  founding  of  the  city  of  Arcquipa,  how  it  was  founded,  and
who  was  its  founder.

The  distance  from  the  City  of  the  Kings  to  that  of  Arequipa
is  one  hundred  and  twenty  leagues.  The  city  of  Arequipa
is  built  in  the  valley  of  Quilca,  fourteen  leagues  from  the  sea,
in  the  most  healthy  and  best  part  for  building.  The  situa-
tion and  climate  of  this  city  is  so  good  that  it  is  praised  as
the  most  healthy  in  all  Peru,  and  the  most  pleasant.  The
country  yields  very  good  wheat,  of  which  they  make  ex-
cellent bread.  The  jurisdiction  of  the  city  extends  from
Acari  to  Tarapaca,  and  there  are  also  some  villages  belong-
ing to  it  in  the  province  of  Condesuyo.  Hubinas,  Chiqui-
guanita,  Quimistaca,  and  Collaguas  are  villages  belonging-
to  this  city,  which  were  formerly  very  populous,  and  pos-
sessed many  flocks  of  sheep.  The  civil  wars  of  the  Span-
iards have  now  destroyed  the  greater  part  both  of  the
natives  and  of  the  sheep.  The  Indians  who  were  natives  of
these  mountain  villages  worshipped  the  sun,  and  buried  their
chiefs  in  great  tombs,  in  the  same  manner  as  was  practised
by  other  Indians.  They  all  go  about  clothed  in  shirts  and
>  Tlie  desert  of  Atacama.


268  THE    TRAVELS    OF

mantles.  Ancient  royal  roads  traversed  these  parts,  made
for  tlie  Kings ;  tliere  were  palaces  and  store-honses,  and  all
tlie  natives  gave  tribute  of  their  crops.  This  city  of  Ai^e-
quipa,  being  so  near  a  seaport^  is  well  supplied  with  Spanish
goods,  and  most  of  the  treasure  which  is  sent  from  Charcas
comes  here,  and  is  put  on  board  ships  which  are  generally
lying  off  Quilca,  to  be  taken  to  the  city  of  the  Kings.

Some  Indians  and  Christians  declare  that,  opposite  to
Acari,  but  very  far  out  at  sea,  there  are  some  large  and  rich
islands,  and  it  is  publicly  reported  that  much  gold  is
brought  from  them  to  trade  with  the  natives  of  this  coast.
I  left  Peru  in  1550,  and  in  that  year  the  Lords  of  the  Royal
Audience  charged  the  captain  Gomez  de  Sohs  with  the  dis-
covery of  these  islands.  It  is  believed  that  they  must  be
rich,  if  they  exist.

*  Concerning  the  founding  of  the  city  of  Arequipa  I  have
only  to  say  that,  when  it  was  founded,  it  was  in  another
place,  and  that  it  was  removed  to  its  present  site,  as  being
more  convenient.^  Near  it  there  is  a  volcano,  which  some
fear  will  burst  forth  and  do  mischief.^  Sometimes  there  are
great  earthquakes  in  this  city,^  which  the  Marquis  Don
Francisco  Pizarro  founded  and  settled,  in  the  name  of  his
Majesty,  in  the  year  of  our  redemption  1540.

•  The  original  site  was  in  the  rear  of  the  little  village  of  Cayma.

2  The  splendid  volcano  of  Misti  rises  immediately  in  the  rear  of  the
city  of  Arequipa,  in  a  perfect  cone  capped  with  snow,  to  a  height  of
18,000  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  or,  according  to  Pentland,  20,300
feet.

^  The  most  terrible  earthquakes  at  Arequijia,  took  place  as  follows  : —


January  2,

1582

August  22,

1715

February  18,

1600

May  13,

1784

November  23

,  1604

1812

December  9,

1609

July  10,

1821

1613

October  9,

1831

ISIay  20,

1666

June  3,

1848.  Between  10

Ai)ril  23,

1668

P.M.  and   2   a.m.

there  were  forty

October  21,

1687

terrific  shocks.

PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    1)E    LEON.  2G0


CHAPTER    LXXVII.

In  which  it  is  declared  how  that,  beyond  the  province  of  Iluancabamba,
there  is  that  of  Caxamarca,  and  other  large  and  very  populous
provinces.

In  most  of  tlie  provinces  of  this  great  kingdom  the  natives
imitate  each  other  so  closely  that^  in  many  things,  one  may
say  that  they  all  seem  to  be  one  people ;  and  for  this  reason
I  touch  briefly  upon  such  matters  in  some  parts  of  my  work,
because  I  have  treated  more  fully  of  them  in  others.

Now  that  I  have  finished  all  I  have  to  say  concerning  the
coast  valleys,  I  shall  return  to  the  mountains,  I  have  already
written  an  account  of  the  villages  and  edifices  from  Quito  to
Loxa,  and  of  the  province  of  Huancabamba,  where  I  halted,
in  order  to  treat  of  the  foundation  of  San  Miguel  and  of
other  subjects.  Returning  now  to  the  former  route,  it
seems  to  me  that  the  distance  from  Huancabamba  to  the
province  of  Caxamarca  is  fifty  leagues,  a  Httle  more  or  less.
This  province  is  famous  as  the  scene  of  Atahualpa's  im-
prisonment, and  is  noted  throughout  the  kingdom  for  its
riches.  The  natives  of  Caxamarca  state  that  they  were
much  esteemed  by  their  neighbours  before  the  Yncas  sub-
dued them,  and  that  they  had  their  temples  and  places  of
worship  in  the  loftier  parts  of  the  mountains.  Some  of
them  say  that  they  were  first  subdued  by  the  Ynca  Yupan-
qui,  others  that  it  was  not  so,  but  that  his  son  Tupac  Ynca
Yupanqui  first  conquered  them.  Whoever  it  may  have
been,  it  is  stated  positively  that  before  he  became  lord  of
Caxamarca,  they  killed  the  greater  part  of  his  troops,  and
that  they  were  brought  under  his  yoke  more  by  intrigues  and
by  soft  and  winning  speeches  than  by  force.^     The  native

>  After  the  armies  of  Ynca  Pachacutec,  under  the  command  of  his
brother,  the  able  general  Ccapac  Yupanqui,  had  conquered  the  Huanca
nation,  that  commander  invaded  the  province  of  Caxamarca  in  al)out


270  THE    TRAVELS    OF

ch-iefs  of  this  province  were  mucli  respected  by  their  Indians,
and  they  had  many  women.  One  of  the  wives  was  the
principal,  and  her  son,  if  she  had  one,  succeeded  in  the
lordship.  When  the  chiefs  died  the  same  customs  were
observed  as  have  already  been  described.  Their  wives  and
riches  were  buried  with  them,  and  there  was  much  and
long-continued  lamentation.  Their  temples  and  places  of
worship  were  much  venerated,  and  the  blood  of  sheep  and
lambs  was  offered  up  as  sacrifice.  They  say  that  the
ministers  of  these  temples  conversed  with  the  devil;  and
when  they  celebrated  their  festivals,  they  assembled  a  vast
concourse  of  people  in  a  clear  open  space,  and  performed
dances,  during  which  they  consumed  no  small  quantity  of
wine  made  from  maize.  They  all  go  dressed  in  mantles
and  rich  tunics,  and  wear  a  peculiar  head-dress  as  a  dis-
tinguishing mark,  being  narrow  cords  in  the  manner  of  a
fillet.

AVhen  the  Yncas  had  subdued  this  pro^^nce  of  Caxa-
marca,  it  is  said  that  they  valued  it  greatly,  and  ordered

1380  A.D.  The  natives  replied  to  the  usual  Yucarial  summons,  by  saying
that  they  had  no  need  for  new  gods  or  new  laws  beyond  those  which  they
had  received  from  their  ancestors.  The  Yucarial  troops  were  victorious
in  the  open  ground,  but  the  natives  of  Caxamarca  then  retreated  into  their
fortified  strongholds,  and  made  contmual  forays.  Thus  the  war  lasted
for  fom-  months,  but  the  Ynca  general  lost  no  opportunity  of  ingTatiating
himself  with  the  enemy,  setting  the  jirisoners  at  liberty,  curing  the
wounded,  and  sending  messages  of  peace  and  amity  to  the  hostile  chiefs.
At  last  the  people  of  Caxamarca  began  to  reflect  that  they  might  meet
a  harder  fate  than  that  of  submitting  to  rulers  who,  wliile  they  were  able
to  kill,  treated  their  prisoners  with  so  much  kindness.  The  chiefs  sent  in
their  submission,  and  were  confirmed  in  their  privileges,  while  the  pro-
vince of  Caxamarca  became  an  integral  part  of  the  empire  of  the  Yncas.
The  general  Ccapac  Yupanqui  was  accompanied  in  this  campaign  by  his
youtlrful  nephew  the  Ynca  Yupanqui,  who  afterwards  succeeded  his
father  Tachacutec  as  tenth  Ynca  of  Peru.

It  was  by  this  enlightened  policy  of  conciUation,  accompanied  by
vigorous  movements  in  the  field,  tliat  most  of  the  conquests  of  the  Yncas
were  effected.     G.  de  la  Vega,  i,  lib.  vi,  cap.  xv.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  271

palaces  and  a  very  grand  temple  of  the  sun  to  be  built,
besides  many  store-houses.  The  virgins  of  the  temple  were
employed  in  weaving  very  fine  cloths,  which  they  dyed
with  better  and  more  perfect  colours  than  can  be  done  in
most  other  parts  of  the  world.  In  this  temple  there  were
great  riches  for  its  services ;  and  on  certain  days  the
ministers  saw  the  devil,  with  whom  they  had  intercourse
and  converse.  There  were  a  great  number  of  Mitimaes  in
this  province  of  Caxamarca,  obeying  the  sujDerintendent,  who
had  orders  to  collect  tribute  and  bear  rule  over  the  province.
The  officers  in  charge  of  store-houses  in  various  parts  of  the
country  came  to  him  to  give  an  account  of  their  charge,  for
he  was  the  chief  officer  in  these  districts,  and  also  bore  rule
over  many  of  the  coast  valleys.  And  although  the  people
on  the  coast  had  the  temples  and  sanctuaries  already
described  by  me,  and  many  others,  yet  many  of  them  came
to  worship  the  sun,  and  to  offer  sacrifices.  There  are  many
things  worthy  of  note  in  the  palaces  of  the  Yncas,  especially
some  very  fine  baths,  where  the  chiefs  bathed  when  they
were  lodged  in  those  edifices.^

'  The  valley  of  Caxamarca  (^Ccasa,  "  frost,"  and  marca^  "  tower"  or
"  house"  in  Quichua)  is  about  five  leagues  long  and  three  broad.  It  is
intersected  with  green  hedges  enclosing  himdreds  of  small  plots  bearing
liixm-iant  crops,  and  a  river  winds  from  one  extremity  to  the  other.
Himiboldt  believed  this  valley  to  be  the  bottom  of  an  ancient  lake.  The
soU  is  extremely  fertile,  and  the  plain  is  full  of  gardens  and  fields,  tra-
veled by  avenues  of  daturas,  willows,  and  the  beautiful  quenuar  tree
{Polylepis  villosa).  In  the  northern  part  of  the  plain,  small  porphyritic
domes  break  thi'ough  the  sandstone  strata,  and  probably  once  fonned
islands  in  the  ancient  lake,  before  its  waters  had  flowed  off.

Atahualpa  had  a  palace  at  the  warm  sulphur  baths  of  Pultamarca,  in
tliis  plain,  some  shght  remains  of  which  can  still  be  traced.  The  large
deep  basin,  forming  the  baths,  appears  to  have  been  artificially  excavated
in  the  sandstone  rock  above  one  of  the  fissures  through  which  the  spring
issues.  There  are  also  slight  remains  of  the  fort  and  palace  of  Atahualpa
in  the  town.  The  palace  was  situated  on  a  hill  of  porphyry.  The  most
considerable  ruins  still  visible  are  only  from  thirteen  to  fifteen  feet  high,
and  consist  of  fine  cut  blocks  of  stone  two  or  tlirce  feet  long,  and  placed


272  THE    TRAVELS    OE

Now  the  province  of  Caxamarca  is  much  diminislied  in
importance ;  for  when  Huayna  Ccapac^  the  rightful  king  of
these  realms,  died  in  the  very  year  that  the  Marquis  Don
Francisco  Pizarro,  with  his  thirteen  companions,  by  the
grace  of  God,  discovered  this  prosperous  kingdom,  his
first-born  and  general  heir,  Huascar,  being  the  eldest  son
that  he  had  by  his  legitimate  wife  the  Ccoya  (which  is  the
name  of  the  Queen),  took  the  fringe  and  crown  of  the  whole
kingdom,^  as  soon  as  his  father^s  death  was  known  in
Cuzco.  He  sent  messengers  in  all  directions,  with  orders
that,  since  his  father  was  dead,  all  men  should  obey  him  as
sole  lord.  But,  during  the  war  of  Quito,  waged  by  Huayna
Ccapac,  the  great  captains  Chalcuchima,  Quizquiz,  Yncla-
hualpec,  and  Rumi-iiaui  had  been  engaged,  who  were  very
famous,  and  had  intrigued  to  make  another  new  Cuzco
in  Quito,  and  to  form  a  kingdom  in  the  northern  pro-
vince, divided  and  separated  from  Cuzco.  They  wished
to  take  for  their  lord  a  noble  and  very  intelligent  youth
named  Atahualpa,  who  was  well  beloved  by  all  the  veteran
soldiers  and  captains,  for  he  had  set  out  with  his  father
from  Cuzco  at  a  tender  age,  and  marched  with  the  army  for

upon  each  other  without  cement.  The  cacique  Astopilco,  a  descendant
of  Atahualpa,  resided  in  a  part  of  these  ruins  at  the  time  when  Hum-
boldt and  Stevenson  visited  Caxamarca.  The  room  was  shown  them,
where  the  unhappy  Atahualpa  was  kept  a  prisoner  for  nine  months  in
1532-33.     HumboldCs  Aspects.     Stevenson^  ii,  cap.  v.

Prescott  gives  the  amount  of  gold  collected  for  Atahualpa's  ransom  at
Caxamarca  at  1,326,539  pesos  de  oro.,  besides  51, CIO  marcs  of  silver.
(From  Xeres.,  in  Barcia's  Coll.^  iii,  p.  232.  Xeres  was  Pizarro's  secre-
tary.) The  peso  or  castellano  de  oro  was  equal,  in  commercial  value,  to
£2  :  12  :  6  ;  so  that  the  gold  alone,  of  this  ransom,  was  worth  £3,500,000.
Prescott^  i,  p.  425.

1  "When  Pizarro  rudely  pulled  Atahualpa  from  his  chair,  and  took  hun
prisoner,  a  soldier  named  INliguel  Astete  tore  the  crimson  fringe,  the
token  of  his  sovereignty,  from  his  forehead.  Astete  kejit  the  fringe  until
1557,  when  he  gave  it  to  Sayri  Tupac,  the  son  of  Ynca  ]\Ianco,  who  was
recognized  as  Ynca,  and  received  a  pension  from  the  viceroy  ]Marquis  of
Canete.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  273

a  long  time.  Some  Indians  even  say  that  Huayna  Ccapac
himself,  before  his  death,  reflecting  that  the  kingdom  which
he  left  was  so  vast  as  to  extend  along  a  thousand  leagues  of
coast,  determined  to  leave  Quito  and  his  other  conquests  to
Atahualpa.  However  this  may  be,  it  is  certain  that,  when
Atahualpa  and  his  followers  knew  that  Huascar  desired  them
to  yield  obedience  to  him,  they  took  up  arms.  It  is  said,
however,  that  at  first,  by  the  cunning  of  one  captain  Atoco,
Atahualpa  was  made  prisoner  in  the  province  of  Tumebamba,
and  that  he  escaped  by  the  help  of  a  woman,  and  reached
Quito,  where  he  assembled  his  troops.  He  gave  battle  to  the
captain  Atoco  near  Ambato,  and  the  army  of  Huascar  was
then  defeated,  as  I  shall  more  fully  relate  in  the  third  part
of  this  work,  in  which  I  treat  of  the  discovery  and  conquest
of  this  kingdom.  As  soon  as  the  defeat  and  death  of
Atoco  were  known  in  Cuzco,  the  captains  Huancauque  and
Yncaroque,  with  a  large  force,  set  out  from  Cuzco  by  order
of  the  King  Huascar,  and  waged  a  great  war  with  Ata-
hualpa, to  force  him  to  yield  obedience  to  the  rightful
King  Huascar.  Atahualpa  not  only  refused  to  do  this,
but  sought  to  obtain  the  kingdom  for  himself.  Thus  there
was  a  great  struggle,  and  it  is  affirmed  by  the  Indians
themselves  that  more  than  100,000  men  were  killed  in  the
wars  and  battles,  in  which  Atahualpa  was  always  victorious.^

^  This  account  differs  slightly  from  that  given  by  Garcilasso  de  la
Vega,  which  is  as  follows.

After  the  death  of  the  Ynca  Huayna  Ccapac  in  1526,  his  two  sons,
Huascar  and  Atahualpa,  reigned  peaceably  for  about  four  or  five  years,
the  former  at  Cuzco,  and  the  latter  at  Quito.  At  last  the  elder  brother
became  jealous  of  the  power  of  his  rival  at  Quito,  and  sent  an  envoy
demanding  that  he  should  do  him  homage  as  sole  and  sovereign  lord.
Atahualpa  replied  that  he  would  most  willingly  submit  to  the  rule  of  the
Ynca,  and  announced  his  intention  of  making  a  journey  to  Cuzco,  accom-
panied by  all  his  vassals,  to  take  an  oath  of  obedience,  and  to  celebrate
the  obsequies  of  their  common  father.  Under  this  feigned  submission
Atahualpa  concealed  the  treacherous  intention  of  attacking  and  dethron-
ing his  brother.     He  collected  thirty  thousand  armed  Indians  luider  the


274  THE    TRAVELS    OP

At  last  lie  came  witli  his  army  to  tlie  province  of  Caxa-
marca  (which  is  the  reason  that  I  treat  of  his  history  in  this

command  of  his  two  generals  Challcucliima  and  Qiiizquiz,  and  sent  them
by  different  ways  towards  Cuzco,  disguised  as  ordinary  serving  men.
Huascar  had  so  little  suspicion  of  treachery  that  he  ordered  these  men  to
be  supplied  with  clotliing  and  provisions  on  the  road.  The  passage  of  so
many  armed  men  through  the  provinces,  excited  the  alarm  of  several
veteran  governors,  who  warned  Huascar  of  his  danger ;  but  meanwhile
the  forces  of  Atahualpa  had  crossed  the  river  Apm-imac  without  opposi-
tion, and,  raising  their  banners,  threw  off  the  mask  and  advanced  as  open
enemies.  Thorouglily  alarmed,  Huascar  siuumoned  the  chiefs  of  the
southern,  eastern,  and  western  districts,  Colla-suyu,  Anti-suyu,  and
Cunti-suyu.  Cliincha-suyu,  the  northern  province,  was  ah-eady  in  the
power  of  Atahualpa.  Those  of  Cimti-suyu  alone  had  time  to  join  the
Ynca,  with  thirty  thousand  undiscipKned  Indians.  The  forces  of  Ata-
hualpa advanced  to  the  attack  without  delay,  in  order  that  there  might
be  no  time  for  more  reinforcements  to  reach  Cuzco,  and  a  desperate
battle  was  fought  at  a  place  called  Quepaypa  (Hterally  of  my  trumpet)^
a  few  leagues  west  of  Cuzco.  Garcilasso  mentions  that,  as  a  boy  at  school
in  Cuzco,  he  twice  visited  this  battle  field,  when  out  hawking  in  the
neighbourhood.  The  battle  lasted  dui-ing  the  whole  day.  At  last  the
veteran  troops  of  Atahualpa,  who  had  served  in  all  his  father's  wars,
triumphed  over  the  raw  levies  of  his  more  peaceful  brother,  Huascar  was
taken  prisoner  after  a  thousand  of  his  body  guard  had  fallen  around  him,
and  most  of  his  faithful  curacas  or  chiefs  volimtarily  sm-rendered,  in
order  to  share  the  fate  of  their  beloved  lord.  This  battle  took  place  in
1532.  Atahualpa  was  not  present  at  the  battle,  but  he  hm-ried  to  Cuzco
on  hearing  of  his  victory.  l\Jiowing  that,  according  to  the  ancient  laws
of  the  empire,  he,  as  an  illegitimate  sou,  could  not  inlierit  the  crown  ;  he
resolved  to  put  all  the  legitimate  heii-s  out  of  his  way  by  indiscruninate
slaughter.  Not  only  did  he  order  all  his  haK -brothers  to  be  put  to  death,
but  also  his  imcles,  nephews,  and  cousins  of  the  blood  royal,  and  most  of
the  faithful  nobles  of  Huascar.  One  of  the  Ynca's  wives,  named  Mama
Huarcay,  fled  Avith  her  little  daughter  Coya  Cusi  Huarcay,  who  after-
wards married  Sayri  Tupac,  the  Ynca  who  was  pensioned  by  the  marquis
of  Cauete  in  1553.  Out  of  so  large  a  family  several  other  members  also
escaped  from  the  fate  intended  for  them  by  the  cruel  Atahualpa.  Among
these  were  the  mother  of  the  historian  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  and  her
brother  Hualpa  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui ;  ISlanco,  PauUu,  and  Titu,  legi-
timate sons  of  Huayna  Ccapac  ;  and  several  princesses,  who  were  baptised
after  the  conquest.  Of  these,  Beatrix  Coya  married  Don  Martin  de
ISIustincia  (the  royal  accountant),  and  had  three  sons ;  Leonora  Coya
married  fir.st  Don  ,Tuan  Balsa,  by  Ashuui  she  had  a  sou — a  schoolfellow  of


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  275

part),  and  here  lie  first  heard  of  the  strange  people  who
had  entered  the  country,  and  who  were  then  not  far  off.
Thinking  it  certain  that  it  would  be  very  easy  to  capture
them  and  hold  them  as  his  servants,  he  ordered  his  captain
Chalcuchima  to  march  to  Cuzco  with  a  great  army,  and
either  seize  or  kill  his  enemy.  Meanwhile  he  himself  re-
mained in  Caxamarca,  at  which  place  the  governor  Don
Francisco  Pizarro  arrived,  and  afterwards  those  events  took
place  which  ended  in  the  encounter  between  the  forces  of
Atahualpa  and  the  Spaniards  (who  did  not  number  more  than
one  hundi-ed  and  fifty  men) ,  the  death  of  many  Indians,  and
the  imprisonment  of  Atahualpa.  Owing  to  these  troubles,  and
to  the  length  of  time  that  the  Christian  Spaniards  remained
there,  Caxamarca  received  much  damage,  and  as,  for  our
sins,  there  have  never  ceased  to  be  civil  wars,  it  has  not
recovered.  It  is  held  in  encomienda  by  the  captain  Mel-
chor  Verdugo,  a  citizen  of  Truxillo.^      All  the  edifices  of

Garcilasso,  and  secondly  Don  Francisco  de  Villacastin  ;  and  there  were
about  a  hundred  other  survivors  of  Ynca  blood.  The  Ynca  Huascar  him-
self was  thrown  into  prison  at  Xauxa,  and  murdered  by  order  of  Ata-
hualpa, after  the  latter  had  been  made  prisoner  by  Pizarro.  Huascar
was  a  mild  and  amiable  prince,  and  fell  a  victim  to  his  guileless  and
unsuspicioiLS  disposition.     G.  de  la  Vega,  i,  lib.  ix,  caps.  32  to  40.

This  is  the  version  given  by  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  of  the  war  between
Huascar  and  Atahualpa.  As  a  descendant  of  the  Yncas  he  was  of  course
strongly  prejudiced  in  favour  of  his  maternal  ancestors,  and  his  account
of  Atahualpa's  cruelties  after  his  victory,  are  probably  much  exaggerated.
At  the  same  time  no  one  covdd  have  had  better  opportunities  of  obtaining
authentic  information,  and  doubtless  the  principal  facts  are  correct.

Velasco  defends  the  conduct  of  Atahualpa  through  thick  and  thin.  As
a  native  of  the  province  of  Quito,  he  naturally  takes  the  part  of  the  last
sovereign  of  Ids  own  country,  whose  subsequent  misfortunes  throw  a  veil
over  his  cruelties  and  treason  to  the  Yncas  of  Cuzco.  Hist,  de  Quito,  ii,
p.  76.

1  Melchor  Verdugo  was  a  native  of  the  town  of  Avila,  in  Spain.  He  dis-
tinguished himself  in  the  battle  of  Chupas,  fighting  against  the  younger
AhnagTO,  and,  receiving  the  district  of  Caxamarca  in  encomienda,  settled
himself  at  Truxillo.  As  a  townsman  and  partizan  of  the  ill-fated  viceroy
Blasco  Nuuez,  he  was  in  bad  odour  with  the  pai'ty  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  and

t2


276  THE    TRAVELS    OF

the  Yncas  and  the  storehouses  are^  like  the  rest^  in  a  ruin-
ous condition.

This  province  of  Caxamarca  is  very  fertile^  and  yields
wheat  like  another  Sicily.  They  also  breed  stock,  and
raise  abundance  of  maize  and  of  edible  roots,  and  of  all  the
fruits  which  I  have  mentioned  as  growing  in  other  parts.
Besides  these,  there  are  falcons,  many  partridges,  doves,
pigeons,  and  other  game.  The  natives  are  well-mannered,
peaceful,  and  amongst  themselves  they  have  some  good
customs,  so  as  to  pass  through  this  'life  without  care.
They  think  little  of  honour,  and  are  not  ambitious  of  having
any,  but  they  are  hospitable  to  Christians  who  pass  through
their  province,  and  give  them  good  food,  without  doing
them  any  evil  turn,  even  when  the  traveller  is  solitary.
For  these  and  other  things  the  Spaniards  praise  the  In-
dians of  Caxamarca.  They  are  very  ingenious  in  forming
irrigating  channels,  building  houses,  cultivating  the  land,
breeding  stock,  and  in  working  gold  and  silver.  They  also
make,  with  their  hands,  as  good  tapestry  from  the  wool  of
their  sheep  as  is  to  be  found  in  Flanders,  and  so  fine  that

was  seized  by  Carbajal,  but  evaded  pursuit,  and  was  concealed  by  his
Indians  at  Caxamarca  until  lie  thought  it  safe  to  return  to  Truxillo.  He
escajied  from  Peru  by  an  act  of  unsurpassed  audacity.  A  vessel  arrived  at
the  port  of  Tnixillo,  from  Callao,  and  Verdugo  resolved  to  seize  her.  He,
therefore,  collected  about  twenty  armed  men,  upon  whom  he  could  depend,
and  concealed  them  in  his  house.  He,  then,  sent  for  the  master  and  pilot,
saying  that  he  wanted  to  ship  some  merchandise  for  Panama,  and  as  soon
as  he  got  them  into  his  house  he  locked  them  up.  Presently  the  alcaldes
of  the  town  walked  down  the  street  with  a  notary,  and  Yerdugo,  throw-
ing open  a  window,  called  out  to  them  to  come  in,  as  he  w^anted  them  to
witness  a  deed,  and  could  not  come  out  to  them,  owing  to  a  disease  in  his
legs.  They  entered,  without  suspecting  anything,  and  were  immediately
put  in  irons  and  locked  up  with  the  master  and  pilot  of  the  ship.  Re-
turning to  his  window,  Yerdugo  continued  to  call  up  people  he  saw
passing,  saying  he  had  something  to  say  to  them,  until  he  had  more  than
twenty  of  the  principal  people  of  the  town,  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro's  party,
safely  locked  up.  He  then  told  them  that  he  would  take  them  all  in  the
ship  with  him,  unles.s  they  paid  a  ransom,  and,  after  thus  collecting  a


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  277

the  threads  of  it  look  like  silk,  although  they  are  only  wool.
The  women  are  amorous,  and  some  of  them  are  beautiful.
They  go  dressed  in  the  same  way  as  the  Fallas,  or  ladies  of
Cuzco.  The  temples  and  huacas  are  now  in  ruins,  and  the
idols  are  broken,  many  of  the  Indians  having  become
Christians.  There  are  always  priests  and  friars  among
them,  teaching  them  our  holy  Catholic  faith.


CHAPTER    LXXVIII.


Of  the  foundation  of  the  city  of  the  frontier,  who  was  its  founder,  and
of  some  customs  of  the  Indians  in  the  province.

Before  reaching  this  province  of  Caxamarca,  a  road  branches
off,  which  was  also  made  by  order  of  the  Kings  Yncas.  It
leads  to  the  country  of  the  Chachapoyas,  where  the  city  of
the  frontier  is  built.  It  will  be  necessary  to  relate  how  it
was  founded,  and  I  shall  then  pass  on  to. treat  of  Huanuco.
I  hold  it  to  be  quite  certain  that,  before  the  Spaniards  con-
quered this  country  of  Peru,  the  Yncas,  who  were  its  natural
lords,  had  great  wars  and  made  many  conquests.  The
Chachapoyas  Indians  were  conquered  by  them,  although
they  first,  in  order  to  defend  their  Hberty,  and  to  Hve  in
ease  and  tranquilHty,  fought  with  such  fury  that  the
Yncas  fled  before  them.  But  the  power  of  the  Yncas
was  so  great  that  the  Chachapoyas  Indians  were  finally
forced  to  become  servants  to  those  Kings,  who  desired  to

large  sum  of  money  in  gold  and  silver,  he  went  on  board,  and  sailed  for
Nicaragua  ;  where  his  ship  was  seized  by  Palomino,  an  officer  serving
under  Hinojosa,  Gonzalo  Pizarro's  admiral  at  Panama.  Verdugo  then
collected  three  small  vessels  in  the  lake  of  Nicaragua,  and,  descending  the
river,  entered  the  sea  and  sailed  to  Xombre  de  Dios,  and  thence  to  Car-
thagena.  After  the  arrival  of  the  president  Gasca  at  Panama,  Yerdugo
returned  to  Spain,  and  received  the  habit  of  Santiago  from  the  Emperor.
Eventually  he  returned  to  his  estates  in  Peru.    Zarate^  lib.  vi,  cap.  vi,  etc.


278  THE    TRAVELS    OP

extend  tlieir  sway  over  all  people.^  As  soon  as  tlie  royal
government  of  the  Yncas  was  establislied,  many  persons
came  from  Cuzco  to  secure  its  continuance,  who  received
land  to  cultivate,  and  sites  for  their  houses,  not  very  far
from  a  hill  called  Carmenca,  close  to  the  present  city.  As
there  were  disturbances  in  the  provinces  bordering  on  Cha-
chapoyas,  the  Yncas  ordered  frontier  garrisons  to  be  esta-
blished under  the  command  of  some  of  the  Orejones,  to
overawe  the  natives.  For  this  reason  there  were  great
stores  of  all  the  arms  used  by  the  Ynca  soldiers,  to  be  ready
in  case  of  need.

These  Indians  of  Chachapoyas  are  the  most  fair  and  good-
looking  of  any  that  I  have  seen  in  the  Indies,  and  tlieir
women  are  so  beautiful  that  many  of  them  were  worthy  to
be  wives  of  the  Yncas,  or  inmates  of  the  temples  of  the
sun.  To  this  day  the  Indian  women  of  this  race  are  ex-
ceedingly beautiful,  for  they  are  fair  and  well  formed.  They
go  dressed  in  woollen  cloths,  like  their  husbands,  and  on
their  heads  they  wear  a  certain  fringe,  the  sign  by  which
they  may  be  known  in  all  parts.  After  they  were  subjugated
by  the  Yncas,  they  received  the  laws  and  customs  according
to  which  they  lived,  from  them.  They  adored  the  sun  and
other  gods,  like  the  rest  of  the  Indians,  and  resembled  them
in  other  customs,  such  as  the  burial  of  their  dead  and  con-
versing with  the  devil.

The  marshal  Don  Alouzo  de  Alvarado,  being  a  captain

'  Chachapoyas  was  a  district  to  the  eastward  of  Caxamarca,  inhabited
by  brave  men  aud  beautiful  women,  according  to  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega.
Their  chief  god  was  tlie  condor,  and  they  also  woi-shipped  snakes.  These
Indians  were  attacked  by  the  Ynca  Tupac  Yupanqui,  and  a  fierce  war
ensued.  They  defended  themselves  in  fortresses  perched  on  inaccessible
heights,  and  were  only  dislodged  after  a  prolonged  resistance.  After  the
death  of  their  conqueror,  they  rebelled  against  his  son  Huayna  Ccapac,
but  were  again  subdued  and  pardoned.  The  modern  town  of  Chacha-
poyas gives  its  name  to  a  bishopric,  with  a  diocese  extending  over  that
part  of  the  vast  forest-covered  region  of  the  Amazon  and  its  tributaries
which  lies  within  tlie  boimdaries  of  Peru.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  279

under  tlie  Marquis  Don  Francisco  Pizarro,  entered  this  pro-
vince.^ After  he  had  conquered  it,  and  reduced  the  natives  to
the  service  of  his  Majesty,  he  peopled  and  founded  the  city  of
the  frontier  in  a  strong  place  called  Levanto,  and  began  to
prepare  the  ground  for  building  with  spades  and  pickaxes ;
but  in  a  few  days  he  removed  to  another  province,  which  is
considered  healthy,  inhabited  by  the  Huancas.^  The  Cha-
chapoyas  Indians  and  these  Huancas  serve  the  citizens  of
the  new  city  who  hold  encomiendas  over  them,  and  the  same
thing  is  done  in  the  province  called  Cascayunca,  and  in
others  which  I  refrain  from  mentioning,  as  I  have  seen  little
of  them.  In  all  these  provinces  there  were  great  store-
houses of  the  Yncas ;  the  villages  are  very  healthy,  and
near  some  of  them  there  are  rich  gold  mines.  All  the  natives
go  about  in  clothes,  men  as  well  as  women.  They  sacrificed
to  their  gods,  and  had  great  flocks  of  sheep.  They  made
rich  and  valuable  cloth  for  the  Yncas,  and  they  still  make
it,  as  well  as  such  fine  and  beautiful  tapestry  as  would  be
highly  esteemed  anywhere.  In  many  parts  of  the  provinces
subject  to  this  city,  there  are  trees  and  fruits  like  those
already  described.  The  land  is  fertile,  and  wheat  and
barley  yield  well,  as  well  as  vines,  fig-trees,  and  other  fruit
trees  of  Spain  that  have  been  planted.  In  customs,  cere-
monies, modes  of  burial,  and  sacrifices,  the  same  may  be
said  of  these  Indians  as  of  all  the  others,  for  they  also
buried  their  dead  in  great  tombs,  accompanied  by  live
women  and  their  riches.

>  Alonzo  de  Alvarado,  a  brother  of  Cortes's  famous  companion,  was
detached  by  Pizarro  with,  orders  to  conquer  Chachapoyas  ;  but  he  was
so  constantly  engaged  in  the  ci\dl  wars,  until  his  death,  that  he  had
little  time  to  spare  in  conquering  and  settling  this  province  ;  which  duty
devolved  upon  his  second  son.

2  The  Huancas  were  the  inhabitants  of  the  valley  of  Xauxa,  or  more
properly  Sausa.  They  are  described  by  Garcilasso  as  living  in  small
Adllages  strongly  fortified,  and  worehiijping  dogs.  The  Huancas  men-
tioned by  Cieza  de  Leon,  were  probably  MUimaes  sent  into  the  Chacha-
poyas district  by  the  Yncas.


280  THE    TRAVELS    OF

The  Spaniards  have  farms  in  the  vicinity  of  the  city  for
their  crops  and  animals^  where  they  reap  a  great  quantity
of  wheat  J  and  the  legumes  of  Spain  also  yield  well.  The
Cordillera  of  the  Andes  passes  to  the  eastward  of  the- city,
and  to  the  west  is  the  South  Sea.  Beyond  the  woods  and
fastnesses  of  the  Andes  is  Moyobamba/  and  other  very
large  rivers,  and  some  villages  of  Indians  who  are  less
civihsed  than  those  I  have  been  describing;  as  I  shall
repeat  in  the  account  of  the  conquest  made  by  the  captain
Alonzo  de  Alvarado  in  Chachapoyas,  and  by  Juan  Perez  de
Guevara  in  the  provinces  which  are  situated  in  the  forests.
It  may  be  held  for  certain  that  the  land  in  this  part  is
peopled  by  the  descendants  of  the  famous  captain  Anco-
allo,  who,  owing  to  the  cruelty  of  the  captains-general  of  the
Ynca  towards  him,  fled  from  his  native  country,  and  went
away  with  those  Chancas  who  desired  to  follow  him,-  as  I

•  ISIoyobamba  is  now  the  chief  town  of  the  modern  province  of  Loreto,
which  inckides  all  the  course  of  the  Amazon  and  its  tributaries  within  the
boundaries  of  Peru.  It  contains  about  fom'teen  thousand  inhabitants,  and  is
built  near  the  river  Mayo,  an  affluent  of  the  Huallaga.  The  ground  consists
of  sandstone,  which  is  easily  washed  away  by  the  heavy  rains,  and  deep
ravines  have  been  formed  in  the  course  of  time,  some  of  them  thirty  and
forty  yards  deep,  which  intersect  and  break  up  the  town.  The  inhabit-
ants are  employed  in  making  straw  hats,  which  are  exported  to  Brazil.
Apuntes^  &ca.^  por  Aniotiio  Raimondy^  p.  60.

^  The  Chanca  Indians  originally  inhabited  the  valley  of  Andahuaylas,
between  Cuzco  and  Guamanga.  They  were  invaded  by  the  Ynca  Rocca,
sixth  in  descent  from  Manco  Ccapac,  and  obliged  to  submit  to  his  yoke.
But  soon  after  the  accession  of  Rocca's  son  Yahuar-huaccac,  the  Chancas
rose  in  rebeUion  under  their  chief  Anco-huallu,  a  youth  of  twenty-six
years  of  age.  The  pusillanimous  Ynca  not  only  neglected  to  march
against  him,  but  even  abandoned  Cuzco,  and  retreated  in  an  oj^posite
direction.  His  son  Huira-ccocha,  however,  was  a  man  of  different  metal.
He  led  an  army  against  the  insurgents,  and  utterly  defeated  them  in  a
bloody  and  well-contested  battle  on  the  Yahuar-pampa,  or  "  plain  of
blood."  Anco-huallu  received  a  full  pardon,  and  for  ten  years  he  continued
to  reside  in  his  native  valley  as  a. tributary  chief.  But  this  dependent  jjosi-
tion  was  di.stasteful  to  him,  and  eventually  he  emigrated  with  eight  thou-
sand followers,  and  settled  in   the  forests  of  the  ISIoyobamba  district.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  281

shall  relate  in  the  second  part.  Fame  relates  wonderful
things  of  a  lake,  on  the  shores  of  which  it  is  said  that  the
villages  of  these  people  are  built.

In  the  year  of  our  Lord  1550  there  arrived  at  the  city  of
the  frontier  (the  noble  cavalier  Gomez  de  Alvarado  being
then  its  governor)  more  than  two  hundred  Indians,  who  re-
lated that  it  was  some  years  since  a.  great  body  of  them
started  from  the  land  where  they  lived,  and  travelled  over
many  provinces,  but  that  they  had  fought  so  many  battles
that  only  the  number  of  men  I  have  mentioned  were  left.
These  Indians  declare  that  to  the  eastward  there  are  vast
and  populous  regions,  some  of  them  very  rich  in  gokP  and
silver.  These  Indians,  with  those  who  were  killed,  set  out
to  seek  new  lands  for  their  homes,  at  least  so  I  have  heard.^
The  captain  Gomez  de  Alvarado,  the  captain  Juan  Perez  de
Guevara,   and   others,    have    demanded   the    grant  of  this

Garcilasso  tells  us  that  the  exact  position  of  his  new  settlement  was  never
exactly  known,  the  report  merely  stating  that  he  descended  a  great  river,
and  cstabUshed  his  people  on  the  banks  of  a  beautiful  lake.  Mr.  Spruce
has  suggested  that  Anco-huallu  and  his  Chancas  conquered  ]\Ioyobamba,
and  drove  the  original  inhabitants  out,  who,  descending  the  Huallaga  and
Amazon,  settled  between  the  rivers  Ucayali,  Marauon,  and  Yavari,  and
were  the  progenitors  of  the  fierce  and  untameable  modern  tribe  of  Afat/o-
ruims  (^Mayu^  a  river,  and  runa^  a  man  in  Quichua).  G.  de  la  Vega^  i,
hb.  V,  cap.  26.

'  The  word  for  gold  in  Quichua  is  ccuri.  In  theTuj^i  language,  which
was  prevalent  among  the  Indians  of  the  river  Amazon,  the  word  curt
means  coloured  earths,  much  used  in  plastering  huts,  and  for  other  pur-
poses. It  is  very  probable  that  Spaniards  from  Peru  who  descended  into
the  valley  of  the  Amazon,  asked  for  ccuri  (gold),  and  were  told  there
was  plenty  of  curi  (coloured  earth)  ;  and  that  from  tliis  mistake  the  fame
of  the  wealth  of  Omagua  and  El  Dorado  arose.

2  For  an  account  of  tins  remarkable  emigration  of  Indians  from  Brazil,
see  my  Introduction  to  the  Expedition  of  Pedro  de  Ursua  (''  Search  for
El  Dorado.^'  Hakluyt  Society's  volume  for  1861,  p.  xxviii,  and  p.  2
of  the  text.)  Their  chief,  named  Yu-aratu,  was  sent  to  Lima,  and  it  was
hLs  reix)rt  that  led  to  the  organisation  of  the  expedition  in  search  of
El  Dorado  and  Omagua,  which  descended  the  Amazon  in  1559,  under
Pedro  de  Ureua,  and  met  with  so  tragic  a  fate.


282  •  THE    TRAVELS    OF

region,  and  many  soldiers  have  waited  on  the  viceroy  for
permission  to  follow  these  captains,  if  they  receive  a  com-
mission to  make  this  discovery.

The  city  of  the  frontier  was  founded  and  settled  by  the
captain  Alonzo  de  Alvarado,  in  the  name  of  his  Majesty,
the  Adelantado  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  being  his  governor
of  Peru,  in  the  year  of  our  redemption  1536.


CHAPTER    LXXIX.


Which  treats  of  the  foundation  of  the  city  of  Leon  de  Iluauuco,  and
who  -was  its  founder.

To  describe  the  founding  of  the  city  of  Leon  de  Huanuco,
it  must  be  understood,  first,  that  when  the  Marquis  Don
Francisco  Pizarro  founded  the  rich  City  of  the  Bangs  in  the
valleys  and  deserts  of  the  coasts,  all  the  provinces  which
were  then  within  the  jurisdiction  of  that  city  had  to  do  ser-
vice, and  the  citizens  held  encomiendas  over  the  chiefs.
And  the  tyrant  Yllatopa,  with  other  Indians  of  his  tribe,
waged  war  against  the  natives  of  the  district,  and  ruined
the  villages,  so  that  the  repartimientos  became  excessive.
At  the  same  time  many  of.  the  conquerors  were  without  any
encomienda  of  Indians.  The  Marquis  was,  therefore,  de-
sirous of  gratifying  these  Spaniards,  especially  some  who
had  followed  the  Adelantado  Don  Diego  de  Almagro,  and
had  afterwards  become  his  friends,  by  giving  them  Indians.
He  wished  to  satisfy  those  who  had  laboured  for  his  Majesty
by  giving  them  some  profit  from  the  land ;  and,  notwith-
standing that  the  municipality  of  the  City  of  the  Kings
protested  against  what  they  thought  might  be  to  their
detriment,  he  named  the  captain  Gomez  de  Alvarado,
brother  to  the  Adelantado  Don  Pedro  de  Alvarado,  as  his


PEDlvO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  283

lieutenant  to  found  a  city  in  the  province  called  Huanuco,
with  a  small  force  of  Spanish  soldiers.  Thus  Gomez  de
Alvarado  set  out,  and,  after  some  encounters  with  the
natives,  he  founded  the  city  of  Leon  de  Huanuco,  and
named  persons  to  hold  offices  in  it.  After  some  years  the
new  city  was  abandoned  on  account  of  the  general  insurrec-
tion throughout  the  kingdom.  Pedro  Barroso  returned  to
build  this  city  again.  Finally,  with  powers  from  the  Hcen-
tiate  Cristoval  Vaca  de  Castro,  after  the  bloody  battle  of
Chupas,  Pedro  de  Puelles  completed  the  settlement,  Juan
de  Varagas  and  others  having  previously  captured  the
tyrant  Yllatopa.  It  may,  therefore,  be  said  that  Gomez
de  Alvarado  founded  the  city,  for  he  gave  it  the  name  it
now  bears,  and  if  it  was  abandoned  afterwards,  this  was
more  from  necessity  than  from  inclination.  It  was  founded
in  the  name  of  his  Majesty,  by  the  authority  of  the  Marquis
Don  Francisco  Pizarro,  his  governor  and  captain-general
in  this  kingdom,  in  the  year  of  the  Lord  1539.


CHAPTER    LXXX.


Of  the  situation  of  tliis  city,  of  the  fertility  of  its  fields,  and  of  the
customs  of  its  inhabitants :  also  concerning  a  beautiful  edifice  or
palace  of  the  Yncas  at  Huanuco.

The  situation  of  this  city  of  Leon  do  Huanuco  is  good,  and
is  considered  very  healthy.  It  is  praised  as  a  place  where
the  nights  and  mornings  are  cool,  and  where  men  are
healthy,  owing  to  a  good  climate.  They  reap  wheat  and
maize  in  great  abundance,  and  they  also  have  grapes,  figs,
oranges,  lemons,  Hmes,  and  other  fruits  of  Spain;  and  of
the  fi^uits  of  the  country  there  are  many  kinds  which  are
excellent.     They  grow  the  pulses  of  Spain,  and  besides  all


284  THE    TRAVELS    OP

these  there  are  large  banana  plantations.  Thus  it  is  a
prosperous  town^  and  there  is  hope  that  it  will  increase
every  day.  They  breed  many  cows^  goats^  and  mares  in
the  fields^  and  have  abundance  of  pigeons^  doves^  partridges,
and  other  birds,  as  well  as  falcons  to  fly  at  them.^  In  the
forests  there  are  some  lions  and  very  large  bears,  besides
other  animals.  The  royal  roads  passed  through  the  villages
near  this  city,  and  *here  were  store-houses  of  the  Yncas,
well  supplied  with  provisions.

In  Huanuco  there  was  a  fine  royal  edifice,  the  stones  of
which  were  large  and  very  accurately  set.  This  palace  was
the  chief  place  in  the  pro^nnces  of  the  Andes,  and  near  it
there  was  a  temple  of  the  sun,  with  many  virgins  and  priests.
It  was  so  grand  a  place  in  the  time  of  the  Yncas,  that  more
than  30,000  Indians  were  set  apart  solely  for  its  service.^

>  The  climate  of  Huanuco  is  delightful.  The  thermometer  seldom  rises
above  72°  in  the  shade,  nor  sinks  below  66°,  and  no  place  in  the  world
equals  it  as  a  retreat  for  patients  suffering  from  diseases  of  the  lungs —
but  it  is  terribly  inaccessible.  The  plain  stOl,  as  in  the  days  of  Cieza  de
Leon,  yields  wheat  and  maize,  bananas,  figs,  coifee,  cotton,  grapes,  pome-
granates, oranges,  lemons,  citrons,  and  limes.     Sniith''s  Peru  As  It  Is.

2  The  ruins  of  the  Huanuco  palace  or  temple  are  chiefly  interesting
from  the  six  portals,  one  witliin  the  other,  which  are  well  preserved.
There  is  also  a  species  of  look  out,  which  was  probably  the  place  where
the  priests  offered  their  sacrifices  to  the  sun.  The  architecture  of  these
ruins  is  very  distinct  from  that  of  other  Ynca  edifices,  and  would  appear
to  be  of  earher  date.  The  Indians  know  these  ruins  by  the  name  of
Auqui  Huanuco.  The  look  out  is  56  paces  long  by  36  in  width,  the  height
of  the  waU  five  yards,  and  inchned  inwards  from  the  base.  It  rests  upon
two  courses  of  round  stone,  about  five  feet  high.  The  walls  are  of  cut
stone  and  terminate  in  a  cornice,  the  stones  being  4^  feet  long  and  1|  feet
thick.  Tlie  interior  is  composed  of  gravel  and  clay,  and  in  the  centre
there  is  a  large  cavity,  wliich  is  said  to  communicate  with  the  palace  by
a  subterranean  passage.  The  look  out  is  approached  by  a  steep  ramp
or  inclined  plane,  and  two  figures  of  animals  are  carved  on  either  side  of
the  entrance.

The  palace  is  entered  by  six  portals.  On  entering  the  first  there  are
halls,  100  yards  long  by  14  wide,  on  either  side.  The  walls  are  built  of
round  stones  mixed  with  clay,  the  doorways  alone  having  cut  stone.  These
doorways  are  9  feet  high  and  4i  broad,  the  lintels  being  of  a  single  stone,


PEDRO    DE    C'lEZA    DE    LEON.  285

The  overseers  of  the  Indians  had  charge  of  the  collection  of
tribute^  and  the  people  of  the  surrounding  districts  assisted
the  work  at  the  palace  with  their  services.  When  the  Kings
Yncas  ordered  that  the  lords  of  the  provinces  should  appear
personally  at  the  court  of  Cuzco,  they  came.  It  is  said  that
the  Indians  of  many  of  these  nations  were  hardy  and  vahant,
and  thatj  before  the  Yncas  subjugated  them,  they  had  many
cruel  wars,  so  that  the  people  were  scattered  and  did  not
know  each  other,  except  when  they  gathered  together  at
their  assembles  and  festivals.  They  built  fortresses  on  the
heights,  and  carried  on  wars  with  each  other  on  very  slight
provocation.  Their  temples  were  in  places  convenient  for
making  sacrifices  and  performing  other  superstitious  rites,
and  where  those  could  hear  the  replies  of  the  devil  who
were  set  apart  for  that  duty.  They  believed  in  the  immor-
tality of  the  soul  in  that  same  blind  fashion  as  is  common
with  all  the  other  Indians.  These  Indians  of  Huanuco  are
intelligent,  but  they  answer  Yes !  to  everything  that  is
asked  of  them.^  The  chiefs,  when  they  died,  were  not  put
into  their  tombs  alone,  but  were  accompanied  by  the  most
beautiful  of  their  wives,  as  is  the  custom  with  all  the  other
tribes.     These  dead  men  lie  with  their  souls  outside  their

12  feet  long  and  1^  thick.  The  jambs  are  of  a  single  piece.  Tliree  yards
fiu"ther  on  is  the  second  portal,  resembling  the  first,  with  two  figures
carved  on  the  upj^er  part.  This  leads  into  a  spacious  court,  at  the  other
end  of  which  are  two  smaller  doorways  in  a  line,  leading  into  a  smaller
covirt,  and  finally  there  are  two  other  portals,  still  smaller,  and  of  sculp-
tiu:ed  stone.  Beyond  the  sLxth  portal  there  are  rooms  with  stone  walls
containing  niches,  and  an  aqueduct  passes  through  one  of  these  rooms,
which  is  said  to  have  been  the  bathing  place  of  the  Ynca.  In  front  of
the  building  there  is  a  broad  artificial  terrace,  and  underneath  a  large
court,  with  a  receptacle  for  water  in  the  centre.

The  stones  of  which  the  ruins  are  composed  were  taken  from  a  ridge
about  half  a  mile  distant,  and  some  are  yet  to  be  seen,  lying  cut  in  the
quarry.

^  In  these  days  a  Peruvian  Indian  answers  No  !  {Manan  canchn)  to
everything  that  is  asked  of  him.  The  change  is  one  of  the  baneful  results
of  three  centuries  of  Spanish  domination.


286  THE    TRAVELS    OP

bodies,  and  the  -women  who  are  buried  witli  them  in  the
great  vaults  await  the  awful  hour  of  death,  holding  it  to  be
an  auspicious  and  happy  thing  to  go  with  their  husbands  and
lords,  and  beheving  that  they  will  soon  again  have  to  do
them  the  same  service  as  they  did  in  this  world.  Thus  it
seemed  to  them  that  the  sooner  they  departed  from  this  life
the  sooner  they  would  see  their  lords  and  husbands  in  the
other.  This  custom  originates,  as  I  have  said  before  on  other
occasions,  from  the  apparition  of  the  devil  in  the  fields  and
houses,  in  the  form  of  chiefs  who  had  died,  accompanied  by
their  wives  who  had  been  buried  ahve.  There  were  some
sorcerers  who  watched  the  signs  of  the  stars  amongst  these
Indians.

After  these  people  were  conquered  by  the  Yncas  they
adopted  their  rites  and  customs.  In  each  of  their  villages
there  were  royal  store-houses,  and  they  adopted  more  decent
ways  of  dressing  and  ornamenting  themselves,  and  spoke
the  general  language  of  Cuzco  in  confoi'mity  with  the  law
and  edict  of  the  Kings,  which  ordered  that  all  their  subjects
should  know  and  speak  it.

The  Conchucos,  the  great  provinces  of  Huaylos,  Tamara,
Bombon,  and  other  districts  large  and  small,  are  under
the  jurisdiction  of  this  city  of  Leon  de  Huanuco ;  they  are
all  very  fertile  and  productive,  yielding  many  edible  roots
which  are  wholesome  and  nourishing,  and  good  for  the
sustenance  of  animal  life.  In  former  times  there  was  so
great  a  number  of  flocks  of  sheep  that  they  could  not  be
counted,  but  the  late  wars  have  caused  their  destruction  to
such  an  extent  that  very  few  remain.  The  natives  preserve
them  for  the  sake  of  their  fleeces,  from  which  they  make
their  woollen  clothing.  The  houses  of  these  Indians  are
built  of  stone,  and  thatched  with  straw.  On  their  heads
they  all  wear  peculiar  head-di'esses  of  cords,  by  which  they
are  known.  Although  the  devil  has  had  great  power  over
them,  I  have  not  heard  that  they  commit  the  abominable


TEDRO   DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  287

crime.     In  truths  however,  as  in  all  other  parts,  there  must
bo  bad  men  among  them.

In  many  parts  of  this  province  they  find  great  mines  of
silver,  and  when  the  Spaniards  begin  to  work  them  they
will  yield  largely.


CHAPTER    LXXXI.


Of  what  there  is  to  be  said  concerning  the  country  from  Caxamarca  to
the  valley  of  Xauxa ;  and  of  the  district  of  Guamachuco,  which
borders  on  Caxamarca.

Having  told  all  that  I  was  able  to  gather  touching  the
foundation  of  the  cities  of  the  frontier  of  Chachapoyas  and
of  Leon  de  Huanuco,  I  shall  now  return  to  the  royal  road,
and  describe  the  provinces  between  Caxamarca  and  the  beau-
tiful valley  of  Xauxa,  a  distance  of  eighty  leagues,  a  little
more  or  less,  all  traversed  by  the  royal  road  of  the  Yncas.

Eleven  leagues  beyond  Caxamarca  there  is  another  large
province  called  Huamachuco,  which  was  once  very  pojjulous,
and  half  way  on  the  road  to  it  there  is  a  very  pleasant  and
dehghtful  valley.  It  is  surrounded  by  mountains  and  is
therefore  cold,  but  a  beautiful  river  flows  through  it,  on  the
banks  of  which  grow  wheat,  vines,  figs,  oranges,  lemons,
and  many  other  plants  which  have  been  brought  from
Spain.  In  ancient  times  there  were  buildings  for  the  chiefs
in  the  meadows  and  dales  of  this  vaUey,  and  many  cul-
tivated fields  for  them  and  for  the  temple  of  the  sun.  The
province  of  Huamachuco  is  like  that  of  Caxamarca,  and  the
Indians  are  of  the  same  race,  imitating  each  other  in  their
religion  and  sacrifices,  as  well  as  in  their  clothes  and  head-
dress. In  times  past  there  were  great  lords  in  this  province
of  Huamachuco  who  were  highly  favoured  by  the  Yncas.


288  THE    TRAVELS    OF

In  the  principal  part  of  the  province  there  is  a  great  plain,
where  the  tampus  and  royal  palaces  were  built,  amongst
which  there  are  two  the  thickness  of  which  was  twenty-two
feet,  and  the  length  as  much  as  a  horse^s  gallop,  all  made  of
stone,  embellished  with  huge  beams,  over  which  the  straw
was  laid  with  much  skill.  Owing  to  the  late  troubles  the
greater  part  of  the  population  of  this  province  has  perished.
The  climate  is  good,  more  cold  than  hot,  and  the  country
abounds  in  all  things  necessary  for  the  sustenance  of  man.
Before  the  Spaniards  arrived  there  were  great  flocks  of
sheep  in  the  province  of  Huamachuco,  and  in  the  lofty  and
uninhabited  mountains  there  were  other  wild  kinds,  called
guanacos  and  vicunas,  which  resemble  those  which  are
domesticated.

They  told  me  that,  in  this  province,  the  Yncas  had  a  royal
chase,  and  the  natives  were  forbidden  to  enter  it  for  the
purpose  of  killing  the  wild  animals,  on  pain  of  death.  It
contained  some  hons,  bears,  and  deer.  When  the  Ynca  de-
sired to  have  a  royal  hunt,  he  ordered  three  thousand,  four
thousand,  ten  thousand,  or  twenty  thousand  Indians  to
surround  a  wide  tract  of  country,  and  gradually  to  con-
verge until  they  could  join  hands.  The  game  was  thus
collected  in  the  centre,  and  it  is  great  fun  to  see  the  guana-
cos,  how  they  jump  up  into  the  air  with  fright,  and  run  from
one  side  to  the  other,  seeking  for  a  way  to  get  out.  Another
party  of  Indians  then  enters  the  enclosure,  armed  with  clubs,
and  kiUs  the  number  of  animals  that  the  lord  requires,
often  ten  thousand  or  fifteen  thousand  head,  such  was  the
abundance    of  these    animals.^     They  made  very  precious

*  The  Yncas  restricted  all  hunting  by  their  subjects,  and  the  nmnber
of  animals  of  all  descriptions  consequently  multiplied  prodigiously.  At
a  certain  season  of  the  year,  after  breeding  time,  the  Yncas  and  governors
of  provinces  held  a  grand  hunt,  called  Chacu  in  Quichua.  As  many  as  thirty
thousand  Indians  were  assembled,  who  sun-ounded  a  space  of  several  square
leagues,  and  gi'adually  drove  all  the  animals  into  the  centre,  closing  upon
them  until  tliey  were  so  close  as  to  be  easily  caught  by  hand.    Very  often


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  289

cloth  from  the  wool  of  the  vicunas,  for  the  use  of  the  Ynca,
his  wives,  and  children,  and  to  ornament  the  temples.
These  Indians  of  Huamachuco  are  very  docile,  and  have
almost  always  been  in  close  alliance  with  the  Spaniards.
In  times  past  they  had  their  religious  superstitions,  and
worshipped  certain  stones  as  large  as  eggs,  and  others, still
larger,  of  different  colours,  which  they  kept  in  their  Jiuacas
in  the  snowy  mountain  heights.  After  they  were  conquered
by  the  Yncas  they  worshipped  the  sun,  and  became  more
civilised,  both  in  their  government  and  in  their  personal
habits.  In  their  sacrifices  they  shed  the  blood  of  sheep
and  lambs,  flaying  them  ahve  without  cutting  ofi"  their
heads,  and  presently  cutting  out  their  hearts  and  entrails
with  great  rapidity,  to  search  in  them  for  signs  and  omens  ;
for  some  of  them  were  sorcerers,  who  also  watched  the
courses  of  comets,  like  other  heathens.  The  devil  came  to
the  place  where  they  had  their  oracles,  with  whom  it  is
publicly  known  that  they  held  converse.  Now  these  things
have  come  to  an  end,  their  idols  are  destroyed,  and  a  cross
has  been  raised  in  their  stead,  to  strike  terror  and  dismay
into  our  adversary  the  devil.  Some  of  the  Indians,  with
their  wives  and  children,  have  become  Chi'istians,  and  every
day,  by  reason  of  the  preaching  of  the  holy  gospel,  more

there  were  as  many  as  forty  thousand  head  of  gumiacos  and  vicunas  alone.
Most  of  the  female  quanacos  and  vicunas,  and  a  certain  number  of  males,
were  then  released ;  but  they  were  shorn  of  their  wool  before  they  were
allowed  to  go  free.  The  rest  were  kiEed.  The  deer  were  also  killed,  and
the  meat  was  distributed  amongst  the  Indians.  An  accurate  account
was  kept  of  the  number  released,  the  nmnber  killed,  and  the  number
shorn,  by  means  of  the  quipus.  The  coarse  wool  of  the  guanacos  was
then  given  to  the  people,  while  that  of  the  vicunas,  as  fine  as  silk,  was
reserved  for  the  Ynca's  service.  These  hunts  were  held  in  each  district
eveiy  four  years,  giving  three  years  of  rest  for  the  animals  to  multiply.
The  Indians  dried  the  meat  which  was  served  out  to  them,  and  this  pre-
served meat,  called  charqui  in  Quichua  (hence  "jerked  beef"),  lasted
them  until  another  hunting  year  came  round.  G.  de  la  Vega.  Comm.
ReaJ,  i,  lib.  vi,  cap.  6.


290  THE    TRAVELS    OF

are  converted,  for  in  these  buildings  and  edifices  there  are
clergymen  who  teach  the  people.  The  royal  road  of  the
Yncas  goes  from  the  province  of  Huamachuco  to  the  Con-
chucos,  and  in  Bombon  it  joins  another  road  equally  large.
One  of  these  roads  is  said  to  have  been  made  by  order  of
Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui,  and  the  other  by  order  of  his  son
Huayna  Ccapac.


CHAPTER    LXXXII.


In  which  it  is  told  how  the  Yncas  ordered  that  the  storehouses  sliould  be
well  provided,  and  how  these  were  kept  in  readiness  for  the  troops.

The  royal  road  of  the  Yncas  goes  from  this  province  of
Huamachuco  to  the  province  of  the  Conchucos,  a  distance
of  two  short  days'  journey,  and  half-way  there  were  build-
ings and  store-houses  prepared  for  the  reception  of  the
Kings  when  they  travelled  this  way ;  for  it  was  their  custom,
when  they  visited  any  part  of  this  kingdom,  to  travel  in
great  state,  and  to  be  served  with  all  things  appertaining
to  their  rank ;  and  it  is  said  that,  except  on  occasions  when
their  service  required  it,  the  Yncas  did  not  travel  more  than
four  leagues  each  day.  In  order  that  there  might  be  suf-
ficient food  to  support  their  retinue,  there  were  buildings
and  store-houses  at  every  four  leagues,  with  great  abund-
ance of  all  the  provisions  that  the  surrounding  districts
could  supply.  The  lieutenants  and  overseers  who  resided
at  the  chief  stations  in  the  provinces  took  special  care  that
the  natives  kept  these  tampus  well  provisioned.  And  that
one  might  not  have  to  contribute  more  of  this  tribute  than
another,  accounts  were  kept  by  a  kind  of  knots,  called
quipu,  which  were  understood,  and  thus  there  was  no
fraud.     Certainly,  although  to  us  it  may  appear  confusing


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  291

and  obscure,  this  is  a  good  way  of  keeping  accounts,  as  I
•will  more  fully  show  in  the  second  part.^  Between  Huama-
chuco  and  the  Conchucos,  although  it  was  two  days'  journey,
there  were  store-houses  and  tampus  in  two  places  on  the
road,  which  is  always  kept  very  clean.  If  some  of  the
mountains  were  rocky,  the  road  was  made  in  steps,  having
great  resting  places  and  paved  ways,  which  are  so  strong
that  they  will  endure  for  many  ages.

In  the  Conchucos  there  were  buildings  and  other  things,
as  in  the  provinces  we  have  passed,  and  the  natives  are  of
middle  height.  They  and  their  wives  go  dressed,  and  they
wear  distinguishing  cords  or  fringes  on  their  heads.     It  is

^  The Peruviany2iipr<5  were  of  twisted  wool,  and  consisted  of  a  large  cord,
with  finer  threads  fastened  to  it  by  knots.  These  fringes  contained  the  con-
tents of  the  qii  ipu^  which  were  denoted  either  by  single  knots  or  by  artificial
inter  twinings.  Sometimes  the  main  cord  was  five  or  six  yards  long,  at  others
not  more  than  a  foot.  The  different  colours  of  the  threads  had  different
meanings  ;  and  not  only  was  the  colour  and  mode  of  intertwining  of  the
knots  to  be  considered,  in  reading  a  quipu,  but  even  the  mode  of  twisting
the  tlu-ead,  and  the  distance  of  knots  from  each  other,  and  from  the  main
cord.  The  registers  of  tribute  ;  the  enrohnent  of  tribes,  distinguishing  be-
tween taxpayers,  aged,  invalids,  women,  and  children  ;  lists  of  ai-ms  and
troops ;  inventories  of  the  contents  of  storehouses ;  all  these  were  the  prunary
uses  of  the  quipus.  But  they  were  also  made  available  for  recording  the
most  striking  events,  and  thus  supplied  the  place  of  chronicles.  Acosta
says  that  the  ancient  Peruvians,  by  their  combinations  of  larger  and
smaller  tlu-eads  ;  double  and  single  knots  ;  green,  blue,  white,  black,  and
red  colours  ;  could  express  meanings  and  ideas  as  innumerable,  as  we  can
by  the  different  combinations  of  our  twenty -four  letters.

All  attempts,  in  modern  times,  to  decipher  the  quipus  found  in  tombs,
have  failed  ;  yet  there  are  Indians  of  noble  family,  especially  in  the
southern  part  of  Peru,  who  know  the  secret  of  deciphering  these  intri-
cate memorials,  but  guard  it  as  a  sacred  trust  transmitted  from  their
ancestors.  The  quipu  records  referring  to  matters  of  revenue  or  regis-
tration were  kept  by  officers  called  QuApu-camayoc  ;  wliile  the  chronicles
of  events  were  recorded  by  the  Amautas  or  learned  men,  and  the  poems
and  song's  by  Haravecs  or  bards.  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  distinctly  states
that  the  sole  specimen  of  Quichua  poesy  preserv'ed  in  his  work,  was  ob-
tained from  an  ancient  quipu  record  by  the  missionary  Bias  Valera.  See
G.  de  la  Vega^  i,  lib.  vi,  cap.  8.  Acosta,  lib.  vi,  cap.  8.  Antiffuedades
Feruanas,  cap.  b.     Markham's  Quichua  Dictionari/,  etc.,  p.  11.

u  2


292  THE    TRAVELS    OF

said  that  the  Indians  of  this  province  were  warlike,  and  that
the  Yncas  would  have  had  some  trouble  in  subjugating  them
if  they  had  not  always  managed  to  conciliate  their  enemies
by  kind  deeds  and  friendly  speeches.  Some  of  these  Indians,
on  various  occasions,  have  killed  Spaniards,  insomuch  that
the  Marquis  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  sent  the  captain  Fran-
cisco de  Chaves^  against  them  with  some  Christians,  who
waged  a  terrible  and  awful  war.     Some  say  that  he  burnt

'  The  name  of  Francisco  de  Chaves  deserves  honourable  mention,  as
that  of  one  of  the  few  Spaniards  who  protested  against  the  foul  and
dastardly  murder  of  the  Ynca  Atahualpa  by  Pizarro,  at  Caxamarca.  He
and  liis  brother  Diego,  natives  of  Truxillo,  Francisco  IMoscoso,  Pedro  de
Ayala,  Diego  de  ISIora,  Heruando  de  Haro,  Pedro  de  Meudoza,  Juan  de
Herrada,  Alonzo  de  Avila,  and  Bias  de  Atienza  were  the  principal  officers
who  raised  their  voices  against  that  horrible  crime.  Their  names  deserve
to  be  remembered  far  more  than  do  those  of  the  famous  thirteen  who
crossed  the  line  drawn  by  Pizarro  on  the  sea-shore  of  the  isle  of  Gallo.

On  the  march  from  Caxamarca  to  Cuzco,  Pizarro's  small  force  was
attacked  by  the  Indians  led  by  the  Ynca  general  Quizquiz,  and,  after  a
long  and  well  contested  battle,  the  Indians  retired,  taking  several  Spanish
prisoners  with  them,  among  whom  was  Francisco  de  Chaves.  He  was
brought  before  Atahualpa's  brother,  the  Ynca  Titu  Atauchi,  and  was
treated  with  great  kindness  because  he  had  protested  against  the  perpe-
tration of  the  murder  ;  while  another  prisoner  named  Cuellar,  who  had
acted  as  notary  and  been  present  at  the  Ynca's  execution,  was  himself
most  justly  put  to  death  by  the  Indians.  Chaves  was  cm-ed  of  his
wounds,  and  set  free  with  many  gifts.  Pizarro  and  his  other  comrades
were  astonished  when  he  arrived  at  Cuzco,  having  mourned  liim  as  dead,
since  the  day  that  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Indians.

The  remaining  part  of  his  history  is  not  so  creditable,  for  he  seems  to
have  committed  great  atrocities  in  his  Conchucos  war.  The  statements
of  Cieza  de  Leon  are  quoted  by  G.  de  la  Vega  (ii,  hb.  ii,  cap.  28),  who
corroborates  the  account  given  by  the  former,  of  the  cruelties  perpetrated
by  Chaves : — a  shameful  return  for  the  kindness  and  forbearance  he  had
himself  experienced  at  the  hands  of  the  Indians.  He  was  with  Pizarro
when  the  assassins  came  to  muj-der  him.  Pizarro  called  to  Chaves  to
close  the  door,  in  order  that  he  and  his  friends  might  have  time  to  arm.
Instead  of  obeying,  Chaves  went  out  to  parley  with  the  intruders,  and
met  them  coming  up  the  stairs.  He  had  scarcely  asked  them  their  busi-
ness before  he  was  stabbed  to  death,  and  his  body  hurled  down  the  steps.
The  assas.sins  then  completed  their  bloody  work  by  the  murder  of  the
conqueror  of  Peru.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  293

aud  impaled  a  great  number  of  Indians.  At  about  tbis
time,  or  a  Httle  earHer,  the  general  insurrection  of  all  tbe
otlier  provinces  took  place,  wben  more  tban  seven  hundred
Christian  Spaniards  were  put  to  cruel  deaths  by  the  Indians
between  Cuzco  and  Quito.  God  delivered  us  from  the  fuiy
of  the  Indians,  which  is  truly  fearful  when  they  can  efiect
their  desires.  Howbeit,  the  Indians  said  that  they  fought
for  their  liberty,  and  to  escape  from  the  cruel  treatment
they  received  from  the  Spaniards,  who  had  become  lords  of
their  land  and  of  themselves.^

In  this  province  of  the  Conchucos  there  have  always  been
rich  mines  of  gold  and  silver.  Sixteen  leagues  further  on
is  the  province  of  Piscobamba,  in  which  there  was  a  stone
building  for  the  lords,  which  was  rather  broad  and  very
long.  The  people  go  clothed,  as  do  all  the  Indians  who
are  natives  of  Piscobamba,  and  they  wear  certain  small
pieces  of  red  wool  on  their  heads.  Their  customs  are  the
same  as  those  of  their  neighbours,  and  they  are  now  in-
telligent, docile,  and  well-disposed  towards  the  Christians.
The  land,  where  they  have  their  villages,  is  very  fertile  and
prolific,  and  there  are  abundant  supplies  of  provisions.

Further  on  is  the  province  of  Huaraz,  which  is  eight
leagues  from  Piscobamba,  over  very  rugged  mountains.  Here
it  is  an  admirable  thing  to  see  how  the  royal  road  is  made  to
pass  over  these  mountains,  always  broad  and  level,  and  in
some  parts  the  live  rock  is  cut  away  to  form  steps  and  resting-
places.  The  Indians  of  this  province  also  are  of  middling
height,  and  they  are  excellent  workmen.  They  worked  the
silver  mines,  and  in  former  times  paid  their  tribute  to  the
Kings  Yncas  in  silver.  Among  the  ancient  buildings  there
is  a  great  fortress  in  the  form  of  a  square,  with  sides
measuring  one  hundred  and  forty  paces,  the  breadth  being
rather  more.     On  many  parts  of  it  faces  and  human  figures

^  Nor,  if  he  woiilcl  speak  out,  was  our  young  author  without  sympathy
for  the  Indians,  and  their  sufferings.


294  THE    TEAVELS    OP

are  carved  witli  most  skilful  workmansliip.  Some  of  the
Indians  say  tliat,  in  token  of  triumph,  the  Yncas  ordered
this  memorial  to  be  raised  in  memory  of  a  victory.  Others
relate  that,  long  before  the  time  of  the  Yncas,  there  were
giants  as  large  as  the  figures  that  are  carved  on  the  stones,
but  time,  and  the  wars  which  they  carried  on  with  those
who  are  now  lords  of  these  districts,  caused  them  to  dis-
appear without  leaving  any  other  memorial  than  these
stones.

Beyond  this  province  is  that  of  Pincos,  near  which  a  river
flows,  and  over  it  there  is  a  bridge  to  pass  from  one  side  to
the  other.  The  natives  of  this  province  are  well  made,
and,  considering  that  they  are  Indians,  of  noble  bearing.
Further  on  is  the  great  and  splendid  palace  of  Huanuco, ,
the  chief  station  between  this  point  and  Caxamarca,  as  I
stated  in  the  chapter  where  I  described  the  founding  of  the
city  of  Leon  de  Huanuco.


CHAPTEE    LXXXIII.


Of  the  lake  of  Bouibou,  and  how  it  is  supposed  to  be  the  source  of  the
great  river  of  La  Plata.

This  province  is  strong  from  its  position,  and  because  the
natives  were  very  warlike.  Before  the  Yncas  could  conquer
them  they  fought  great  battles  with  them,  until  (according
to  what  many  of  the  oldest  Indians  declare)  they  at  length
induced  them  to  submit  by  the  use  of  intrigues  and  pre-
sents. There  is  a  lake  in  the  country  of  these  Indians
which  is  more  than  ten  leagues  round.  This  land  of  Bom-
bon  is  level  and  very  cold,  and  the  mountains  are  some
distance  from  the  lake.^  The  Indians  have  their  villages
'  Also  called  the  lake  of  Chinchaycocha.     Near  its  southern  shore  the


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  295

round  the  lake,  ^vith  large  dykes.  These  natives  of  Bombon
had  great  numbers  of  sheep,  and,  although  most  of  them
have  been  destroyed  in  the  late  -wars,  yet  some  still  remain,
and  in  the  desert  heights  there  are  quantities  of  the  wild
kinds.  There  is  little  maize  in  this  country  on  account  of
the  cold,  but  there  is  no  want  of  other  provision  by  which
the  people  are  sustained.  There  are  some  islands  and  rocks
in  the  lake,  where  the  Indians  form  garrisons  in  time  of
war,  and  are  thus  safe  from  their  enemies.  Concerning
the  water  which  flows  from  this  lake,  it  is  held  for  certain
that  it  forms  the  source  of  the  famous  river  of  La  Plata,
because  it  becomes  a  powerful  river  in  the  valley  of  Xauxa,
and  further  on  it  is  joined  by  the  rivers  of  Parcos,  Vilcas,
Abancay,  Apurimac,  and  Yucay.  Thence  it  flows  to  the
west,  traversing  many  lands,  where  it  receives  other  rivers
which  are  still  unknown  to  us,  until  it  finally  reaches
Paraguay,  the  country  discovered  by  those  Christian  Span-
iards who  first  came  to  the  river  of  La  Plata.  I  myself
believe,  from  what  I  have  heard  of  this  great  river,  that  it
owes  its  origin  to  two  or  three  branches,  or  perhaps  more  ;
hke  the  rivers  Maraiion,  Santa  Martha,  Darien,  and  others
in  those  parts.     However  this  may  be,  in  this  kingdom  of

fcomous  cavalry  action  was  fought  in  1823  between  the  Spaniards  and
Patriots,  known  as  the  battle  of  Junin,  in  Ashich  the  gallant  old  general
IMiller  distinguished  himself.  The  lake  is  thirty-six  miles  long  in  a  north-
west and  south-east  du-ection,  with  an  average  breadth  of  about  six  miles,
and  12,940  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  The  plain  or  basin  in  wliich
it  lies,  is  forty-five  miles  long  and  from  six  to  twelve  broad,  with  a
gravelly  soil  producing  a  short  grass.  A  great  number  of  large  and
beautiful  water-fowl,  including  the  scarlet  flamingo  and  several  varieties
of  snipe,  frequent  the  banks  of  the  lake,  wliich  are  overgrown  by  reeds.
As  the  lake  loses  by  various  outlets  much  more  water  than  it  receives
from  its  tributary  soiu-ces,  it  is  evident  that  it  must  be  fed  by  subter-
raneous springs.  The  Indians  entertain  a  superstitious  behef  that  this
lake  is  haunted  by  huge  fish -hke  animals,  who  at  certain  hours  of  the
night  leave  their  watery  abode  to  prowl  about  the  adjacent  pasture
lands,  where  they  commit  great  havoc  among  the  cattle.  Von  Tschudi,
Jlerndon.


296  THE    TRAVELS    OP

Peru,  we  believe  that  it  owes  its  source  to  tlie  lake  of
Bombon,  which  receives  the  water  caused  by  the  melting-
of  the  snow  from  the  heat  of  the  sun  on  the  desert  heights,
and  of  this  there  cannot  be  little.^

Ten  leagues  beyond  Bombon  is  the  pro\ance  of  Tarma,
the  inhabitants  of  which  were  not  less  warlike  than  those  of
Bombon.  The  chmate  is  here  more  temperate,  and  much
maize  and  wheat  are  grown,  besides  various  fruits  of  the
country.  In  former  times  there  were  great  buildings  and
store-houses  of  the  Kings  Yncas  in  Tarma.  The  natives
and  their  wives  go  dressed  in  clothes  made  from  the  wool
of  their  sheep,  and  they  adore  the  sun,  which  they  call
Mocha.  When  any  of  them  marry,  the  friends  assemble
together,  and,  after  drinking,  saluting  their  cheeks,  and
performing  other  ceremonies,  the  marriage  of  the  bride  and
bridegroom  is  complete.  When  the  chiefs  die  they  are
buried  in  the  same  way  as  amongst  all  the  other  tribes,  and
their  women  shave  their  heads  and  wear  black  cloaks,  also
anointing  their  faces  with  a  black  ointment,  and  this  state
of  widowhood  lasts  for  a  year.  When  the  year  is  over,  as  I
understood,  and  not  before,  they  may  marry  again.  These
people  have  their  annual  festivals  and  fasts,  which  they
carefully  observe,  abstaining  from  meat  and  salt  and  from

'  The  lake  of  Bombon  or  Chinchay-cocha  is  drained  by  the  river  of
Xauxa,  wliich  flows  into  the  JNIantaro,  one  of  the  sources  of  the  Ucayali,
a  jjrincijial  afllueut  of  the  Amazon.  The  otlier  rivers  mentioned  above,
namely  the  Vilcas,  Abancay,  Apurimac,  and  Yucay,  are  also  tributaries
of  the  Ucayali.  The  erroneous  sui-mise  of  Cieza  de  Leon  and  liis  inform-
ants, who  would  carry  off  all  these  streams  into  the  Paraguay,  is  by  no
means  surprising  when  we  remember  that  maps  were  published  in  England
not  twenty  years  ago,  which  conveyed  the  waters  of  the  Beni  right  across
the  line  of  drainage  of  the  great  river  Purus,  and  poured  them  into  the
UcuyaU  !  The  mistake  of  Cieza  de  Leon  possibly  arose  from  his  having
observed  that  the  Xauxa  flows  south  while  in  the  mountains,  and  that
all  other  tributaries  of  the  Amazon  flow  north.  The  Xauxa  does  not
change  its  direction  until  it  enters  the  tropical  forests,  far  beyond  the
ken  of  the  early  conquerors.


PEDRO    I)E    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  297

sleeping  witli  women.  They  also  ask  him  who  is  considered
most  religious,  and  on  the  best  terms  with  their  gods  and
devils,  to  fast  for  a  whole  year  for  the  benefit  of  the  others.
This  being  done,  at  the  time  of  maize  harvest,  they  assemble
and  pass  some  days  and  nights  in  eating  and  drinking.

It  is  notorious  that  some  of  them  conversed  with  the  devil
in  their  temples,  and  the  devil  replied  in  a  terrible  voice.
From  Tarma,  travelling  by  the  royal  road  of  the  Yncas,  the
traveller  reaches  the  great  and  beautiful  valley  of  Xauxa,
which  was  one  of  the  principal  districts  in  Peru.


CHAPTER    LXXXIV.


Which  treats  of  the  valley  of  Xauxa,  and  of  its  inhabitants,  and  relates
how  great  a  place  it  was  in  times  past,

A  RIVER  flows  through  this  valley  of  Xauxa,  which  is  that
which  I  said,  in  the  chapter  on  Bombon,  was  the  source  of
the  river  of  La  Plata.  The  valley  is  fourteen  leagues  long,
and  four  to  five  broad,  in  some  places  more,  in  others  less.^
It  was  so  populous  throughout,  that,  at  the  time  the  Span-
iards first  entered  it,  they  say  for  certain  that  it  contained
more  than  thirty  thousand  Indians ;  now  I  doubt  whether
it  has  ten  thousand.  They  were  divided  into  three  tribes,
although  all  are  and  were  known  by  the  name  of  Huancas."

'  No  more  picturesque  view  can  charm  the  eye  of  the  weary  traveller
than  is  presented  by  the  mimense  garden  which  forms  the  valley  of  Xauxa,
which  is  forty  square  leagues  in  extent.  Its  two  principal  towns  are
Xauxa  and  Huancayo,  in  the  centre  of  the  valley  is  the  convent  of
Ocopa,  and  the  remaining  population  is  scattered  in  small  villages  sui--
rounded  by  trees  on  either  side  of  the  river  of  Xauxa,  which  flows  tlu-ough
the  vaUey.     The  mighty  Andes  bound  the  river  on  every  side.

2  The  Huancas  were  conquered  by  Ccapac  Yupanqui,  the  brother  and
general  of  the  Ynca  Pachatutec  ;  and  at  that  time  they  are  said  to  have


298  THE    TRAVELS    OP

They  say  tliat  this  arrangement  has  existed  since  the  time
of  Huayna  Ccapac^  or  of  his  father,  who  divided  the  lands
and  settled  their  boundaries.  One  of  these  tribes  was
called  Xauxa,  whence  the  valley  took  its  name,  and  the
chief  Cucixaca.  The  second  was  called  Maricavilca,  over
which  Huacarapora  was  chief.  The  third  was  kno-\vn  as
Llacsapallanca,  and  its  chief  Alaya.  In  all  these  parts  there
are  great  buildings  of  the  Yncas,  but  the  largest  edifices
were  in  the  principal  part  of  the  valley,  called  Xauxa.
Here  there  was  a  great  area  covered  with  strong  and  well-
built  stone  edifices,  a  house  of  virgins  of  the  sun,  a  very
rich  temple,  and  many  store-houses  well  supplied  with  pro-
visions. Here  there  were  many  workers  in  silver,  who  made
vases  of  silver  and  gold  for  the  service  of  the  Yncas,  and  for
ornaments  in  the  temple.  There  were  more  than  eight'
thousand  Indians  set  apart  for  the  service  of  the  temple  and
palaces.  These  edifices  were  all  of  stone,  above  which  there
were  enormous  beams  covered  with  long  straw.  These
Huancas  had  great  battles  with  the  Yncas  before  they  were
conquered,  as  I  will  relate  in  the  second  part.  The  virgins
of  the  sun  were  guarded  with  great  vigilance,  and  if  they
had  any  intercourse  with  men  they  were  severely  punished.
These  Indians  relate  a  very  pleasant  legend.  They  afl&rm
that  their  origin  is  derived  from  a  certain  man  (whose  name
I  do  not  recollect)  and  a  woman  called  Urochombe,  who
came  forth  out  of  a  fountain  called  Huarivilca.  These  two
were  so  prolific,  that  aU  the  Huancas  have  proceeded  from
them.  In  memory  of  this  pair  the  fathers  of  the  present
inhabitants  made  a  great  and  high  wall,  and  near  it  they
built  a  temple,  to  which  the  Indians  all  go  to  worship.     It

munbered  tliirty  thousand  souls  in  the  valley  of  Xauxa.  Garcilasso
informs  us  that,  before  they  were  subjugated  by  the  Yncas,  they  wor-
shijiped  the  figm-e  of  a  dog,  and  feasted  on  the  flesh  of  dogs.  He  sur-
mises that  they  adored  the  dog-idol  because  they  were  so  fond  of  roast
dog.  G.  de  la  Vega^  i,  lib.  vi,  cap.  10.  lluancar  ("  a  drum"  in  Quichua,)
is  probably  a  name  given  to  this  nation  by  the  Yncas.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON,  299

may  be  gathered  from  this  that,  as  these  Indians  were
ignorant  of  the  true  faith,  God,  for  their  sins,  allowed  the
devil  to  attain  great  power  over  them,  and,  that  he  might
secure  the  perdition  of  their  souls,  which  is  his  desire,  he
made  them  believe  these  follies  and  others,  such  as  that
they  were  born  from  stones  and  lakes  and  caves ;  all  that
they  might  erect  temples  in  which  to  adore  him.

These  Huancas  know  that  there  is  a  Creator  of  all  things,
whom  they  call  Ticeviracocha.  They  believe  in  the  immor-
tality of  the  soul.  They  flayed  the  captives  they  took  in
war,  making  some  of  the  skins  into  drums,  and  stuffing
others  with  ashes.  The  Indians  go  dressed  in  shirts  and
mantles.  The  villages  had  fortresses  of  stone,  like  small
towers,  broad  at  the  base  and  narrow  above.  Even  now
they  appear,  to  one  seeing  them  from  a  distance,  Hke  the
towers  of  Spain.  In  ancient  times  all  these  Indians  made
wars  with  each  other,  but,  after  they  were  subjugated  by
the  Yncas,  they  became  expert  workmen  and  bred  large
flocks.  Their  head-dress  consisted  of  a  woollen  wreath
about  four  fingers  broad.  They  fought  with  slings  and
lances.  Formerly  there  was  a  fountain,  over  which,  as  has
been  already  said,  they  built  a  temple,  called  Huarivilca.^
I  saw  it,  and  near  it  there  were  three  or  four  trees  called
molles,^  hke  walnut-trees.  These  trees  were  considered
sacred,  and  near  them  there  was  a  seat  made  for  the  chiefs
who  came  to  sacrifice,  whence  some  paved  steps  led  to  the
precincts  of  the  temple.  Porters  were  stationed  to  guard
the  entrance,  where  a  stone  flight  of  steps  led  down  to  the
fountain  already  mentioned.  Here  there  is  an  ancient  wall
of  great  size  built  in  the  form  of  a  triangle.     Near  these

>  "  The  temple  of  Guarivilca,  in  tlie  valley  of  Xauxa,  was  consecrated
to  the  god  Ticexdracocha,  chief  divinity  of  the  Huancas,  whose  singular
worship  reminds  one  of  the  mythology  of  the  northern  countries  of
Europe.  Notwithstanding  the  most  scrupulous  investigations,  it  has  been
impossible  to  find  any  vestiges  of  the  ruins  of  this  temple."     Antiq.  Per.

^  Schinus  Molle  Lin.


300  THE    TRAVELS    OF

buildings  there  is  a  plain^  where  the  devil,  whom  they
adored,  is  said  to  have  been,  and  to  have  conversed  with
some  of  them.

These  Indians  relate  another  legend  which  they  heard
from  their  ancestors,  namely,  that  a  great  mviltitude  of
devils  once  assembled  in  these  parts,  and  did  much  damage
to  the  natives,  terrifying  them  with  their  looks.  While
this  was  going  on  five  suns  appeared  in  the  heavens,  which,
with  their  brilliant  splendour,  annoyed  the  devils,  who  dis-
appeared with  loud  screams  and  groans.  The  devil  Huari-
vilca,  who  was  in  this  place,  was  never  seen  again,  and  all
the  places  where  he  had  stood  were  scorched  and  burnt.
As  the  Yncas  were  lords  of  this  valley,  a  grand  temple  of
the  sun  was  built  for  them,  as  in  other  parts,  but  the  natives
did  not  cease  to  offer  sacrifices  to  this  Huarivilca.  The
temple  of  the  sun,  equally  with  that  of  Huarivilca,  is  now  in
ruins,  and  full  of  w:eeds  and  abominations  j  for  when  the
governor  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  entered  the  valley,  the
Indians   say  that  the  bishop.  Friar  Vicente  de  Valverde,^

»  Vincente  de  Valverde,  a  Dominican  friar,  accomi^anied  Pizarro  to
Peru,  and  we  first  hear  of  him  as  addressing  an  intolerably  proUx
theological  discourse  to  the  Ynca  AtahualjDa,  when  he  came  to  visit  the
Spanish  camp  at  Caxamarca.  The  treacherous  friar  completed  his  evil
work  by  calhng  out  to  Pizarro  and  his  bloodhounds  to  attack  their  guest.
Valverde  continued  to  torment  the  ill-fated  Ynca  with  his  theology
while  in  prison,  until  the  poor  captive's  sufferings  were  consummated  by
his  nuuder  on  August  29th,  1533.  We  next  find  him  tormenting  the
unfortunate  general  Challcuchina,  whom  Pizarro  burnt  alive,  distm-bing
his  last  moments  by  oflicious  importunities.  He  performed  mass  at  the
humiliating  coronation  of  Ynca  Manco,  who  received  the  llautu  from  the
hands  of  Pizarro.  Valverde  was  soon  afterwards  confinued  as  bishoiJ  of
Cuzco  by  the  Pope  in  1538.  He  returned  to  Spain,  but  came  out  to  Peru
again  in  the  following  year  (1539),  and  wrote  a  curious  letter  to  Charles  V,
still  preserved  in  the  archives  of  Simancas,  in  which  he  describes  the  ruin
and  devastation  caused  by  the  Spaniards  in  the  once  flourishing  capital
of  the  Yncas.  Bishop  Valverde  protested  against  the  execution  of
Ahnagro  ;  and  also  endeavoured  to  save  Pizarro's  secretary,  who  was  put
to  death  at  Lima  by  the  asstissins  of  his  master.     The  assassins  allowed


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  301

broke  the  idols,  and  tlie  devil  was  never  again  heard  in  that
place.  I  went  to  see  this  temple  with  Don  Cristoval,  son
of  the  chief  Alaya,  who  is  now  dead,  and  he  showed  me  the
monument.  He,  as  well  as  the  other  chiefs  of  the  valley,
has  turned  Chi-istian,  and  there  are  two  clergymen  and  a
friar  who  have  charge  of  the  instruction  of  these. Indians  in
our  holy  catholic  faith.  This  valley  of  Xauxa  is  surrounded
by  snowy  mountains,  and  in  many  parts  of  them  there  are
ravines  where  the  Huancas  raise  their  crops.  The  City  of
the  Kings  was  seated  in  this  valley  before  it  was  removed
to  the  place  where  it  now  is,  and  the  Spaniards  found  a
great  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  here.


CHAPTER    LXXXV.


In  which  the  road  is  described  from  Xauxa  to  the  city  of  Guamanga,
and  what  there  is  worthy  of  note  on  this  road.

I  FIND  that  the  distance  from  this  valley  of  Xauxa  to  the
city  of  the  victory  of  Guamanga  is  thirty  leagues.  Going
by  the  royal  road,  the  traveller  journeys  on  until  certain
veiy  ancient  edifices,  now  in  ruins,  are  reached,  which  are
on  the  summit  of  the  heights  above  the  valley.  Further
on  is  the  village  of  Acos,  near  a  morass  full  of  great  rushes.
Here,  also,  there  were  edifices  and  store-houses  of  the
Yncas,  as  in  all  the  other  towns  of  this  kingdom.  The
natives  of  Acos  live  away  from  the  royal  road,  in  some  very
rugged  mountains  to  the  eastward.  I  have  nothing  more
to  say   of  them,   except  that   they  go   dressed  in  woollen

the  bishop  to  depart  in  a  vessel  from  Callao,  which  touched  at  the  island
of  Pima,  where  he  was  killed  by  the  IncUans  in  1541.

Valverde  was  the  fii'st  bishop  of  Cuzco,  from  1538  to  1541.  He  was
succeeded  by  friar  Juan  Solano  (1545-62),  since  whose  time  twenty-six
bishops  have  filled  that  episcopal  chair.


302  THE    TRAVELS    OF

clothes,  and  tliat  their  houses  are  of  stone  thatched  with
straw.  The  road  goes  from  Acos  to  the  buildings  at  Pico,
then  over  a  hill,  the  descent  from  which  is  rugged  and
would  seem  difficult,  yet  the  road  continues  to  be  so  broad
and  smooth,  that  it  almost  seems  to  be  passing  over  level
ground.  Thus  it  descends  to  the  river  which  passes  by
Xauxa,  where  there  is  a  bridge,  and  the  pass  is  called
Angoyaco.  Near  this  bridge  there  is  a  certain  white
ravine,  whence  comes  a  spring  of  wholesome  water.  In
this  pass  of  Angoyaco  there  was  an  edifice  of  the  Yncas,
where  there  was  a  bath  of  water  that  was  naturally  warm
and  convenient  for  bathing,  on  account  of  which  all  the
Lords  Yncas  valued  it.  Even  the  Indians  of  these  parts
used  to  wash  and  bathe  in  it  every  day,  both  men  and
women.  In  the  part  where  the  river  flows  the  valley  is
small,  and  there  are  many  molle^  and  other  trees.  Further
on  is  the  valley  of  Picoy,  but  first  another  small  river  is
crossed,  where  there  is  also  a  bridge,  for  in  winter  time  this
river  washes  down  with  much  fury.

From  Picoy  the  road  leads  to  the  buildings  of  Parcos,
erected  on  the  top  of  a  hill.  The  Indians  have  their  abodes
in  very  lofty  and  rugged  mountains  on  either  side  of  these
buildings.  Before  reaching  Parcos  there  is  a  place  called
Pucara  (which  in  our  language  means  a  strong  thing-)  in  a
small  wilderness,  where,  in  ancient  times,  as  the  Indians
declare,  there  was  a  palace  of  the  Yncas  and  a  temple  of  the
sun.  Many  provinces  sent  their  usual  tribute  to  this  Pucara,
and  delivered  it  to  the  overseer  who  had  charge  of  the
stores,  and  whose  duty  it  was  to  collect  the  tribute.  In
this  place  there  is  such  a  quantity  of  dressed  stones  that,
from  a  distance,  it  truly  appears  like  some  city  or  towered
castle,  from  which  it  may  be  judged  that  the  Indians  gave
it  an  appropriate  name.     Among  the  rocks  there  is  one,

>  Schinus  MoUe  Lin.,  the  prevailing  tree  in  tliis  part  of  the  Andes.
*  Pucara  is  (Jnicliua  for  a  fortress.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  303

near  a  small  river,  wliich  is  so  large  that  its  size  is  wonderful
to  behold.  I  saw  it,  and  slept  one  night  under  it,  and  it
appeared,  to  me  that  it  had  a  height  of  two  hundred  cubits,
and  a  circuit  of  more  than  two  hundred  paces.  If  it  was
on  any  dangerous  frontier,  it  might  easily  be  turned  into  an
impregnable  fortress.  This  great  rock  has  another  notable
thing  connected  with  it,  which  is  that  there  are  so  many
caves  in  it  that  more  than  a  hundred  men  and  some  horses
might  get  into  them.  In  this,  as  in  other  things,  our  God
shows  his  mighty  power.  All  these  roads  are  full  of  caves,
where  men  and  animals  can  take  shelter  from  the  wet  and
snow.  The  natives  of  this  district  have  their  villages  on
lofty  mountains,  as  I  have  already  said.  Their  summits
are  covered  with  snow  during  most  part  of  the  year.  The
Indians  sow  their  crops  in  sheltered  spots,  like  valleys,
between  the  mountains.  In  many  parts  of  these  mountains
there  are  great  veins  of  silver.  The  road  descends  a  moun-
tain from  Parcos,  till  it  reaches  a  river  bearing  the  same
name,  where  there  is  a  bi'idge  built  over  great  blocks  of
stone.  This  mountain  of  Parcos  is  the  place  where  the
battle  took  place  between  the  Indians  and  the  captain
Morgovejo  de  Quinones,  and  where  Gonzalo  Pizarro  ordered
the  captain  Gaspar  Rodriguez  de  Campo-redondo^  to  be
killed,  as  I  shall  relate  in  another  part  of  my  work.  Be-
34ond  this  river  of  Parcos  is  the  station  of  Asangaro,  now
the  repartimiento  of  Diego  Gavilan,^  whence  the  royal  road
passes  on  till  it  reaches  the  city  of  San  Juan  de  la  Victoria
de  Guamanga.

'  Gaspar  Rodriguez  de  Campo  Redondo  -was  brother  of  a  distingiiislied
officer  who  was  killed  in  the  battle  of  Chupas.  Gaspar  Rockiguez  joined
Gonzalo  Pizarro  in  his  rebellion  agamst  the  viceroy  Blasco  Xuflez  de
Vela,  bnt  afterwards,  seeing  reason  to  think  that  he  had  chosen  the
losing  side,  he  sent  to  the  viceroy  to  ask  for  a  safe  conduct.  This
treachery  became  knoA^Ti  to  Pizarro  and  his  ruthless  lieutenant  Carbajal,
who  came  to  the  traitor's  tent.  The  wTetched  man  offered  many  excuses,
but  Carbajal  never  showed  mercy,  and  his  head  was  cut  off  on  the  spot.

'■^  Diego  Gavilan,  with  his  brother  Juan,  joined  Francisco  Hernandez


304  THE    TRAVELS    OF

CHAPTER    LXXXYI.

T\''hich  treats  of  the  reason  why  the  city  of  Guamanga  was  founded,  its
provinces  having  been  at  first  partly  under  the  jimsdiction  of  Cu2Co,
and  partly  under  that  of  the  City  of  the  Kings.

After  the  war  at  Cuzco  between  tlie  Indians  and  the
Spaniards^  the  King  Manco  Ynca^  seeing  that  he  could
not  recover  the  city  of  Cuzco^  determined  to  retire  into  the
provinces  of  Viticos,  which  are  in  the  most  retired  part  of
these  regions^beyond  the  great  Cordillera  of  the  Andes;  after
having  first  led  the  captain  Rodrigo  Orgoilez  a  long  chase,
who  hberated  Ruy  Diaz,  a  captain  whom  the  Ynca  had  had
in  his  power  for  some  days.  When  it  was  known  that
Manco  Ynca  entertained  this  intention,  many  of  the  Orejones
of  Cuzco  (the  nobility  of  that  city)  wished  to  follow  him.
Having  reached  Yiticos  with  a  great  quantity  of  treasure,
collected  from  various  parts,  together  with  his  women  and
retinue,  the  King  Manco  Ynca  established  himself  in  the
strongest  place  he  could  find,  whence  he  sallied  forth  many
times,  and  in  many  directions,  to  disturb  those  parts  which
were  quiet,  and  to  do  what  harm  he  could  to  the  Spaniards,
whom  he  considered  as  cruel  enemies.  They  had,  indeed,
seized  his  inheritance,  forcing  him  to  leave  his  native  land,
and  to  live  in  banishment.  These  and  other  things  were
published  by  Manco  Ynca  and  his  followers,  in  the  places  to
which  they  came  for  the  purpose  of  robbing  and  doing
mischief.     As  in  these  provinces  no  Spanish  city  had  been

Giron  in  his  rebellion  at  Cuzco  in  1553  ;  and  the  rebel  chief  appointed
Diego  to  the  post  of  captain  of  infantry.  The  mvmicipality  of  Cuzco
was  obliged  to  elect  Giron  captain-general  of  Peru,  more,  says  Garci-
lasso,  from  fear  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  arquebusiers  under  the  com-
mand of  Diego  Gavilan,  who  were  drawn  up  in  front  of  the  comi -house,
than  from  good  will.  After  the  overthrow  and  flight  of  Gu-on  at  Pucara,
Diego  and  Juan  Gavilan  went  over  to  the  royal  army  and  received
pardon  for  their  share  in  the  rebellion.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON,  305

builtj  the  natives  were  given  in  encomieuda,  some  to  citizens
of  CuzcOj  and  others  to  those  of  the  City  of  the  Kings.
Thus  the  Indians  of  Manco  Ynca  were  able  to  do  much
harm  to  the  Spaniards  and  to  the  friendly  Indians,,  killing
and  robbing  many  of  them.

These  things  rose  to  such  a  height  that  the  Marquis  Don
Francisco  Pizarro  sent  captains  against  Manco  Ynca.  The
factor  Yllan  Suarez  de  Carbajal/  by  order  of  the  Marquis,
set  out  from  Cuzco  and  sent  the  captain  Yilla-diego  to
reconnoitre  with  a  force  of  Spaniards,  for  there  was  news
that  the  Ynca  was  not  far  distant  from  the  place  where  he
was  encamped.  Notwithstanding  that  they  were  without
horses  (which  is  the  most  important  arm  against  these
Indians),  they  pressed  on  because  they  were  confident  in
their  strength,  and  desired  to  enjoy  the  spoils  of  the  Ynca,
thinking  that  he  had  his  women  and  treasure  with  him.
They  reached  the  summit  of  a  mountain,  fatigued  and
exhausted,  when  the  Ynca,  with  little  more  than  eighty
Indians,  attacked  the  Christians,  who  numbered  twenty-
eight  or  thirty,  and  killed  the  captain  Villa- diego,  and  all
his  men,  except  two  or  three,  who  escaped  with  the  aid  of
the  friendly  Indians.  These  fugitives  presented  themselves
to  the  factor,  who  deeply  felt  the  misfortune.  When  the
Marquis  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  heard  it,  he  hastily  set  out
from  the  city  of  Cuzco  with  a  body  of  men,  who  had  orders
to  pursue  Manco  Ynca.  But  this  attempt  also  failed,  for
the  Ynca  retreated  to  his  settlement  at  Viticos,  with  the

•  Yllan  Suarez  de  Carbajal  was  the  factor  of  the  royal  revenue.  After
the  death  of  Pizarro  he  fled  from  the  camp  of  the  younger  Ahnagro,  and
fought  bravely  under  Vaca  de  Castro  in  the  battle  of  Chupas.  Carbajal
was  at  Lima  when  Blasco  Nuiiez  de  Vela  arrived,  and  one  night  the  hot-
headed viceroy  sent  for  him,  accused  him  of  treason,  and,  during  the
altercation  which  followed,  stabbed  hini  with  a  poniard.  The  attendants
dispatched  him  with  their  swords,  and  the  body  was  secretly  buried
before  morning.  This  foul  murder  was  the  immediate  cause  of  the  vice-
roy's downfall.


306  THE    TRAVELS    OF

heads  of  the  Christians.'  Afterwards  the  captain  Gonzalo
Pizarro  undertook  the  pursuit  of  the  Ynca,  and  occupied
some  of  his  passes  and  bridges.  At  last^  as  the  evils  done
by  the  Indians  had  been  great,  the  governor  Don  Francisco
Pizarro,  with  the  assent  of  the  royal  officers  who  were  with
him,  determined  to  form  a  settlement  between  Cuzco  and
Lima  (which  is  the  City  of  the  Kings),  so  as  to  make  the
road  secure  for  travellers.  This  city  was  called  "  San  Juan
de  la  Frontera,^^  until  the  licentiate  Christoval  Vaca  de
Castro,  Pizarro's  successor  in  the  government  of  the
country,  called  it  "  De  la  Victoria,'^  after  the  victory  which
he  gained  over  the  men  of  Chile,  on  the  heights  of  Chupas.-

'  Mauco  Ynca,  the  second  legitiinate  son  of  Hnayna  Ccapac,  was
invested  with  the  royal  llautu  at  Cuzco  by  the  conqueror  Pizarro ;  but  he
chafed  under  the  yoke  of  the  invaders,  and,  on  the  first  opportunity,
raised  the  standard  of  revolt.  Then  followed  the  famous  siege  of  Cuzco,
and  when  the  place  was  relieved  by  Ahnagro,  and  Iklanco's  last  chance  of
regaining  the  ancient  capital  of  his  ancestors  failed,  he  retreated  into  the
forest  fastnesses,  continued  his  hostilities  against  the  Spaniards,  and  led
the  romantic  life  described  above  by  Cieza  de  Leon.  On  one  occasion
Gonzalo  Pizarro  sent  a  negro  slave  to  him  with  presents,  to  open  a
negotiation,  who  was  murdered  by  a  party  of  Indians  ;  upon  which  Gon-
zalo perpetrated  an  act  of  such  devilish  cruelty  upon  a  yomig  wife  of
Manco,  whom  he  had  made  jOTsoner,  as  to  be  barely  credible.  The  story-
is  related  by  Prescott,  on  the  authority  of  Pedro  PizaiTo's  MS.  (ii,  p.  13G).
Manco's  end  was  very  melancholy.  He  was  playing  at  a  game  with
balls,  with  one  Gomez  Perez  and  some  other  Spaniards  of  Almagro's
faction,  who  had  taken  refuge  in  the  Ynca's  fastness,  when  the  ill-
conditioned  ruffian  was  guilty  of  some  act  of  disrespect.  The  Ynca
pushed  him  on  one  side,  upon  which  Gomez  Perez  hit  him  such  a  blow  on
the  head  with  a  ball  that  he  fell  dead.  {Oomara,  cap.  clvi.)  Tliis  was
in  the  year  1544.  The  gallant  young  Ynca  left  two  sons,  Sap-i  Tupac
and  Tupac  Amaru.  The  former  was  pensioned  by  the  Spaniards  and
died  at  Yucay ;  the  latter  perished  on  the  scaffold  at  Cuzco.

-  After  the  assassination  of  Pizarro,  the  younger  Almagro  assembled
his  partizans  and  prepared  to  resist  the  royal  forces  under  the  new
governor  Vaca  de  Castro.  The  two  armies  met  on  the  heights  of  Chupas,
which  overhang  the  city  of  Guanianga,  on  tlie  IGth  of  September
1542.  During  my  residence  at  Guamanga  I  went  in  search  of  the  battle
field,  which  is  alxjut  three  leagues  from  the  town.     The  field  of  Chujjas


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  307

All  tlic  villages  and  provinces  from  the  Andes  to  the  South
Sea  wore  under  the  jurisdiction  either  of  the  city  of  Cuzco
or  of  that  of  the  Kings^  and  the  Indians  were  granted  in
enconiienda  to  the  citizens  of  one  or  other  of  these  cities.
When,  therefore,  the  governor  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  de-
termined to  build  this  new  city,  he  ordered  that  some
citizens  from  each  of  the  two  cities  should  come  to  Hve  in
it,  so  that  they  might  not  lose  their  claim  to  the  oicomienda
of  the  Indians  in  that  part.  The  province  of  Xauxa  then
became  the  limit  of  Lima,  and  Andahuaylas  that  of  Cuzco.
The  new  city  was  founded  in  the  following  manner.


CHAPTER    LXXXVII.

Of  the  founding  of  the  city  of  Guamanga,  and  who  was  its  founder.

When  the  marquis  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  determined  to
found  a  city  in  this  province,  he  did  not  select  the  site  where
it  now  stands,  but  chose  an  Indian  village  called  Guamanga,
which  is  the  reason  why  the  city  received  the  same  name.^

is  on  a  sort  of  terrace  of  the  Andes,  with  the  mountains  rising  in  the  rear,
a  rapid  descent  towards  Guamanga,  and  slightly  wooded  ravines  to  the
right  and  left.  The  view  from  it  is  magnificent.  It  is  now  covered  with
fields  of  wheat,  with  a  few  huts  scattered  here  and  there  amidst  thickets
of  chilca  (a  species  of  Baccharis).  A  most  furious  and  bloody  encounter
was  the  battle  of  Chupas.  It  was  long  doubtful,  but  at  length  Vaca  de
Castro  was  victorious,  and  out  of  850  Spaniards  brought  into  the  field
by  young  AlmagTo,  700  were  killed.  The  victors  lost  about  350  men.
Among  the  slain,  on  the  royal  side,  was  Pedro  Alvarez  Holguin,  one  of
the  first  corregidors  of  Guamanga,  and  formerly  a  companion  of  Hernan
Cortez — the  same  who  captured  Guatimozin  in  the  lakes  of  INIexico.  He
was  buried  in  the  little  chiu-ch  of  San  Clu-istoval  at  Guamanga,  which
was  built  by  PizaiTo  and  still  exists.  Several  of  the  prisoners,  who  were
impUcatcd  in  the  murder  of  Pizarro,  were  beheaded  in  the  plaza  of  Gua-
manga.

'  The  country  round  Guamanga  was  inhabited,  in  ancient  times,  by

x2


308  THE    TRAVELS    OF

The  village  was  near  the  great  Cordillera  of  the  Andes.  The
marquis  left  the  captain  Francisco  de  Cardenas  as  his  lieu-
tenant here.  After  some  time,  and  from  various  causes,  the
city  was  removed  to  the  place  where  it  now  stands,  which  is
on  a  plain,  near  a  chain  of  hills  on  its  south  side.  Although
a  small  plain  half  a  league  from  the  present  city,  would  have
been  a  site  more  pleasant  to  the  inhabitants,  yet  they  were
obhged  to  give  it  up  owing  to  the  want  of  water.  Near  the
city  a  small  stream  of  very  good  water  flows,  at  which  the
citizens  drink.  In  this  city  the  best  and  largest  houses  in  all
Peru  have  been  built,  all  of  stone,  bricks,  and  tiles,  with  tall
towers,  so  that  there  is  no  want  of  buildings.  The  plaza  is
level  and  very  large. -^      The   climate  is  very  healthy,  for

the  nation  of  Pocras.  They  joined  the  Chaucas  under  Anco-huallu  in
their  war  against  the  Yuca  (see  note  at  p.  280),  and  after  the  bloody-
defeat  of  the  allied  tribes  on  the  plain  of  Yahuarpampa,  and  the  emigi-a-
tion  of  Anco-huallu,  they  again  rose  in  rebellion.  They  were  finally
crushed  in  a  bloody  battle  at  the  foot  of  the  heights  of  Condor-canqui,
by  the  Ynca  Huira-ccocha,  in  a  place  which  has  ever  since  been
called  Aya-cucho  ("  the  corner  of  dead  men").  Foiu-  hundred  and  fifty
years  afterwards,  on  the  same  spot,  the  battle  was  fought  between  the
Spaniards  and  the  Patriots,  which  finally  established  the  independence  of
Peru.     (December  9th,  1824.)

After  the  overtlu-ow  of  the  Pocras,  the  Ynca  was  serving  out  rations
of  llama  flesh  to  his  soldiers  when  a  falcon  (huaman)  came  wheeling  in
circles  over  his  head.  He  threw  up  a  piece  of  meat  crying  Huaman-ca
(Take  !  falcon),  and  the  bird  caught  it  and  flew  away.  "  Lo,"  cried  the
soldiers,  "even  the  birds  of  the  air  obey  liim  :"  and  the  place  was  ever
afterwards  called  Huaman-ca^  corrujited  by  the  Spaniards  into  Gua-
manqa.  Since  the  independence,  the  name  of  the  city  has  been  altered
to  Ayacucho^  in  honour  of  the  battle.

Others  derive  the  name  from  Huaman  (falcon)  and  Ccaca  (a  rock) —
"  the  Falcon's  Rock."

*  The  city  of  Guamanga,  now  called  Ayacucho,  is  in  lat.  12°  59'  S.,
and  long.  73°  59'  W.  From  the  steep  mountains  which  overhang  it  on
the  south-west,  the  city  presents  to  the  view  a  mass  of  red  tiles,  with
church  towers  rising  here  and  there,  surrounded  by  gardens  of  fruit  trees,
which  extend  in  different  directions  up  the  sides  of  the  mountains,  while
to  the  north-west  is  the  broad  gi'assy  plain  called  Pampa  del  Arco,  and
the  view  is  bounded  in  that  direction  by  the  frowning  heights  of  Condor-


PEDliO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  309

neither  the  sun  nor  the  air  do  harm,  nor  is  it  damp  nor  hot,
but  it  possesses  an  excellent  and  most  salubrious  tempera-
ture. The  citizens  have  also  built  houses  where  they  keep
their  flocks,  in  the  valleys  adjoining  the  city.  The  largest
river  near  the  city  is  called  Viilaque,  near  which  there  are
some  great  and  very  ancient  edifices,  which  are  now  in  ruins,
but  appear  to  have  stood  for  many  ages.^  When  the  Indians
are  asked  who  built  these  ancient  monuments,  they  reply
that  a  bearded  and  white  people  like  ourselves  were  the
builders,  who  came  to  these  parts  many  ages  before  the
Yncas  began  to  reign,  and  formed  a  settlement  here.  These,
and  some  other  ancient  edifices  in  this  kingdom  do  not
appear  to  me  to  be  like  those  which  were  erected  by  order
of  the  Yncas ;  for  their  buildings  were  square,  and  those  of
the  Yncas  are  long  and  narrow.  It  is  also  reported  that
certain  letters  were  found  on  a  tile  in  these  buildings.  I
neither  deny  nor  affirm  that,  in  times  past,  some  other  race,
possessed  of  judgment  and  intelligence,  made  these  things,
and  others  which  we  have  not  seen.

On  the  banks  of  this  river  of  Viuaque,  and  in  other  adja-

canqui,  at  the  feet  of  which  the  famous  battle  of  Ayacucho  was  fought.
The  streets  run  at  right  angles,  sloping  gradually  from  north  to  south,
and  in  the  centre  is  the  plaza  mayor.  On  the  south  side  of  the  jij^aza  are
the  handsome  stone  cathedral  and  the  cabildo  or  court-house.  The  other
three  sides  are  occupied  by  private  houses  on  handsome  arcades,  with
stone  pillars  and  circular  arches.  The  south  part  of  the  town  was  for-
merly broken  up  by  a  deep  ravine,  but  in  1801  the  Spanish  intendente,
Don  Demetrio  O'Higgins,  spanned  it  with  a  number  of  well  built  stone
biidges.  On  the  west  side  there  is  an  alameda  or  avenue  of  double  rows
of  wallow  trees,  by  the  side  of  which  a  stream  of  clear  water  flows  down
and  supplies  the  city.  On  either  hand  the  hLUs  rise  up  abruptly,  covered
^  with  fruit  trees,  and  hedges  of  prickly  pears.  There  are  more  than  twenty
chiu-ches,  built  of  limestone,  with  well  proportioned  towers.  The  climate,
as  Cieza  de  Leon  says,  is  delicious,  and  Ayacucho  is  one  of  the  pleasantest
places  in  Peru.

•  In  alluding  to  these  ruins,  Tschudi  and  Rivero,  in  their  "  Antigue-
dades  Fenianas,''  merely  refer  to  the  above  passage  in  Cieza  de  Leon,
but  do  not  appear  to  have  identified  or  examined  them.


310  THE    TRAVELS    OF

cent  parts^  they  reap  a  great  quantity  of  wheat,  of  which
they  make  bread  as  excellent  as  the  best  that  is  made  in
Andalusia.^  They  have  planted  some  vines,  and  it  is  be-
lieved that  in  time  there  will  be  many  extensive  vineyards,
and  most  other  things  that  grow  in  Spain.  There  is  abun-
dance of  all  the  fruits  of  the  country,  and  so  many  doves
that  there  is  no  other  part  of  the  Indies  where  they  are  so
numerous.  In  the  spring  there  is  some  difficulty  in  getting
enough  fodder  for  the  horses,  but,  owing  to  attendance  from
the  Indians,  this  want  is  not  felt.  It  must  be  understood  that
at  no  time  do  the  horses  and  other  beasts  feed  on  straw,  nor
is  any  use  made  of  what  is  cut,  for  neither  do  the  sheep  eat
it,  but  all  are  maintained  by  the  grass  of  the  field.

The  outlets  to  this  city  are  good,  but  in  many  parts  there
are  so  many  thorns  and  briars  that  it  is  necessary  for  tra-
vellers to  be  careful,  whether  they  go  on  foot  or  on  horse-
back. This  city  of  San  Juan  de  la  Victoria  de  Guamanga
was  founded  and  settled  by  the  marquis  Don  Francisco
Pizarro,  governor  of  Peru,  in  the  name  of  his  Majesty,  on
the  9th  day  of  the  month  of  January,  1539.


CHAPTER    LXXXVIII.


In  which  some  things  are  related  concerning  the  natives  of  the  districts
near  this  city.

Many  Indians  have  been  given  in  encomienda  to  the  citizens
of  Guamanga,  and  notwithstanding  that  they  are  numerous,
yet  the  wars  have  caused  the  destruction  of  great  numbers.
Most  of  them  were  Mitimaes,  who,  as  I  have  already  said,
were  Indians  transported  from  one  province  to  another,  the

'  The  country  round  (luanianga  still  yields  abundant  supplies  of  wheat,
and  is  capable  of  supporting  ten  times  the  present  population.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON,  311

work  of  the  Kings  Yncas.  Some  of  these  were  Orejones,
although  not  of  the  principal  families  of  Cuzco.  To  the  east-
ward of  this  city  is  the  great  mountain  chain  of  the  Andes.
To  the  west  is  the  coast  of  the  South  Sea.  I  have  named
villages  which  are  near  the  royal  road.  The  others  have
very  fertile  land  round  them,  and  large  flocks.  All  the
Indians  go  about  clothed.  They  had  temples  and  places  of
worship  in  secluded  corners,  whore  they  performed  their
sacrifices  and  vain  ceremonies.  In  their  burials  they  prac-
tised the  same  customs  as  all  the  other  Indians,  interring
live  women  and  treasures  with  their  dead.  After  they  were
brought  under  the  yoke  of  the  Yncas,  they  adored  the  sun,
and  adopted  the  laws  and  customs  of  their  conquerors.
Originally  they  were  a  brave  race,  and  so  warlike  that  the
Yncas  were  hard  put  to  it,  when  they  invaded  their  country ;
insomuch  that,  in  the  days  of  the  Ynca  Yupanqui,  after  the
Soras  and  Lucanas  (provinces  inhabited  by  a  robust  people)
had  been  subdued,  these  Indians  fortified  themselves,  in
great  numbers,  in  strong  positions.  For,  to  preserve  their
liberty,  and  escape  servitude  under  a  tyrant,  they  thought
little  of  hunger  and  long  protracted  wars.  Ynca  Yupanqui,
covetous  of  the  rule  over  these  people,  and  jealous  of  his
own  reputation,  besieged  them  closely  for  more  than  two
years ;  at  the  end  of  which  time,  after  they  had  done  all
they  could,  they  smTendered  to  the  Ynca.

When  Gonzalo  Pizarro  rose  in  arms,  the  principal  citizens
of  Guamanga,  from  fear  of  his  captains,  and  from  a  desire  to
serve  his  Majesty,  after  having  raised  a  standard  in  his  royal
name,  marched  to  this  same  stronghold  to  fortify  themselves
(as  I  myself  heard  from  some  of  them),  and  saw  the  vestiges
of  the  former  war  spoken  of  by  the  Indians.  All  these
Indians  wear  certain  marks  by  which  they  are  known,  and
which  were  used  by  their  ancestors.  Some  of  them  were
much  given  to  omens,  and  were  great  sorcerers,  pretending
to  predict  what  would  happen  in  the  future,  on  which  occa-


312  THE    TRAVELS    OF

sions  they  talked  nonsense,  as  all  must  do  who  try  to  foretel
what  no  creature  can  know  ;  for  God  alone  can  tell  what  is
about  to  happen.


CHAPTER    LXXXIX.


Of  the  great  buildings  in  the  province  of  Vilcas,  which  are  beyond  the
city  of  Guamanga.

The  distance  from  the  city  of  Guamanga  to  that  of  Cuzco  is
sixty  leagues,  a  little  more  or  less.  On  this  road  is  the
plain  of  Chupas,  where  the  cruel  battle  was  fought  between
the  governor  Vaca  de  Castro  and  Don  Diego  de  Almagro
the  Younger.  Further  on,  still  following  the  royal  road,
are  the  edifices  of  Vilcas,  eleven  leagues  from  Guamanga,
which,  say  the  natives,  was  the  centre  of  the  dominions  of
the  Yncas  ;  for  they  assert  that  from  Quito  to  Vilcas  is  the
same  distance  as  from  Vilcas  to  Chile,  these  being  the
extreme  points  of  the  empire.  Some  Spaniards,  who  have
travelled  from  one  end  to  the  other,  say  the  same.  Ynca
Yupanqui  ordered  these  edifices  to  be  built,  and  his  suc-
cessors added  to  them.  The  temple  of  the  sun  was  large
and  richly  ornamented.  On  one  part  of  the  plain,  towards
the  point  where  the  sun  rises,  there  was  a  chapel  for  the
lords,  made  of  stone,  and  surrounded  by  a  low  wall,  which
formed  a  terrace  about  six  feet  broad,  with  other  steps  upon
it,  on  the  highest  of  which  there  was  a  seat  where  the  lord
stationed  himself  when  he  said  his  prayers.  This  seat  was
made  of  a  single  enormous  stone,  eleven  feet  long,  and
seven  broad.  They  say  that  this  stone  was  once  set  with
gold  and  precious  stones,  for  it  was  thus  that  they  adorned
a  place  held  by  them  in  great  veneration.  On  another
stone,  which  is  not  small,  in  the  centre  of  the  open  space.


PEDRO   DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON,  313

they  killed  animals  and  young  children  as  sacrifices,  whose
blood  they  offered  to  their  gods.  The  Spaniards  have  found
some  treasure  on  these  terraces.

By  the  side  of  the  chapel  were  the  palaces  of  Tupac  Ynca
Yupanqui,  and  other  great  buildings,  besides  many  store-
houses where  they  put  the  arms  and  fine  cloths,  with  all
other  things  paid  as  tribute  by  the  Indians  of  provinces
within  the  jurisdiction  of  Vilcas,  which  was,  I  have  heard  it
said  in  other  places,  as  it  were  the  head  of  the  kingdom.
Near  a  small  hill  there  were,  and  still  are,  more  than  seven
hundred  houses,  where  they  stored  up  the  maize  and  other
provisions  for  the  soldiers  who  marched  that  way.  In  the
middle  of  the  great  square  there  was  another  form  or  seat,
where  the  lord  sat  to  witness  the  dances  and  festivals.  The
temple  of  the  sun,  which  was  built  of  stones  fitted  one  on
the  other  with  great  skill,  had  two  doorways,  approached
by  two  flights  of  stone  stairs,  having,  as  I  counted  them,
thirty  steps  apiece.  Within  this  temple  there  were  lodgings
for  the  priests  and  virgins.  The  Orejones  and  other  Indians
affirm  that  the  figure  of  the  sun  was  very  rich,  and  that
there  was  great  treasure  in  smaller  pieces.  These  build-
ings were  served  by  more  than  forty  thousand  Indians,
divided  into  relays,  and  each  chief  understood  the  orders  of
the  governor,  who  received  his  power  from  the  Ynca.  To
guard  the  doorways  alone  there  were  forty  porters.  A
gentle  channel  of  water,  conducted  with  much  skill,  flowed
through  the  great  square,  and  the  lords  also  had  their
secret  baths  both  for  themselves  and  for  their  women.
"What  may  now  be  seen  of  all  this  are  the  outlines  of  the
buildings,  the  walls  of  the  chapels,  the  temple  with  its  steps
all  in  ruins,  and  other  ruined  buildings.  In  fine,  it  once
was  what  it  now  is  not,  and  by  what  it  now  is  we  may
judge  what  it  once  was.  Some  of  the  first  Spanish  con-
querors saw  this  edifice  entire  and  in  its  perfection,  as  I
have  myself  been  told  by  them.^

'  I  have  been  unable  to  find  any  other  detailed  account  of  the  ruins  of


314  THE    TRAVELS    OP

From  Vilcas  the  road  passes  to  Uramarca,  whicli  is  seven
leagues  nearer  Cuzco,  and  here  the  great  river  called  Vilcas
is  crossed^  the  name  being  given  because  it  is  near  these
buildings.  On  each  side  of  the  river  there  are  very  large
stone  pillars  made  very  strong  and  with  very  deep  founda-
tions. From  these  pillars  a  bridge  of  ropes^  like  those  used
for  drawing  water  with  a  wheel,  is  slung  across  the  river.
These  ropes  are  so  strong  that  horses  may  pass  over  with
loosened  rein,  as  if  they  were  crossing  the  bridge  of  Alcan-
tara, or  that  of  Cordova.  The  bridge  was  one  hundred  and
sixty-six  paces  long  when  I  passed  over  it.^  The  river
rises  in  the  province  of  the  Soras,  which  is  very  fertile,  and

Vilcas,  near  Guamanga,  where  there  was  evidently  a  very  important
station  in  the  time  of  the  Yncas.  There  is  a  bare  allusion  to  the  above
passage  of  Cieza  de  Leon  in  the  Antiguedades  Peruanas,  without  a  word
of  further  information.  I  made  an  endeavour  to  find  the  ruins,  when  I  was
in  this  part  of  the  country,  but  without  success.  They  are  mentioned,
and  nothing  more,  by  Paz  Soldan  {Qeografia  del  Peni^  p.  366)  ;  and,
indeed,  no  author  tells  us  so  much  concerning  the  once  si^lendid  palaces
and  temples  of  Vilcas  as  does  Cieza  de  Leon.

1  This  river  is  now  known  as  the  Pamj^as.  It  flows  tlu'ough  the  very
deep  valley  of  Pumacancha,  which  is  covered  with  dense  miderwood,  and
tall  stately  aloes.  The  mountains  rise  up  abruptly,  in  some  places  quite
perpendicularly,  on  either  side.  In  a  place  where  the  river  is  about
twenty  paces  across,  a  bridge  of  sogas,  or  roj^es  made  of  the  twisted  fibres
of  the  aloe,  is  stretched  from  one  side  to  the  other.  It  consists  of  six
sogas^  each  of  about  a  foot  in  diameter,  set  up  on  either  side  by  a  wind-
lass. Across  these  sogas  other  smaller  ropes  are  secured,  and  covered  wiih.
matting.  This  rope  bridge  is  considerably  lower  in  the  centre  than  at
the  two  ends,  and  vibrated  to  and  fro  as  we  passed  over  it.  It  has  to  be
renewed  several  times  every  year.  In  Spanish  times  the  Indians  of  cer-
tain villages  were  excused  other  service,  to  repair  the  bridge.  It  has
been  a  point  of  considerable  strategical  importance,  in  the  frequent  in-
testine wars  which  Peru  has  suffered  from,  as  commanding  the  main  road
from  Cuzco  to  Lima  and  the  coast.  On  the  side  towards  Cuzco  the
valley  of  Pumacancha  is  bounded  by  the  mountains  of  Bombon,  up  which
the  road  passes  through  woods  of  molle,  chilca^  and  other  trees,  while
rugged  peaks  rise  up  on  either  .side.  One  of  those  glorious  views  which
are  seldom  equalled  out  of  the  Andes,  may  be  enjoyed  from  the  cnesta  of
Hombon.


PEUKO    DE    CIE/A    DE    LEON.  315

inhabited  by  a  warlike  race.  They  and  the  people  of
Ijucaiias^  speak  one  language,  and  go  about  dressed  in
woollen  cloths.  They  possessed  large  flocks,  and  in  their
provinces  there  are  rich  mines  of  gold  and  silver.  The
Yncas  esteemed  the  Soras  and  Lucanas  so  highly,  that
their  provinces  were  favoured,  and  the  sons  of  their  chiefs
resided  at  the  court  of  Cuzco.  There  are  store-houses  in
these  provinces,  and  great  numbers  of  wild  flocks  in  the
desert  mountains.  Returning  to  the  royal  road,  the  traveller
reaches  the  buildings  of  Uramarca,  which  is  a  village  of
Mitimcu's,  for  most  of  the  natives  were  killed  in  the  wars  of
the  Yncas.


CHAPTER    XC.


Of  the  proviuce  of  Andahuaylas,  and  of  what  is  to  be  seen  as  far  as  the
valley  of  Xaquixaguana.

When  I  entered  this  province  of  Andahuaylas,"  the  chief
of  it  was  an  Indian  named  Guasco,  and  the  natives  were
called  Ckancas.  They  go  about  dressed  in  woollen  shirts
and  mantles.  In  former  times  they  were  so  valiant,  that  they
not  only  conquered  other  lands  and  lordships,  but  extended
their  dominions  so  widely  that  they  came  near  to  the  city  of
Cuzco.  There  were  fierce  encounters  between  those  of  the
city  and  these  Chancas,  until,  by  the  valour  of  the  Ynca
Yupanqui,  the  Chancas  were  conquered.  The  captain  An-
coallo,^  so  famous  in  these  parts  for  his  great  bravery,  was
a  native  of  this  province.     They  relate  that  he  could  not

>  Lucanas  is  one  of  the  pro\-inces  of  the  modern  department  of  Aya-
cucho.

-  From  the  Qiiichua  words  a7ita  (copper)  and  huaylla  (pasture),  "  the
copper  coloured  meadow."

^  See  ante^  note  at  p.  280.


316  THE    TRAVELS    OF

endure  to  be  under  the  yoke  of  the  Yncas^  and  under
the  orders  of  his  captains ;  so,  after  having  performed
great  deeds  in  the  districts  of  Tarama  and  Bombon,  he
penetrated  into  the  depths  of  the  forests,  and  his  followers
peopled  the  banks  of  a  lake  which  is,  according  to  Indian
statements,  down  the  course  of  the  river  of  Moyobamba.
When  I  asked  these  CJiancas  concerning  their  origin,  they
told  me  such  another  legend  as  did  those  of  Xauxa.  They
said  that  their  fathers  were  born  in,  and  came  out  of,  a  small
lake  called  Soclo-cocha,  and  conquered  the  country  as  far
as  a  place  called  Chuquibamba,  where  they  established
themselves.  After  some  time  they  strove  with  the  Quichuas,^
a  very  ancient  nation,  who  were  lords  of  this  province  of
Andahuaylas,  and  conquered  their  country,  which  they  have
been  lords  of  ever  since.  They  held  the  lake  out  of  which
they  came  to  be  sacred,  and  it  was  their  chief  place  of
worship,  where  they  prayed  and  made  sacrifices.  They
buried  their  dead  in  the  same  way  as  the  other  Indians,  and
beheved  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  which  they  called
Sonccon,  a  word  which  also  means  ''  heart. ^•'~  They  buried
women  alive  with  the  bodies  of  their  lords,  and  also  treasure
and  apparel.  They  had  their  days  set  apart  for  solemnising
festivals,    and   places  where    they  held  their  dances.     As

'  The  original  followers  and  subjects  of  Manco  Ccapac,  the  first  Ynca
of  Peru,  appear  to  have  been  called  Quichuas,  and  hence  the  name  of  the
language.  The  derivation  of  the  word  is  doubtful.  In  Peru  the  hot
tropical  valleys  are  called  Yunca,  the  lofty  cold  heights  Puna,  and  the
intermediate  temperate  region  Quichua.  Mossi  suggests  the  following
derivation  of  the  word.  Quehuani  is  "to  twist"  in  Quichua,  the  parti-
ciple of  which  is  Quehnasca^  "  twisted  ;"  and  Ychu  is  "  straw."  Hence
Quehuasca-ychu^  "  t-ndsted  straw,"  corrupted  into  Quichua;  from  the
quantity  of  straw  growing  in  this  temperate  region.  Thus  the  Quichuas
were  the  inhabitants  of  the  temperate  zone,  between  the  Punas  and  the
VuJicas;  and  they  were  the  original  followers  of  the  first  Ynca  of  Peru.
Gramatica  i'e  la  Lengua  General  del  Peru,  con  Diccionario,  yor  el  R.  P.
Fray  Ilonorio  Mossi  (Misionero)  Sucre,  1857.

-  Sonccon  is  the  Quicluia  word  for  "  heart."


PEDRO    DE    CIKZA    DK    LEON.  317

there  are  priests  in  this  province  kibouring  among  the
Indians,  some  of  them  have  become  Christians,  especially
among-  the  young  men.

The  captain  Diego  Maldonado  has  always  held  these
Indians  in  encomienda}  They  all  wear  their  hair  long,  and
plaited  into  many  very  small  plaits,  with  some  woollen  cords
which  are  allowed  to  fall  below  the  chin.  Their  houses  are
of  stone."  In  the  centre  of  the  province  there  were  large
edifices  and  store-houses  for  the  chiefs.  Formerly  the  In-
dians in  this  province  of  Andahuaylas  were  very  numerous,
but  the  wars  have  reduced  them,  as  they  have  done  the
other  Indians  of  this  kingdom.  The  province  is  very  long,
and  contains  many  large  flocks  of  domesticated  sheep.  The
part  which  is  forest  is  not  included  within  the  limits  of  the
province.  This  province  is  well  supplied  with  provisions ;
it  yields  wheat,  and  there  are  many  fruit  trees  in  the  warm
valleys.^

'  Diego  JNIaldonado  was  one  of  the  first  conquistadores.  He  was  im-
prisoned in  the  fortress  of  Cuzco  by  Ahaagro,  after  the  marshal  returned
from  Chile,  with  Marcio  Serra  de  Legesamo,  and  many  others.  He  was
afterwards  in  the  battle  of  Chupas,  fighting  on  the  royal  side.  He  be-
came a  regidor  of  Cuzco,  where  he  had  several  houses,  received  Anda-
huaylas in  encomienda^  and  was  surnamed  "  the  rich."  When  Gonzalo
Pizarro  rebelled,  JNIaldonado  was  with  the  insm-gent  forces,  and,  hearing
that  accusations  had  been  brought  against  him,  he  fled  from  his  tent  on
foot,  and  hid  himself  in  a  field  of  sugar  cane.  An  Indian  foimd  him,
and,  with  the  usual  kind-heartedness  of  his  race,  guided  him  to  the  beach,
made  a  balsa  out  of  a  bundle  of  straw,  and  paddled  him  to  one  of  La
Gasca's  ships,  which  was  lying  off  and  on  in  CaUao  bay.  He  was  then
sixty-eight  years  of  age  ;  but  he  stiU  continued  to  play  an  important  part
in  public  affairs,  and  was  wounded  in  the  rebellion  of  Giron  in  1554.
He  lived  for  twelve  years  afterwards,  though  he  eventually  died,  in  15CG,
of  wounds  received  in  the  battle  against  that  rebel.

2  The  Indians  of  Andehuaylas,  descendants  from  these  Chancas,  are  a  tall
and  generally  handsome  race,  and  many  of  the  women  are  beautiful.  The
population  of  the  valley  is  about  six  thousand.

^  The  valley  of  Andahuaylas  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  in  the  Andes.
It  contains  the  three  small  towns  of  Talavera,  Andahuaylas,  and  San  Gero-
nimo.    Through  its  centre  flows  a  little  river,  lined  on  either  side  by  lofty


318  THE    TRAVELS    OF

We  were  liere  for  maii}^  days  with  tlie  president  Gasca,
when  he  marched  to  punish  the  reboUion  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,^
and  great  were  the  sufferings  of  these  Indians  from  the
exactions  of  the  Spaniards.  The  good  Indian  chief  of  this
valley,  Guasco,  was  very  diligent  in  collecting  suppHes.
From  this  province  of  Andahuaylas  (which  the  Spaniards
usually  call  Andaguaylas)  the  road  leads  to  the  river  of
Abancay,  which  is  nine  leagues  nearer  Cuzco,  and  this
river,  like  many  others,  has  its  strong  stone  pillars,  to  which
a  bridge  is  attached.-  Where  the  river  flows,  the  moun-
tains form  a  small  valley  where  there  are  trees,  and  they
raise  fruit  and  other  provisions  in  abundance.  It  was  on
the  banks  of  this  river  that  Don  Diego  de  Almagro  defeated
and  captured  the  captain  Alonzo  de  Alvarado,  general  for
the  governor  Don  Francisco  Pizarro,  as  I  shall  relate  in  the
book  containing  the  history  of  the  war  of  Las  Salinas.^
Not  very  far  from  this  river  there  were  edifices  and  store-
houses like  those  in  all  the  other  districts,  but  they  were
small  and  not  of  much  importance.

willows,  while  here  and  there  large  fruit  gardens  slope  down  to  its  banks.
Every  part  of  the  valley  is  carefully  cidtivated,  and  large  fields  of  wheat
cover  the  lower  slopes  of  the  surrounding  mountains.

»  From  the  beginning  of  January  to  the  end  of  March  1548.  Gasca
was  here  joined  by  Valdivia,  the  conqueror  of  Chile,  and  when  he  com-
menced his  march  against  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  he  was  at  the  head  of  nearly
two  thousand  weU  armed  men.

2  This  is  the  river  Pachachaca.  It  is  now  spanned  by  a  handsome
stone  bridge  of  one  arch,  at  a  gi-eat  height  above  the  stream.  Tliis  bridge
is  some  sLxty  years  old.     The  Pachachaca  is  a  tributary  of  the  Ucayali.

^  See  my  translation  of  the  life  of  Don  Alonzo  Enriquez  de  Guzman,
chap,  xlviii,  and  note  at  p.  114.     Hakluyt  Society's  volume  for  1862.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  310


CHAPTER    XCI.

Of  the  river  of  Apuriinac,  of  the  valley  of  Xaquixaguana,  of  tiic
causeway  which  passes  over  it,  and  of  what  else  there  is  to  relate
until  the  city  of  Cuzco  is  reached.

Further  on  is  tlio  river  of  Apurimac,  which  is  the  largest  of
those  which  are  crossed  between  this  place  and  Caxamarca.
It  is  eight  leagues  from  that  of  Abancay,  and  the  road  is
much  broken  up  by  mountains  and  declivities,  so  that
those  who  made  it  must  have  had  much  labour  in  breaking
up  the  rocks,  and  levelling  the  ground,  especially  where  it
descends  towards  the  river.  Here  the  road  is  so  rugged
and  dangerous,  that  some  horses,  laden  with  gold  and
silver,  have  fallen  in  and  been  lost  without  any  possibihty
of  saving  them.  There  are  two  enormous  stone  pillars,  to
which  the  bridge  is  secured.  When  I  returned  to  the  City
of  the  Kings,  after  we  had  defeated  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  some
of  our  soldiers  crossed  the  river  without  a  bridge,  which
had  been  destroyed,  each  man  in  a  sack  fastened  to  a  rope
passing  from  the  pillar  on  one  side  of  the  river  to  that  on
the  other,  more  than  fifty  of  us.^  It  is  no  small  terror  that
is  caused  by  seeing  what  men  pass  through  in  these  Indies.
After  crossing  this  river  the  place  is  presently  seen  where
the  buildings  of  the  Yncas  were,  and  where  they  had  an
oracle.     The  devil,  according  to  the  Indians,  rephed  from

^  A  few  miles  beyond  the  little  village  of  Ciu-ahuasi,  is  the  precipitous
descent  to  the  bridge  over  the  Apiu-imac  (Apu,  "  cliief,"  and  riinac,
"  speaking,"  or  "a  speaker,"  in  Quichua).  A  steep  zigzag  path  leads
do^^^l  to  the  side  of  the  cliff,  and  at  last  the  precipice  becomes  so  perpen-
dicular that  a  tunnel  has  been  excavated  in  the  soUd  rock,  about  twenty
yards  long,  at  the  end  of  which  is  the  bridge.  It  is  made  in  the  same  way
as  that  over  the  river  Pampas.  The  river  dashes  furiously  along  between
vertical  precipices  of  stupendous  height,  and  a  high  wind  is  not  uncom-
mon, which  blows  the  frail  rope  bridge  to  and  fro,  rendering  the  passage
very  dangerous,  and  at  times  im];:


320  THE    TRAVELS    OF

out  of  the  trunk  of  a  tree^  near  wliicli  they  buried  gold^  and
offered  up  sacrifices.

From  this  river  of  Apurimac  the  road  leads  to  the  build-
ings of  Limatambo/  and  crossing  the  mountains  of  Yilca-
conga  (which  is  the  place  where  the  Adelantado  Don  Diego
de  AlmagrOj  with  some  Spaniards^  fought  a  battle  with  the
Indians  before  he  entered  Cuzco)  the  valley  of  Xaquixa-
guana  is  reached,  which  is  a  plain  situated  between  the
chains  of  mountains.  It  is  not  very  broad,  nor  long.  At
the  beginning  of  it,  is  the  place  where  Gonzalo  Pizarro  was
defeated,  and  close  by  he  and  his  captains  were  tried  by
order  of  the  licentiate  Don  Pedro  de  la  Gasca,  president  for
his  Majesty.  In  this  valley  there  were  very  rich  and  sump-
tuous edifices,  where  the  nobles  of  Cuzco  retired  to  enjoy
their  ease  and  pleasure.  Here,  also,  was  the  place  where
the  governor  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  ordered  Challcuchima,
the  captain-general  of  Atahualpa,  to  be  burnt.  The  distance
from  this  vaUey  to  the  city  of  Cuzco  is  five  leagues  along
the  grand  royal  road.  The  water  of  a  river  which  rises
near  this  valley  forms  a  large  and  deep  morass,  and  it
would  be  very  difficult  to  cross  it,  if  the  Yncas  had  not
caused  a  broad  and  strong  causeway  to  be  made,  with  walls
on  either  side  so  strong  as  to  last  for  a  long  time.     In

'  The  empire  of  the  Yncas,  as  it  existed  in  the  time  of  Manco  Ccapac,
the  founder  of  his  dyna.sty,  only  extended  from  the  Apurimac  on  the  west,
to  the  Paucar-tambo  on  the  east,  a  distance  of  about  fifty  miles.  In  the
centre  was  Cuzco,  while  on  each  frontier  there  was  a  fortress  and  a
palace — Ollantay-tampu  on  the  north,  Paccari-tampu  on  the  south,
Paucar-tampu  on  the  east,  and  Rimac-tampu  (corrupted  by  the  Span-
iards into  Limatambo)  on  the  west,  near  the  river  of  Apurimac.  The
ruins  of  the  palace  of  Lima-tambo  are  situated  in  a  delightful  spot,  com-
manding a  fine  view.  Only  two  walls,  and  the  face  of  the  stone  terrace
on  which  the  palace  was  built,  now  remain.  These  walls  are  twenty
and  forty  paces  long  respectively,  forming  an  angle,  and  about  fourteen
feet  high.  The  stones  are  beautifully  fitted  into  each  other,  without
cement  of  any  kind,  and  to  this  day  look  angular  and  fresh.  At  intervals
there  are  recesses  in  the  walls,  aliout  one  foot  deep  and  eight  feet  high.
The  interior  of  tlie  palace  is  now  an  extensive  fruit  garden.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  321

former  times  this  valley  was  very  populous,  and  was  covered
with  crops,  in  fields  which  were  so  numerous  that  it  was  a
sight  worth  seeing.  These  fields  were  divided  from  each
other  by  broad  walls,  with  the  crops  of  maize  and  roots
sown  between  them,  and  thus  they  rose  up  the  sides  of  the
mountains.^  Many  of  these  crops  are  of  wheat,  which  grows
well.-  There  are  also  large  flocks  belonging  to  the  Span-
iards who  are  citizens  of  the  ancient  city  of  Cuzco,  which  is
built  between  certain  hills  in  the  manner  and  fashion  that  I
shall  declare  in  the  following  chapter.

'  These  axe  the  andeneria  or  terraced  fields  and  gardens.  They  may
still  be  seen  on  the  liills  bordering  the  plain  of  Xaquixagiiana  or  Siirite.

-  The  original  name  of  tliis  plain  appears  to  have  been  Yahuar-pampa
(field  of  blood),  so  called  in  memory  of  the  bloody  battle  between  the
army  of  Ynca  Huira-ccocha  and  the  allied  tribes  led  by  Anco-hualluc.
In  the  days  of  the  Spanish  conquest  it  was  known  by  the  name  of
Xaquixagiiana  (Cieza  de  Leon  and  Zarate)  or  Sacsahuana  (G.  de  la
Vega)  ;  here  the  Ynca  general  Challcuchima  was  cruelly  burnt  to  death
by  Pizarro,  and  here  the  President  Gasca  defeated  and  executed  Gonzalo
Pizarro  and  Carbajal.  It  is  now  generally  called  the  plain  of  Siirite,
from  a  village  of  that  name  at  its  north-western  corner.

The  plain  of  Surite  is  a  few  leagues  west  of  Cuzco,  on  the  road  to  Lima,
at  a  sufficient  elevation  to  be  within  the  region  of  occasional  frosts,  and
is  sm-rounded  by  mountains,  up  wluch  the  ancient  andeneria  or  terraced
fields,  now  left  to  ruin,  may  be  seen  rising  tier  above  tier.  The  plain  is
swampy  and  covered  with  rank  grass,  and  woidd  be  difficult  to  cross,  if  it
were  not  for  the  causeway,  bmlt  by  order  of  the  Yncas,  and  accurately
described  by  Cieza  de  Leon,  which  is  still  in  good  preservation.  This
causeway  is  of  stone,  raised  about  six  feet  above  the  plain,  and  perfectly
straight  for  a  distance  of  two  leagues.  At  the  end  of  the  causeway  is  the
little  village  of  Yscu-chaca.


322  THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    XCII.

Of  the  manner  in  which  the  city  of  Cuzco  is  built,  of  the  four  royal
roads  wliich  lead  from  it,  of  the  grand  edifices  it  contained,  and
who  was  its  founder.

The  city  of  Cuzco  is  built  iu  a  very  rugged  situation,  and  is
surrounded  by  mountains  on  all  sides.  It  stands  on  the
banks  of  two  streams,  one  of  wliicli  flows  through  it,  and
there  are  buildings  on  both  sides.  To  the  eastward  there  is
a  valley,  which  commences  at  the  city  itself,  so  that  the
waters  of  the  streams  which  pass  by  the  city  flow  to  the
east.^  This  valley  is  very  cold,  and  there  are  no  trees  which
yield  fruit,  except  a  few  moUes.  On  the  north  side  of  the
city,  on  the  highest  and  nearest  mountain,  there  is  a  fortress
which,  for  its  strength  and  grandeur,  was  and  still  is  an
excellent  edifice,  although  now  most  of  it  is  in  ruins.  The
massive  foundations,  however,  with  the  principal  blocks  of
stone,  are  still  standing."

'  The  ancient  city  of  Cuzco  is  in  lat.  13°  31'  S.,  and  long.  73°  3'  W.,
at  the  head  of  a  valley  11,380  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  The
valley  is  nine  miles  long,  and  from  two  to  tlu-ee  broad,  bounded  on  either
side  by  ranges  of  bare  mountains  of  considerable  elevation.  It  is  covered
with  fields  of  barley  and  lucerne,  and,  besides  many  farms  and  country
houses,  contains  the  two  small  towns  of  San  Sebastian  and  San  Geroninio.
On  the  north  side  the  famous  hill  of  Sacsahuaman  rises  abrujrtly  over
the  city,  and  is  divided  from  the  mountains  on  either  side  by  two  deep
ravines,  through  which  flow  the  little  rivere  of  Huatanay  and  Rodadero.
The  former  stream  rushes  noisily  past  the  moss-grown  walls  of  the  old
convent  of  Santa  Teresa,  under  the  houses  forming  the  west  side  of  the
great  square  of  Cuzco,  down  the  centre  of  a  broad  street,  where  it  is
crossed  by  nimierous  stone  bridges,  and  eventually  unites  with  the
Rodadero.  The  Huatanay  is  now  but  a  noisy  httle  mountain  torrent
confined  between  banks  faced  with  masonry ;  but  in  former  times  it  must
liave  been  m  the  habit  of  frequently  breaking  its  bounds,  as  the  name
implies,  which  is  composed  of  two  words,  Huata  (a  year),  and  Ananay^
an  ejaculation  of  weariness,  indicating  fatigue  from  the  yearly  necessity
of  renewing  its  banks.  The  principal  part  of  the  ancient  city  was  built
between  the  two  rivere.

=  '•'■  The  grandeur  of  the  fortress  of  Cuzco,"  says  Garcilasso  do  la  Vega,


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  323

To  the  north  and  east  of  Cuzco  arc  the  provinces  of  Anti-
suyu,  which  contain  the  dense  forests  of  the  Andes,  and  also

"  is  incredible  to  those  who  have  not  seen  it,  and  those  who  have  ex-
amined it  carefully  might  well  imagine,  and  even  beUeve,  that  it  was
made  by  some  enchantment,  and  by  demons  rather  than  men.  The
multitude  and  bigness  of  the  stones  in  the  three  lines  of  fortification
(which  are  more  like  rocks  than  stones)  cause  admu-ation,  and  it  is
wonderful  how  the  Indians  could  have  cut  them  out  of  the  quarries
whence  they  were  brought,  for  they  have  neither  iron  nor  steel.  How
tliey  conveyed  them  to  the  building  is  a  still  greater  difficulty,  for  they
had  no  bullocks,  nor  did  they  know  how  to  make  carts  which  coidd  bear
the  weight  of  the  stones ;  so  they  dragged  them  with  stout  ropes  l;)y  the
force  of  their  arms.  Tlie  roads  by  which  they  had  to  come  were  not
level,  but  led  over  very  rugged  mountains,  up  and  dovm  which  the
stones  were  dragged  by  sheer  force.  ]\Iany  of  the  stones  were  brought
from  distances  of  ten,  twelve,  and  fifteen  leagues,  particularly  the  stone,
or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  the  rock  which  the  Indians  call  sayciisca  (as
much  as  to  say  'tired'),  for  it  never  reached  the  building.  It  was
brought  from  a  distance  of  fifteen  leagues,  across  the  river  of  Yucay,
which  is  little  smaller  than  the  Guadalquivir  at  Cordova.  The  nearest
quan-y  w^as  at  INIuyna,  five  leagues  from  Cuzco.  But  it  is  still  more
wonderful  to  think  how  they  fitted  such  great  stones  so  closely  that  the
point  of  a  knife  will  scarcely  go  between  them.  INIany  are  so  w^ell  ad-
justed that  the  joining  can  scarcely  be  seen,  and  to  attain  such  nicety  it
must  have  been  necessary  to  raise  them  to  their  places  and  lower  theni
veiy  many  times  ;  for  the  Indians  had  no  square,  nor  had  they  any  rule
by  which  they  could  know  that  one  stone  fitted  justly  on  another.  They
had  no  knowledge  of  cranes  nor  of  pulleys,  nor  of  any  machine  wliich
woiUd  assist  them  in  raising  and  lowering  the  stones."  .  .  .  Acosta  (lib.  vi,
cap.  14,  p.  421,  ed.  1608)  makes  similar  remarks  on  the  size  of  the  stones
and  on  the  difficulty  of  raising  them.  Garcilasso  continues  :  "  They  built
the  forti-ess  on  a  high  liill  to  the  north  of  the  city,  called  Sacsahuaman.
This  hill  rises  above  the  city  ahnost  perpendicidarly,  so  that  on  that  side
the  fortress  is  safe  from  an  enemy,  whether  formed  in  squadron  or  in
any  other  way.  Owing  to  its  natm-al  advantages  this  side  was  only  for-
tified with  a  stout  wall,  more  than  two  himdred  fathoms  long.  But  on
the  other  side  there  is  a  wide  plain  approaching  the  hill  by  a  gentle
incline,  so  that  an  enemy  might  march  up  in  squadrons.  Here  they  made
tlu-ee  walls,  one  in  front  of  the  other,  each  wall  being  more  than  two
hundred  fathoms  long.  They  are  in  the  form  of  a  half  moon,  and  unite
with  the  wall  facing  the  city.  The  fii*st  wall  contains  the  largest  stones.
I  hold  that  they  were  not  taken  from  any  quarry,  because  they  bear  no
marks  of  lianng  been  worked,  but  that  they  were  huge  boidders  (tormos)

Y  2


324  THE    TRAVELS    OF

those  of  Chinclia-suyUj  extending  towards  Quito.  To  the
south  are  the  provinces  of  the  Collao  and  of  Cunti-suyu,  of

or  loose  rocks  which  were  found  on  the  hills,  adapted  for  building.
Nearly  in  the  centre  of  each  line  of  wall  there  was  a  doorway,  each  with
a  stone  of  the  same  height  and  breadth,  which  closed  it.  The  first  of
these  doorways  was  called  Ttiu-'piLncu  (Sand  gate) ;  the  second,  Acahuana-
puncu,  so  called  after  the  chief  architect ;  and  the  third,  Huira-ccocha-
puncu.  There  is  a  space  of  twenty-five  or  tliirty  feet  between  the  walls,
which  is  made  level,  so  that  the  summit  of  one  wall  is  on  a  line  with  the
foot  of  the  next.  Each  wall  had  its  parapet  or  breastwork,  behind  wliich
the  defenders  could  fight  with  more  security.  Above  these  lines  of
defence  there  is  a  long  narrow  platform,  on  which  were  three  strong
towers.  The  principal  one  was  in  the  centre,  and  was  called  Moyoc-
marca  or  '  the  round  tower.'  In  it  there  was  a  fountain  of  excellent
water,  brought  from  a  distance  underground,  the  Indians  know  not
whence.  The  kings  lodged  in  this  tower  when  they  went  up  to  the  fortress
for  amusement,  and  all  the  walls  were  adorned  with  gold  and  silver,  and
animals,  birds,  and  plants  imitated  from  nature,  which  served  as  tapestry.
The  second  tower  was  called  Paucar-marca^  and  the  tliird,  Sacllac-marca.
They  were  both  square,  and  they  contained  lodgings  for  many  soldiers.
The  foundations  were  as  deep  as  the  towers  were  high,  and  the  vaults
passed  from  one  to  the  other.  These  vaults  were  cunningly  made,  with
so  many  lanes  and  streets  that  they  crossed  each  other  with  theu'  turns
and  doublings."  Garcilasso  complains  that  the  Spaniards,  instead  of
preserving  this  wonderful  monument,  have  taken  away  many  stones,
from  the  vaults  and  towers,  with  which  to  build  their  new  houses  in
Cuzco  ;  but  they  left  the  three  great  walls,  because  the  stones  were  so
enormous  that  they  could  not  move  them.  He  adds  that  the  fortress
took  fifty  years  in  building.

The  ruins  of  the  fortress  of  Cuzco  are  the  most  interesting  in  Peru,
and  I  made  a  very  minute  examination  of  them  in  1853.  On  the  side  of
the  hill  immediately  above  the  city  there  are  three  stone  terraces.  The
first  wall,  14  feet  high,  extends  in  a  semicircular  form  round  this
end  of  the  hill,  for  180  paces.  Between  the  first  and  second  walls  there
is  a  level  space  8  paces  broad.  Above  the  third  wall  there  are  many  care-
fully hewn  stones  lying  about,  some  of  them  supporting  three  lofty  wooden
crosses.  Here,  probably,  were  the  three  towers  mentioned  by  Garcilasso,
now  totally  destroyed.  The  view  from  this  point  is  extensive  and  beau-
tiful. The  city  of  Cuzco  is  spread  out  like  a  map  below,  with  its  hand-
some church  towers  and  domes  rising  above  the  other  buildings.  The
great  square  is  seen,  crowded  with  Indian  girls  sitting  under  shades  before
their  merchandise,  or  passing  to  and  fro  like  a  busy  hive  of  bees.  Beyond
is  the  long  ]ilain,  and  far  in  the  distance,  rising  above  the  lower  ranges


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  325

wliicli  the  Collao  is  between  the  cast  and  south  winds,  and
Cunti-suyu  between  the  south  and  west.

One  part  of  this  city  was  called  Hanan-Cuzco,  and  another
Hurin-CuzcOj  where  the  most  noble  and  ancient  families
lived.  Another  division  was  the  hill  of  Carmcnca/  where
there  were  certain  small  towers  for  observing  the  move-
ments of  the  sun/  which  the  people  venerated.      In  the

of  moimtains,  towers  Asungato,  with  its  snowy  peak  stauding  out  in
strong  relief  against  the  cloudless  sky.

The  length  of  the  platform  or  table  land  on  the  summit  of  the  Sacsa-
huaman  hill  is  525  paces,  and  its  breadth,  in  the  broadest  part,  130
paces.  INIany  deep  excations  have  been  made  in  all  parts  of  it,  in  search
of  liidden  treasure.  On  the  south  side  the  position  was  so  strong  that  it
needed  no  artificial  defence,  being  bounded  by  the  almost  inaccessible
ravine  of  the  Huatanay.  On  the  north,  from  the  terraces  already  de-
scribed for  174  paces  in  a  westerly  direction,  the  position  is  naturally
defended  by  the  steep  ravine  through  wliich  flows  the  river  Rodadero,  and
only  required  a  single  stone  breastwork,  which  stiU  exists.  But  from
this  point  to  the  western  extremity  of  the  table  land,  a  distance  of
400  paces,  it  is  entirely  undefended  by  uatui^e.  Here  the  Yncas  con-
structed that  gigantic  treble  hue  of  Cyclopean  fortification,  which
must  fiU  the  mind  of  every  traveller  with  astonishment  and  admiration.
The  first  wall  averages  a  height  of  18  feet,  the  second  of  16,  and  the
tliird  of  14  :  the  terrace  between  the  first  and  second  being  10  paces
across,  and  that  between  the  second  and  tliird  8  paces.  The  walls
are  built  with  salient  and  retiring  angles.  The  position  is  entered  by
tlu-ee  doorways,  so  narrow  that  they  only  admit  of  the  passage  of  one
man  at  a  time.  The  outer  angles  are  generally  composed  of  one  enormous
block  of  stone.  I  measured  some  of  these.  One  was  17  feet  high,
12  broad,  and  7^  long ;  another,  16  feet  high  by  6  broad.  They
are  made  to  fit  so  exactly  one  into  the  other  as  to  form  a  piece  of
masom-y  unparalleled  in  solidity  and  the  peculiarity  of  its  construc-
tion, in  any  other  part  of  the  world.  These  walls  are  composed  of  a
limestone  of  a  dark  slate  colour,  and  are  now  overgrown  with  cacti  and
wild  flowers.

»  Ivnown,  in  the  days  of  the  Yncas,  as  Huaca-puncu  ('*  the  holy
gate").

2  The  Yncas  ascertained  the  time  of  the  solstices  by  means  of  eight
towers  on  the  east,  and  eight  towers  on  the  west  of  the  city,  put  four
and  four,  two  small  between  two  large  ones.  The  smaller  towers  were
eighteen  or  twenty  feet  apart,  and  the  larger  ones  were  the  same  distance,
one  on  each  side.     The  solstice  was  ascertained  by  watching  \\hen  the


826  THE    TRAVELS    OF

central  and  most  populous  part  of  the  city  there  was  a  large
open  space^  which  they  say  was  once  a  lake  or  swamp,  but
that  the  founders  filled  it  up  with  earth  and  stones,  and
made  it  as  it  now  is.  From  this  square  four  royal  roads
led.  That  which  they  called  Chincha-suyu  went  towards  the
coast,  and  also  to  Quito  and  Paste.  The  second  road,  called
Cunti-suyu,  led  to  the  provinces  which  are  subject  to  this
city,  and  to  that  of  Are  quip  a.  The  third  royal  road,  called
Anti-suyu,  goes  to  the  provinces  at  the  skirts  of  the  Andes,
and  to  some  villages  beyond  the  mountains.  The  last  road,
called  Colla-suyu,  leads  to  the  provinces  which  extend  as
far  as  Chile. ^  Thus,  as  in  Spain,  the  ancients  made  a  divi-
sion of  the  whole  country  according  to  provinces;  and  thus  the
Indians  knew  those  districts,  which  extended  over  so  vast  a
country,  by  the  names  of  the  roads.  The  stream  which
flows  through  the  city  has  its  bridges  for  passing  from  one
side  to  the  other.  In  no  part  of  this  kingdom  was  there
found  a  nobly  adorned  city,  except  at  this  Cuzco,  which  was
(as  I  have  already  said  many  times)  the  capital  of  the  empire
of  the  Yncas,  and  their  royal  seat.  In  all  the  other  parts  of
the  kingdom  the  people  live  in  houses  scattered  about,  and
if  there  are  some  villages,  they  are  without  plan  or  order,
or  anything  worthy  of  praise.  But  Cuzco  was  grand  and
stately,  and  raust  have  been  founded  by  a  people  of  great
intelligence.  It  had  fine  streets,  except  that  they  were
narrow,  and  the  houses  were  built  of  solid  stones,  beautifully
joined.  These  stones  were  very  large  and  well  cut.  The
other  parts  of  the  houses  were  of  wood  and  straw,  but  there
are  no  remains  of  tiles,  bricks,  or  lime  amongst  them.  In
this  city  there  wei-e  many  grand  buildings  of  the  Yncas  in

sun  set  or  rose  between  the  smaller  towers.  G.  de  la  Vega,  i,  lib.  ii,
cap.  22.

1  Tlie  four  grand  divisions  of  the  empire  of  the  Yncas  gave  their  names
to  these  four  royal  roads.  The  whole  empire  was  called  Ttahua-ntin-
Sujju.  literally  "The  four  regions."


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  o27

vai'ious  parts^  in  which  he  who  succeeded  to  the  lordship
celebrated  his  festivals.^     Here,  too,  was   the  solemn  and

•  The  most  detailed  accouut  of  ancient  Cuzco  is  to  be  found  in  the
pages  of  the  Ynca  historian.  He  says  that  the  first  houses  were  built  on
the  steep  slopes  of  the  Sacsahuaman  hill.  The  city  was  divided  into  two
parts,  Hanan-Cuzco  (upper  or  north)  and  Iliu-in-Cuzco  (lower  or  soutli).
The  chief  ward  or  di\asion  was  on  the  slopes  of  Sacsahuaman,  and  wa.s
called  Collcam-pata.  Here  ISIanco  Ccapac  built  his  palace,  the  ruins  of
which  are  still  in  good  preservation  ;  and  the  great  hall,  where  festivals
were  celebrated  on  rainy  days,  was  entire  in  the  days  of  Garcilasso.
The  next  ward,  to  the  east,  was  called  Cantut-pata  ("  the  terrace  of
flowers")  ;  then  came  Puma-curcu  ("  lion's  beam"),  so  called  from  a
beam  to  wliich  wild  animals  were  secured ;  then  Toco-cachi  ("  window
of  salt")  ;  then,  further  south,  Munay-sencca  ("  loving  nose")  ;  then
Rimac-'pampa  ("  speaking  place"),  where  ordinances  were  promulgated,
close  to  the  temple  of  the  sun,  at  the  south  end  of  the  city  ;  then  Pumap-
chupan  {'■'■  hon's  tail"),  where  the  two  streams  of  Huatanay  and  Rodadero
luiite,  and  form  a  long  promontory,  like  a  tail.  To  the  westward  there
was  a  division  called  Chaquill-chaca  ;  and  next  to  it,  on  the  north,  were
others  called  Pichu  and  Qnillipata.  Finally,  the  division  known  as
Huaca-puncu  ("  holy  gate")  adjoined  the  Collcampata  on  the  west  side.

The  inner  space,  between  the  abovenamed  divisions  or  suburbs,  and
extending  from  the  Collcampata  on  the  north  to  Rimac-pampa  on  the
south,  was  occupied  by  the  palaces  and  houses  of  the  Ynca  and  his  family,
divided  accoi'ding  to  their  Ayllus  or  lineages.  This  central  part  of  the
city  was  divided  into  four  parts,  called  Hatun-cancha^  containing  the
palace  of  Ynca  Yupanqui ;  Puca-marca^  where  stood  the  palace  of  Tupac
Ynca  Yupanqui ;  Ynti-pampa^  the  open  space  in  front  of  the  temple  of
the  sun  ;  and  Ccori-cancha^  wdiich  was  occupied  by  the  temple  of  the  sun
itself.  Immediately  south  of  the  Collcam-pata  was  the  Sacha-hziasi  or
college,  founded  by  Ynca  Rocca,  where  the  Amautas  or  wise  men  resided.
Near  the  college  was  the  palace  of  Ynca  Rocca,  called  Coracora^  and
another  palace  called  Cassana*  the  abode  of  the  Ynca  Pachacutec.  The
latter  was  so  called  because  it  would  cause  any  one  who  saw  it  to  freeze
(cassa)  with  astonisluuent,  at  its  grandeur  and  magnificence.  These
palaces  looked  upon  the  great  square  of  the  ancient  city,  called  Hxuicay-
pata  ("  the  festive  terrace"),  which  was  two  hundred  paces  long  and  one
hundred  and  fifty  broad  from  east  to  west.  At  the  west  end  it  was
bounded  by  the  Huatanay  stream.  At  the  south  side  there  was  another
royal  palace,  called  Amaru-cancha  ("place  of  a  serpent"),  the  residence
of  Huayna  Ccapac,  and  south  of  the  Anani-canclia  was  the  Aclla-Imasi,


The  site  is  now  occupied  by  the  convent  of  San  Francisco.


328  THE    TRAVELS    OP

magniiicent  temple  of  the  sun^,  called  Ccuri-cancha^  whicli
was  ricli  in  gold  and  silver.^  Most  parts  of  tlie  city  were
inhabited  by  Mitimaes,   and  laws  and   statutes  were  esta-

or  convent  of  virgins.  "West  of  the  Huacay-fata  was  the  Cusi-pata
("  joyful  terrace"),  which  was  united  with  it,  the  Huatanay  being  paved
over  with  large  flagstones.

All  the  streets  of  modern  Cuzco  contain  specunens  of  ancient  masonry.
Many  of  the  stones  have  serpents  sculptured  in  rehef ,  and  four  slabs  are
to  be  seen,  with  figures — half  bird,  half  man — carved  upon  them,  with
some  pretence  to  artistic  skill.  The  wall  of  the  palace  of  Ynca  Rocca  is
still  very  perfect.  It  is  formed  of  huge  masses  of  rock  of  various  shapes,
one  of  them  actually  having  twelve  sides,  yet  fitting  into  each  other  with
marvellous  accuracy.  They  are  of  a  sombre  hue,  and  have  an  imposing
effect.  With  the  exception,  however,  of  this  building,  of  the  palace  on
the  Collcampata,  and  of  the  fortress,  which  are  in  the  Cyclopean  style,
all  the  ancient  masonry  of  Cuzco  is  in  regular  parallel  courses.  The
roofs  were  of  thatch,  but  very  neatly  and  carefully  laid  on,  as  may  be
seen  in  the  specimen  still  existing  at  the  Sondor-huasi  of  Azangaro
(See  note  to  p.  166),  and  the  city  must  altogether  have  presented  a  scene
of  architectural  grandeur  and  magnificence  which  was  well  calculated  to
astonish  the  gi-eedy  and  illiterate  conquerors.

>  Ccuri-cancha  means  literally  "the  place  of  gold."  Its  site  is  now
occupied  by  the  convent  of  San  Domingo,  but  several  portions  of  the
ancient  temple  of  the  sun  are  still  .standing,  especially  at  the  west  end,
where  a  mass  of  the  dark,  beautifully-formed  masonry,  about  eighteen
feet  high,  overhangs  the  Huatanay  river.  At  the  east  end  of  the  convent
the  ancient  wall  of  the  temple  is  ahnost  entire,  being  seventy  paces  long
and  about  thirty  feet  high.  The  stones  are  of  irregular  length,  generally
about  two  feet  by  one  a-half,  and  very  accurately  cut.  They  are  in
regular  parallel  com-ses,  with  their  exterior  surfaces  projecting  slightly
and  sloping  off  at  the  sides  to  form  a  junction  with  their  neighbours.
The  roof  was  formed  of  beams  pitched  very  liigh,  and  thatched  with
straw.  In  the  interior  the  four  walls  were  lined  with  plates  of  gold,  and
at  one  end  there  was  a  huge  golden  svm,  with  features  represented,  and
rays  of  flame  darting  from  its  circumference,  all  of  one  piece.  It
extended  from  one  wall  to  the  other,  occupying  the  whole  side.  This
magnificent  prize  fell  to  the  share  of  a  Sjianish  knight  named  Marcio
Serra  de  Lejesama,  who  gambled  it  away  in  one  night ;  but  he  never
took  a  card  into  his  hand  again.  The  reformed  knight  married  an  Ynca
princess,  and  left  the  memorable  will  which  I  have  quoted  in  a  note  at
page  124.

On  each  side  of  the  golden  sun  were  the  mummies  of  the  deceased
Yncas,  seated  in  chairs  of  gold.  The  principal  door  faced  towards  the
north,  and  opened  on  the  open  space  known  as  the  Ynti-fairifa  ;  and  a


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  320

blisliccl  for  their  conduct,  which  were  understood  by  all,  as
well  regarding  their  superstitions  and  temples,  as  in  matters
relating  to  government.  This  city  was  the  richest  of  which
we  have  any  knowledge,  in  all  the  Indies,  for  great  store  of
treasure  was  often  brought  in  to  increase  the  grandeur  of
the  nobles ;  and  no  gold  nor  silver  might  be  taken  out,  on
pain  of  death.  The  sons  of  the  chiefs  in  all  the  provinces
came  to  reside  at  court^  with  their  retinues,  for  a  certain
time.  There  were  a  great  many  gilders  and  workers  in
silver,  who  understood  how  to  work  the  things  ordered  by
the  Yncas.  The  chief  priest,  called  Huillac-Umu^  lived  in
the  grand  temple.

At  present  there  are  very  good  houses^  with  upper  stories
roofed  with  tiles.  The  climate,  although  it  is  cold,  is  veiy
healthy,  and  Cuzco  is  better  supplied  with  provisions  than
any  other  place  in  the  kingdom.  It  is  also  the  largest  city,
and  more  Spaniards  hold  encomiendas  over  Indians  here  than
elsewhere.  The  city  was  founded  by  Manco  Ccapac,  the  first
King  Ynca ;  and,  after  he  had  been  succeeded  by  ten  other
lords,^  the  Adelantado  Don  Francisco  Pizarro,  governor  and
captain-general  of  these  kingdoms,  rebuilt  and  refounded  it
in  the  name  of  the  Emperor,  Don  Carlos,  our  lord,  in  the
month  of  October  of  the  year  1531'.

cornice  of  gold,  a  yard  broad,  ran  round  the  exterior  walls  of  the  temple.
On  the  south  side  were  the  cloisters,  also  ornamented  with  a  broad
cornice  of  gold,  and  within  the  enclosure  were  buildings  dedicated  to  the
moon,  and  adorned  with  silver,  to  the  stars,  to  lightning,  and  to  the
rainbow ;  as  well  as  the  dwellings  of  the  Huillac  Umu,  or  high  priest,
and  of  his  attendants.  Within  the  courts  of  these  cloisters  there  were
five  fountains,  with  pipes  of  silver  or  gold.  lai  the  rear  of  the  cloisters
was  the  garden  of  the  sun,  where  all  the  flowers,  fruits,  and  leaves,  were
of  pure  beaten  gold.  I  have  myself  seen  some  of  these  golden  fruits  and
flowers.

>  Namely  SincM  Rocca  (1062),  Lloque  Yupanqui  (1091),  INIayta
Ccapac  (1126),  Ccapac  Yuimnqui  (1156),  Ynca  Rocca  (1197),  Yahuar-
huaccac  (1249),  Huira-ccocha  (1289),  Pachacutec  (1340),  Ynca  Yu-
panqui (1400),  and  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui  (1439).  The  last  named  was
succeeded  by  Huayna  Ccapac  (1475),  in  whose  reign  the  Spaniards  lii-st
appeared  on  the  coast  of  Peru.


330  THE    TRAVELS    OF

CHAPTER    XCIII.

Ill  which  the  things  of  this  city  of  Cuzco  are  described  more  in  detail.

As  tliis  city  was  the  most  important  and  principal  place  in
the  kingdom,  the  Indians  of  the  neighbourhood  were  assem-
bled at  certain  seasons  of  the  year  to  clean  the  sti-eets,  and
perform  other  duties.  Near  the  city,  on  one  side  and  the
other,  there  were  the  same  storehouses  as  are  to  be  found
in  all  parts  of  the  kingdom,  some  larger,  and  some  stronger
than  others.  As  these  Yncas  were  so  rich  and  powerful,
some  of  their  edifices  were  gilded,  and  others  were  adorned
with  plates  of  gold.  Their  ancestors  held,  as  a  sacred  place,
a  great  hill  near  the  city  called  Huanacaure,  and  they  say
that  human  blood  and  many  lambs  and  sheep  were  sacrificed
on  it.  The  city  was  full  of  strangers  from  all  parts,  Indians
of  Chile  and  Pasto,  Caiiaris,  Chachapoyas,  Huancas,  Collas,
and  men  of  all  the  tribes  in  the  provinces,  each  living  apart
in  the  quarter  assigned  by  the  governors  of  the  city.  They
all  retained  the  costumes  of  their  fathers,  and  went  about
after  the  manner  of  their  native  land ;  and,  even  when  one
hundred  thousand  men  were  assembled  together,  the  country
of  each  Indian  was  easily  known  by  the  peculiar  head-dress
which  distinguished  him.^  Some  of  these  strangers  buried
their  dead  in  high  mountains,  others  in  their  houses,  and
others  in  tombs  with  live  women,  precious  things,  and  plenty
of  food.  The  Yncas,  as  I  was  given  to  understand,  inter-
fered in  none  of  these  things,  so  long  as  their  vassals  adored
and  venerated  the  sun,  and  this  adoration  they  called  mocha.^
In  many  parts  of  the  city  there  are  great  edifices  under  the
ground,  and  even  now  some  tiles  and  pieces  of  gold  are  found
buried  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth.     Assuredly  there  must  be

'  G.  do  la  Vega  quotes  this  passage  (i,  lib.  vii,  cap.  19).
^  In  Quichua,  Muchani  is  to  adore  or  to  kiss ;  and  Mucha//  wouid  I  le
"adoration."


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  331

great  treasure  buried  within  tlio  circuit  of  the  city,  but  those
who  are  living  know  not  where  to  find  it.  As  there  was  so  large
a  concourse  of  people  here,  and  as  the  devil,  by  the  permis-
sion of  God,  had  such  complete  mastery  over  them,  there
were  many  soothsayers,  sorcerers,  and  idolaters.  Even  now
the  city  is  not  yet  entirely  free  of  them,  especially  as  re-
gards witchcraft.  Near  the  city  there  are  many  warm  valleys
where  there  are  fruit  and  other  trees  which  grow  well,  and
most  of  the  fruit  is  brought  to  the  city  for  sale.  They  also
reap  much  wheat,  of  which  they  make  bread  ;  and  they  have
planted  many  orange  trees  and  other  fruit  trees  both  of
Spain  and  of  the  country.  They  have  mills  over  the  stream
which  flows  through  the  city,  and  at  a  distance  of  four
leagues  may  be  seen  the  quarry  from  which  the  stones  were
conveyed  of  which  the  city  is  built,  a  sight  well  worth
seeing.  They  rear  fowls  in  Cuzco,  and  capons  as  fat  and
good  as  those  of  Granada,  and  in  the  valleys  there  are  herds
of  cattle,  and  flocks,  both,  of  Spanish  sheep  and  of  those  of
the  country.  Although  there  are  no  trees  round  the  city,
the  pulses  of  Spain  ripen  very  well.


CHAPTER    XCIV


Wliich  treats  of  the  valley  of  Yucay  and  of  the  strong  fortress  at  Tanibo,
and  of  part  of  the  province  of  Cunti-suyii.

About  four  leagues  from  this  city  of  Cuzco,  a  little  more  or
less,  there  is  a  valley  called  Yucay,  which  is  very  beautiful,
confined  between  ranges  of  mountains  in  such  sort  that  the
shelter  thus  afforded  makes  the  climate  very  pleasant  and
healthy.^     It  is  neither  too  hot  nor  too  cold,  and  is  cou-


'  The  valley  of  Yucay  or  Vilca-mayii  is  the  paradise  of  Peru.  It  was
the  favourite  residence  of  the  Yncas,  and  is  one  of  the  most  delightful
spots  in  this  favoiu'ed  land.     The  rapid  river  which  flows  through  it


332  THE    TRAVELS    OF

sidered  so  excellent  tliat  the  citizens  of  Cuzco  have  several
times  proposed  to  remove  the  city  into  the  valley.  But  as  the
houses  in  the  city  are  so  grand^  they  could  not  undertake  to
build  them  anew.  They  have  planted  many  trees  in  this
valley  of  Yucay^  and  there  is  good  hope  that  in  time  there
will  be  large  vineyards  and  beautiful  and  I'efreshing  orchards
as  well  in  this  valley,  as  in  that  of  Vilcas,  and  in  others ;
indeed,  they  have  already  been  commenced.  I  say  more  of
this  valley  than  of  the  others,  because  the  Yncas  thought
much  of  it,  and  went  to  it  for  their  festivities  and  solace,  espe-
cially Huira-ccocha  Ynca,  who  was  the  grandfather  of  Tupac
Ynca  Yupanqui.  In  all  parts  of  the  valley  are  to  be  seen
fragments  of  many  buildings  which  have  once  been  very
large,  especially  those  at  Tambo,  three  leagues  down  the
valley,  between  two  great  mountains,  forming  a  ravine
through  which  a  stream  flows.  Although  the  climate  of  the
valley  is  as  pleasant  as  I  have  described,  these  mountains
are  quite  white  with  snow  during  the  greater  part  of  the
year.  In  this  place  the  Yncas  had  the  strongest  fort  in  all
their  dominions,  built  on  rocks,  where  a  small  force  might
hold  their  own  against  a  large  one.     Among  these  rocks

rises  in  the  mountains  of  Yilcaiiota,  and,  leaving  the  city  of  Cuzco  at  a
distance  of  about  ten  miles  to  the  west,  eventually  joins  the  Apurimac
after  a  course  of  about  four  hundred  miles,  and  becomes  one  of  the  main
affluents  of  the  Ucayali.

The  valley  is  seldom  more  than  three  miles  in  breadth,  and  is  bounded
on  its  eastern  side  by  the  snow-capped  range  of  the  Andes.  To  the
westward  there  is  a  lower  range  of  steep  and  rocky  mountains.  Within
these  narrow  limits  the  vale  of  Yucay  enjoys  a  delicious  climate,  and  the
picturesque  farms,  with  their  maize  towers  surrounded  by  little  thickets
of  fruit  trees,  the  villages  scattered  here  and  there  along  the  banks  of  the
rapid  river,  the  groves  of  trees,  and  the  lofty  mountains  rising  abruptly
from  the  valley,  combine  to  form  a  landscape  of  exceeding  beauty.  The
little  village  of  Yucay  is  on  the  site  of  the  delicious  country  retreat  of  the
Yncas,  a  palace  on  which  all  the  arts  of  Peruvian  civilisation  were
lavished  to  render  it  a  fitting  abode  for  the  sovereign  and  his  court.  'I'he
only  remaining  vestiges  of  the  palace  are  two  walls  of  Ynca  mcisoiiry,
forming  sides  of  a  modern  liouse  in  the  idazn  of  the  village.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  333

there  were  certain  masses  of  stone  which  made  the  place
impregnable,  and,  lower  down,  the  sides  of  the  mountains
are  lined  with  terraces  one  above  the  other,  on  which  they
raised  the  crops  which  sustained  them.  Among  the  stones
there  may  still  be  seen  the  figures  of  lions  and  other  wild
animals,  and  of  men  with  arms  like  halberds,  as  if  they
were  guarding  the  way.  They  are  all  well  and  skilfully
executed.  There  were  many  edifices,  and  they  say  that,
before  the  Spaniards  conquered  this  kingdom,  they  con-
tained great  treasure.  In  these  buildings  there  are  stones,
well  cut  and  fitted,  which  are  so  large  that  it  must  have  re-
quired many  men  and  great  ingenuity  to  raise  them,  and
place  them  where  they  now  are.^    It  is  said  for  certain  that,

^  Next  to  the  fortress  of  Ciizco,  the  riiius  at  Tambo  or  Ollantay-tambo,
in  the  valley  of  Yucay,  are  the  most  astonisliing  in  Peru.  They  are
buUt  at  a  point  where  the  valley  is  only  about  a  leagaie  in  width,  covered
with  maize  fields,  with  the  broad  and  rapid  river  flowing  through  the
centre.  The  dark  moimtains  rise  up  ahnost  perpendicularly  on  either
side  to  such  a  stupendous  height  that  but  a  narrow  portion  of  blue  sky
smiles  down  upon  the  peacefiU  scene  between  them.  A  ravine,  called
jMarca-ccocha,  descends  from  the  bleak  punas  of  the  Andes  to  the  valley
of  Yucay  at  this  point,  and  at  the  junction  two  lofty  masses  of  rock  rise
up  abruptly  in  dark  and  frowning  majesty.  The  fortress  of  Tambo  is
built  on  the  rock  wliich  forms  the  western  portal  to  the  ravine.  The
rock  is  a  dark  limestone,  the  lower  part  of  which,  to  the  south  and
east,  is  faced  with  masonry  composed  of  small  stones.  At  a  height  of
about  300  feet  there  is  a  platform  covered  with  a  ruin  apparently  left
in  an  unfinished  state.  Here  there  are  six  enormous  slabs  of  granite,
standing  upright,  and  united  by  smaller  pieces  fitted  between  them.
Each  slab  is  12  feet  high,  and  at  their  bases  there  are  other  blocks  of
the  same  material,  in  one  place  formed  into  a  commencement  of  a  wall.
This  spot  appeal's  to  have  been  intended  as  the  principal  part  of  the  citadel.
In  the  rear,  and  built  up  the  steep  sides  of  the  mountains,  there  are
several  edifices  of  small  stones  plastered  over  with  a  yellow  mud.  They
have  gables  at  either  end,  and  apertures  for  doors  and  windows.  StiQ
further  to  the  east,  a  flank  wall  of  the  same  material  rises  up  from  the
valley  to  near  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  which  is  very  steep  and  rocky,
and  indeed  difficult  of  ascent.  Immediately  below  the  principal  plat-
form there  are  a  succession  of  stone  terraces.  The  upper  one  is  entered
at  the  side  by  a  handsome  doorway  with  an  enormous  granite  lintel.


334  THE    TRAVELS    OF

in  these  edifices  of  Tambo,  or  in  others  at  some  other  place
with  the  same  name  (for  this  is  not  the  only  place  called

The  wall  is  biiilt  of  polygonal-sliaped  blocks,  fitting  exactly  into  each
other,  and  contains  eight  recesses,  two  feet  two  inches  high  by  one  broad
and  one  deep.  ^^Hien  the  inner  sides  of  these  recesses  are  tapped  -with.
the  fingers,  a  peculiar  metalHc  ringing  sound  is  produced.  In  front  of
the  terraces  there  a  series  of  well-constructed  ajideneria,  or  hanging
gardens,  sixteen  deep,  all  faced  with  masonry,  which  descend  into  the
ravine.  On  the  opposite  side  of  these  andeneria  the  moimtain  rises
perpendicularly,  and  terminates  in  a  dizzy  peak,  where  there  is  a  huge
block  of  stone  called  the  Tnti-huatana^  or  place  for  observing  the  sun.

The  most  astonishing  circimistance  connected  with  these  ruins  is  the
distance  from  which  the  stones  which  compose  them  have  been  conveyed.
The  huge  blocks  of  granite  of  enormous  dimensions  rest  upon  a  hmestone
rock,  and  the  nearest  granite  quarry  is  at  a  distance  of  six  mUes,  and  on
the  other  side  of  the  river.  On  the  road  to  this  quarry  there  are  two
stones  wliich  never  reached  their  destination.  They  are  known  as  the
Saycusca-rnmicuna  or  '^  tired  stones."  One  of  them  is  9  ft.  8  in.  long
and  7  ft.  8  in.  broad  ;  with  a  groove  round  it,  tliree  inches  deep,  appa-
rently for  passing  a  rope.  The  other  is  20  ft.  4  in.  long,  15  ft.  2  in.
broad,  and  3  ft.  6  in.  deep.

At  the  foot  of  the  rock  on  wliich  the  fortress  is  built  there  are  several
ancient  buildings.  Here  is  the  Manay  raccay  ov  "court  of  petitions,"
sixty  paces  square,  and  surrounded  by  buildings  of  gravel  and  plaster,
which  open  on  the  court  by  doorways  twelve  feet  high,  sm-mounted  by
enormous  granite  lintels,  On  the  western  side  of  the  ravine  of  Marca-
ccocha,  opposite  the  fortress,  there  is  another  mass  of  rock  towering  up
perpendicularly,  and  ending  in  a  sharp  peak.  It  is  called  the  Pincidluna
(•'Place  of  Flutes").  HaK-v/ay  up,  on  a  rocky  ledge  very  diflicult  of
approach,  there  are  some  buildings  which  tradition  says  were  used  as  a
convent  of  virgins  of  the  smi.  They  consist  of  tlu-ee  long  chambers
separated  from  each  other  but  close  together,  and  rising  one  beliiud  the
other  up  the  dechvitous  side  of  the  mountain.  They  are  each  twenty-
eight  paces  long,  with  a  door  at  each  end,  and  six  windows  on  each  side.
There  are  steep  gables  at  each  end  about  eighteen  feet  liigh,  and  the
doors  have  stone  hntels.  There  may  have  been  six  cells,  according  to
the  number  of  windows,  making  eighteen  in  all.  On  one  side  of  these
buildings  there  are  tlu-ee  terraces  on  wliich  the  doors  open,  which
probably  supplied  the  inmates  with  vegetable  food  and  flowers,  and
whence  they  might  view  one  of  natiu'e's  loveliest  scenes,  the  tranquil
fertile  valley,  with  its  noble  river,  and  mountains  fringed  with  tiers
of  cultivated  terraces.

About  a  liundred  yards  beyond  tlie  edge  of  these  convent  gardens  the


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  335

Tambo),  in  a  certain  part  of  a  royal  palace  or  of  a  temple
of  the  sun,  gold  is  used  instead  of  mortar,  which,  jointly
with  the  cement  that  they  make,  served  to  unite  the
stones  together.  The  governor  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  got
much  of  this  gold,  before  the  Indians  could  take  it  away.
Some  Spaniards  also  say  that  Hernando  Pizarro  and  Don
Diego  de  Almagro  the  Younger  got  much  gold  from  Paccari-
tambo.  I  do  not  myself  hesitate  to  believe  these  things,
when  I  remember  the  rich  pieces  of  gold  that  were  taken
to  Seville  from  Caxamarca,  where  they  collected  the  trea-
sure which  Atahualpa  promised  to  the  Spaniards,  most  of  it
from  Cuzco.  There  was  little  to  divide  afterwards,  found
by  the  Christians,  for  the  Indians  carried  it  off,  and  it  is
buried  in  parts  unknown  to  any  one.  If  the  fine  cloths
which  were  destroyed  and  lost  in  those  times,  had  been  pre-
served, they  would  have  been  worth  a  great  deal.

The  Indians  called  Chumbivilicas,  Vuinas,  and  Pomatam-
bos,  and  many  other  nations  which  I  do  not  mention,  lived
in  the  country  called  Cvmti-suyu.^  Some  of  them  were  war-
like, and  their  villages  are  in  very  lofty  mountains.  They
have  vast  quantities  of  flocks,  both  domesticated  and  wild.
All  their  houses  are  of  stone,  thatched  with  straw.    In  many

PincuUuna  becomes  quite  perpendicular,  and  forms  a  yawning  precipice
eight  liundred  feet  high,  descending  slieer  down  into  the  valley.  This
was  used  as  the  Hnarcuna  or  place  of  execution,  and  there  is  a  small
building,  hke  a  martello  tower,  at  its  verge,  whence  the  victims  were
hiu-led  into  eternity.

For  an  accoimt  of  the  tradition  connected  with  the  building  of  OUan-
tay-tambo,  and  of  the  Quichua  drama  wliich  is  foimded  on  it,  see  my
work,  Ciizco  and  Lima,  pp.  172  to  188.

The  authors  of  the  Antiguedades  Peruanas  beUeve  these  ruins  to  be
anterior  to  those  of  Cuzco.

•  Cunti-suyu  was  the  western  division  of  the  empire  of  the  Yncas.
The  word  was  afterwards  corrupted  by  the  Spaniards  into  Condesuyos  ;
and  the  district  of  that  name  is  now  a  province  of  the  department  of
Arequipa.  It  is  nearly  on  the  watershed  of  the  maritime  Cordillera,  and
is  drained  by  a  river  which,  after  irrigating  the  valley  of  Ocoiia,  falls
into  the  Pacific.


336  THE    TRAVELS    OF

places  there  are  buildings  for  their  chiefs.  The  rites  and
customs  of  these  Indians  were  the  same  as  those  of  other
parts,  and  they  sacrificed  lambs  and  other  things  in  their
temples.  It  is  notorious  that  the  devil  was  seen  in  a  temple
which  they  had  in  a  certain  part  of  the  district  of  Cunti-
snju,  and  I  have  heard  of  certain  Spaniards,  in  the  present
times,  who  saw  apparitions  of  this  our  enemy.  In  the  rivers
they  have  collected  much  gold,  and  they  were  getting  it  out
when  I  was  at  Cuzco.  In  Pomatambo  and  other  parts  of
this  kingdom  they  have  very  good  tapestry,  the  wool  being
very  fine  from  which  they  make  it,  and  the  colours  with
which  they  dye  it  are  so  perfect  that  they  excell  those  of
other  countries.  There  are  many  rivers  in  this  province  of
Cunti-suyu,  some  of  which  are  crossed  by  bridges  of  ropes,
made  in  the  way  I  have  already  described.  There  are  also
many  fruit  and  other  trees,  deer  and  partridges,  and  good
falcons  to  fly  at  them.


CHAPTER    XCV.


Of  the  forest  of  the  Andes,  of  their  great  tliickness,  of  the  huge  snakes
which  are  bred  in  them,  and  of  the  evil  customs  of  the  Indians  who
live  in  the  interior  of  these  forests.

This  cordillera  of  the  Andes  must  be  one  of  the  grandest
in  the  world,  for  it  commences  at  the  straits  of  MagaUanes,
extends  along  the  whole  extent  of  this  kingdom  of  Peru,
and  traverses  so  many  provinces  that  they  cannot  be  enu-
merated. It  is  covered  with  high  peaks,  some  of  them  well
covered  with  snow,  and  others  with  mouths  of  fire.  The
forests  on  these  mountains  are  very  difficult  to  penetrate  by
reason  of  their  thickness,  and  because  during  the  greater
part  of  the  year  it  rains.  The  shade  is  so  dark  that  it  is
necessary  to   go  with  much   caution,   for  the  roots  of  the


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  337

trees  spread  out  and  cover  all  the  ground,  and  when  it  is
desired  to  pass  with  horses,  much  labour  is  necessary  in
making  roads.  It  is  said  among  the  Orejones  of  Cuzco,
that  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui  traversed  these  forests  with  a
large  army,  and  many  of  the  tribes  who  inhabited  them
were  very  difficult  to  conquer  and  bring  under  his  sway.  In
the  skirts  of  the  mountains  towards  the  South  Sea,  the  natives
were  intelligent ;  they  were  all  clothed,  and  were  ruled  by
the  laws  and  customs  of  the  Yncas.  But,  towards  the  other
sea,  in  the  direction  of  the  sun-rise,  it  is  well  kno^vn  that
the    inhabitants    are    of  less    understanding    and    reason.^

'  To  the  eastward  of  the  Andes  are  the  great  forests  which  extend
unbroken  to  the  Atlantic.  Those  in  the  uumediate  neighbom-hood  of
Cuzco  are  watered  by  the  tributaries  of  the  Pxirus,  one  of  the  largest  and
most  important,  though  still  imexplored  affluents  of  the  Amazon.  These
forests  comi^rised  the  ^-1  nti-suyu  or  eastern  division  of  the  empire  of  the
Yncas,  and  were  inhabited  by  wandering  savage  tribes  called  Antis  and
Cliimchos.  The  forest  region  was  first  invaded  by  the  Ynca  Rocca,  but
no  permanent  conquest  was  made  until  the  reign  of  the  Ynca  Yupanqui,
who  received  tiding-s  of  a  rich  province  inhabited  by  a  people  called
jSIusus  (]Moxos)  far  to  the  eastward.  All  the  streams  were  said  to  unite
and  form  a  great  river  called  the  Amaru-mayu  ("  sei-pent  river"),  wliich
is  probably  the  main  stream  of  the  Purus.  The  Ynca  made  a  road  from
the  Andes  to  the  shores  of  the  river,  through  the  forest -covered  country
now  known  as  the  montuha  de  Paucartambo^  and  was  occupied  for  two
years  in  making  canoes  sufficient  to  carry  ten  thousand  men,  and  their
provisions.  He  then  descended  the  river,  and,  after  a  long  and  bloody
war,  subjugated  the  savage  tribes  of  Chunchos  on  its  banks,  and  collected
them  into  a  settlement  called  Tono.  They  ever  afterwards  paid  an  annual
tribute  of  parrots,  honey,  and  wax  to  the  Yncas.  Yupanqui  then  pene-
trated still  further  to  the  south  and  east,  and  conquered  the  province  of
Moxos.

In  the  early  days  of  the  conquest,  the  Spaniards  established  fax-ms  for
raising  coca,  cacao,  and  sugar  in  the  beautiful  forests  of  Paucartambo,
especially  along  the  banks  of  the  Tono,  and  Garcilasso  de  la  A'ega  tells
lis  that  he  inlierited  an  estate  called  Abisca,  in  this  part  of  the  country.
But  as  Spanish  power  declined,  these  estates  began  \o  fall  into  decay,
the  siivage  Chunchos  encroached  more  and  more,  and  now  there  is  not  a
single  farm  remaining  in  this  once  wealthy  and  flourishing  district.  The
primitive  forest  has  again  resumed  its  sway,  and  the  country  is  in  the
same  state  as  it  was  before  it  was  invaded  by  the  Ynca  Yupanqui.


338  THE    TRAVELS    OF

They  raise  a  great  quantity  of  coca,  which  is  a  very
precious  plant  among  the  Indians,  as  I  will  relate  in  the
next  chapter.  As  the  forests  are  very  large,  the  truth
may  be  received  that  they  contain  many  animals,  as  well
bears,  tigers,  lions,  tapirs,  pigs,  and  striped  wild  cats,  as
other  wild  beasts  worthy  of  note.  Some  Spaniards  have
also  seen  serpents  of  such  bigness  that  they  looked  like
beams,  but,  although  one  should  sit  on  them,  they  would
do  no  harm,  nor  do  they  try  to  kill  any  person.  In  talking
over  this  matter  of  the  serpents  with  the  Indians  of  Cuzco,
they  told  me  something  which  I  wiU  relate  here,  as  they
assured  me  of  its  truth.  In  the  time  of  the  Ynca  Yupanqui,
who  was  grandson  of  the  Ynca  Huira-ccocha,  certain  cap-
tains were  sent  with  a  large  army  to  visit  these  forests,  by
the  Ynca's  order,  and  to  bring  the  Indians  they  met  with
under  subjection  to  him.  Having  entered  the  forests,  these
serpents  killed  all  those  who  went  with  the  said  captains,
and  the  calamity  was  so  great  that  the  Ynca  showed  much
concern  at  it.  An  old  enchantress  heard  this,  and  she  said
that  if  she  were  allowed  to  go  to  the  forests,  she  would  put
the  serpents  into  so  deep  a  sleep,  that  they  would  be  able
to  do  no  harm.  As  soon  as  she  had  received  permission,  she
went  to  the  place  where  the  people  had  been  killed.  Here  she
performed  her  incantations,  and  said  certain  words,  upon
which  the  snakes  changed  from  fierce  and  wild,  to  the  gentle
and  fooHsh  creatures  they  now  are.     All  this  that  the  In-

The  exploration  of  the  course  of  the  Purus  is  one  of  the  chief  desiderata
in  South  American  geogi-aphy.  An  expedition  under  Don  Tiburcio  de
Landa,  governor  of  Paucartambo,  penetrated  for  some  distance  down  the
course  of  the  Tono  in  about  1778  ;  in  about  1824  a  Dr.  Sevallos  was  sent
on  a  similar  errand  ;  General  Miller,  in  1835,  penetrated  to  a  greater
distance  than  any  other  explorer  before  or  since  ;  Lieutenant  Gibbon,
U.S.N.,  entered  tlie  forests  in  1852  ;  and  I  explored  part  of  the  course  of
the  Tono  in  1853.  I  have  been  furnished  with  a  most  valuable  and  in-
teresting paper  on  the  river  Puriis,  by  Mr.  Richard  Spruce,  the  dis-
tinguished South  American  traveller  and  botanist,  which  1  have  inserted
as  a  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  339

dians  say  may  indeed  be  a  fiction  or  fable,  but  it  is  cer-
tainly true  that  tlieso  snakes,  though  so  largo,  do  no  hurt
to  any  one.

The  forests  of  the  Andes  were  well  peopled  in  those  parts
where  the  Yncas  had  buildings  and  store-houses.  The
country  is  very  fertile,  yielding  maize  and  yucas,  as  well  as
the  other  roots  which  they  raise,  and  there  are  many  excel-
lent fruits.  Most  of  the  Spanish  citizens  of  Cuzco  have
planted  orange,  Hme,  fig,  vine,  and  other  trees  of  Spain,
besides  large  plantain  groves,  and  very  luscious  and  fragrant
pines.  In  the  very  distant  and  dense  parts  of  these  forests
they  say  that  there  is  a  people  so  savage,  that  they  have
neither  houses  nor  clothes,  but  go  about  like  animals,  killing
birds  and  beasts  with  arrows.^  They  have  neither  chiefs
nor  captains,  and  they  lodge  in  caves  or  in  the  hollows
of  trees,  some  in  one  part  and  some  in  another.  It  is  said,
also  (but  I  have  not  seen  them),  that  there  are  very  large
monkeys  which  go  about  in  the  trees.

2

In  the  year  1549  I  was  at  Charcas ;  and  I  went  to  see  the
cities  in  that  region,  for  which  purpose  the  president  Gasca
gave  me  letters  of  introduction  to  the  corregidors,  that  I
might  learn  all  that  was  worthy  of  notice.

'  These  are  the  Ckunchos  and  other  wild  tribes.
-  Unfit  for  translation.


NOTE   TO   CHAPTER   XCV.

ON    THE    RIVER    PURUS,    A    TRIBUTARY    OP   THE    AMAZON.
BY

Mr.  Richakd  Spruce.
"  NoTWiTHSTAXDiXG  the  slow  rate  at  which  commerce  and  civilisation
advance  in  the  interior  of  South  America,  the  opening  up  of  routes  of
coimuunication  is  becoming  daily  of  more  importance,  and  is  exciting
greater  interest  among  the  inliabitants.  Some  of  the  mighty  rivers  of
that  continent  might  seem  to  have  been  made  by  nature's  hand  expressly

z  2


340  THE    RIVER    PUKUS.

for  steam  navigation,  being  so  wide  and  deeji,  and  flowing  with  so  gentle
and  equable  a  descent,  as  to  allow  vessels  of  considerable  size  to  reach  the
very  foot  of  the  mountains  whence  they  take  their  rise  ;  such  are  the
Amazons,  the  JNIagdalena,  and  the  Plata,  with  its  tributary  the  Parana  ;
whUe  othei-s,  of  scarcely  inferior  volume,  such  as  the  Orinoco,  the  Rio
Negro,  the  INIadeira,  and  the  Cauca  (the  mam  tributary  of  the  Magda-
lena),  are  navigable  for  a  considerable  distance  in  their  lower  and  upper
parts,  but  towards  the  middle  of  their  course  are  beset  by  rapids  and
cataracts,  wliich  can  only  be  ascended,  even  by  small  boats,  with  infinite
trouble,  risk,  and  delay.  In  the  case  of  the  Orinoco  and  Rio  Negro,  the
cataracts  occupy  so  short  a  space,  the  actual  fall  is  so  shght,  and  the
nature  of  the  ground  is  such,  that  the  obstructions  might  be  easily  tm-ned
or  avoided  by  a  navigable  canal  or  a  railroad,  neither  of  which  is  likely  to
be  constructed  mitil  the  exigencies  of  commerce  or  colonisation  shall  make
it  an  imperative  necessity.  The  ]Madeira,  however,  the  largest  tributary
of  the  Amazons,  has  no  less  than  two  hundred  and  forty  miles  of  its  middle
course  rendered  practically  unnavigable  by  a  succession  of  rapids  and  cata-
racts, below  which  it  is  navigable  down  to  its  mouth, — a  distance  of  five
hundred  miles, — for  steamers  of  a  thousand  tons ;  and  above  them  for
smaller  vessels  for  an  equal  distance,  counting  the  navigation  of  its  tribu-
tary, the  Mamore,  which  was  explored  by  Lieut.  Gibbon,  of  the  U.  S.
navy,  in  1851.  Its  other  large  tributaries,  the  Beni,  the  Ubahy,  and  the
Guapore,  are  said  to  be  navigable  for  an  equal  or  even  greater  distance.
Now  the  navigation  of  the  Madeira  is  of  the  first  importance  to  the
Brazihans,  not  only  as  a  means  of  commmiication  with  the  western
part  of  the  empire,  but  also  with  the  highlands  of  Bohvia  and  South-
ern Peru,  and  it  has  been  proposed  to  obviate  its  chfficulties,  1.  By
opening  a  road  from  the  point  where  it  ceases  to  that  where  it  begins
a^ain  to  be  navigable,  along  which  cargos  might  be  transported  on  beasts
of  burden,  and  then  be  re-embarked  above  the  falls  ;  or,  2.  By  exploring
the  rivers  rmining  to  the  Amazon  from  the  southward,  between  thelNIadeira
and  Ucayali,  in  the  behef  that  some  one  of  them  might  prove  to  be  navi-
gable up  to  a  point  beyond  the  last  falls  of  the  Madeira.  The  three  princi-
pal of  these  rivei-s,  beginning  with  the  most  easterly,  or  that  nearest  the
Madeira,  are  the  Puriis,  the  Yutahy,  and  the  Yauary  (or  Javari).  All  these
rivers  are  stated  by  Baena'  to  take  their  rise  in  the  highlands  of  Peru,
and  the  Punis  has  always  been  considered  the  largest  of  the  three  ;  for
although  it  di-ains  a  far  narrower  basin  than  the  Madeira,  and  its  stream


»  "  Ensayo  Corogrnfico  sohre  o  Para.  This  author  cites  no  authorities,
but  he  had  access  to  very  valualile  documents  and  manuscript  maps  in  the
archives  of  Paru,  most  of  which  were  unfortunately  destroyed  or  di.spei-sed
during  the  uprising  of  Xhacabanos  in  1835  ;  and  wherever  I  have  had  the
opportunity  of  testing  his  statements  by  personal  observation  I  have
found  them  very  exact.


THE    RIVER    PURUS.  341

is  much  less  -wide  and  rapid,  it  is  still  a  noble  river,  with  deep  water
for  a  very  long  way  up.  People  have  gone  up  it  from  the  Amazon  and
the  Barra  do  Rio  Negro,  in  quest  of  tmile,  brazil-nuts,  and  sarsiiparilla,
for  months  without  encountering  any  obstacle  to  its  navigation.  Lieuten-
ant llerndon,  in  descending  the  Amazon  in  1851,  found  the  mouth  of  the
Puriis  to  be  half  a  mile  wide,  with  a  depth  of  16  fathoms,  while  at  one
mile  up  the  depth  was  18  fathoms.

"  The  Purvis  communicates  with  the  Amazon  by  one  principal  moutli,
and  by  fom-  narrow  channels  (called  furos)  wliich  leave  the  Puriis  at  a
good  way  up,  and  enter  the  Amazon,  tliree  above  and  one  below  the  real
mouth.  Along  these  channels  the  water  sometimes  flows  from  the  Puriis
into  the  Amazon,  and  sometimes  in  the  contrary  direction,  according  to
the  variable  height  of  tlie  water  in  the  two  rivers ;  and  sometimes,  when
both  rivers  ai-e  very  low,  the  channels  are  left  nearly  dry.  The  middle
one  of  the  tlu-ee  upper  channels  is  called  the  Fiu-o  de  Cochiuani,  a  name
wliich  Acufia  applies  to  the  whole  river,  and  -m-ites  it  '  Cuchiguani.''  It
is  a  famous  and  navigable  river,  he  says,  and  adds,  '  Although  there  are
rocks  in  some  jjlaces,  it  has  plenty  of  fish,  a  great  number  of  turtle,
abundance  of  maize  and  mandioc,  and  all  things  necessary  for  facilitating
the  entrance  of  an  expedition.' '  The  rocks  of  which  he  speaks,  we  shall
afterwards  find  to  be  cliffs  rising  from  the  river's  edge,  and  offering  no
hindrance  whatever  to  navigation.

""VMien  I  was  at  the  Barra  do  Rio  Negro  in  1851,  a  man  of  colour,
named  Serafim  Salgado,  arrived  there  from  the  Puriis,  where  he  had  spent
some  six  months,  trading  vnth  the  Piu-upm-ii  (or  Spotted)  Indians,  who
inhabit  the  lower  part  of  the  river,  and  from  whom  it  takes  its  name  ;  and
also  with  the  Catauixi's,  whose  settlements  extend  upwards  to  a  distance
of  two  months'  joiu-ney  from  the  mouth.^  I  purchased  from  liim  various
warlike  and  other  instruments  used  by  the  Catauixis,  which  are  now  de-
I^osited  in  the  IMuseum  of  A^egetable  Products  at  Kew  ;  and  obtained  from
him  some  curious  information  about  the  customs  of  those  Indians.  They
use  the  powder  of  the  roasted  seeds  of  Acacia  Niopo  as  a  stimulant  and
narcotic,  as  I  have  also  seen  it  used  by  the  Gualiibos  on  the  Orinoco,
where  it  is  called  Niopo,  and  by  the  INIiiras  and  other  Indians  on  the
Amazon,  where  it  is  called  Paricd.  For  absorbing  the  Parted  by  the
nose,  a  tube  is  made  of  the  bone  of  a  bird's  leg  cut  in  two,  and  the
pieces  joined  again  at  such  an  angle,  that  one  end  being  apphed  to  the
mouth  the  other  reaches  the  nostrils  ;  a  portion  of  snuff  is  then  put  into
the  tube  and  blown  from  it  with  great  force  up  the  nose.  A  Paricd
clyster-pipe  (which  seems  peculiar  to  the  river  Puriis,  as  I  have  myself


>  "  Neiv  Discovery  of  the  Great  River  of  the  Amazons.  INIarkham's
Transl.,  p.  107.

^  "  Acufia  v>Tites  these  names  respectively  '  Curucurus'  and  '  Qua-
tausis.'


342  THE    RIVEE    PURUS.

nowhere  seen  it  used)  is  made  on  the  same  principle,  of  the  long  sliank-
bone  of  the  Tuyuyu  {Mycteria  Americana).  The  effect  of  the  Paricd^
taken  as  snuff,  is  to  speedily  induce  a  sort  of  intoxication,  resembling  in
its  symptoms  that  produced  by  the  fungus  Amanita  muscaria.  Taken  as
a  clyster  it  is  a  purge,  more  or  less  violent  according  to  the  quantity  em-
ployed. "When  the  Catauixi  Indian  is  about  to  set  forth  on  the  chase,  he
takes  a  small  clyster  of  Far  led,  and  administers  another  to  liis  dog,  the
effects  on  both  being  (it  is  said)  to  clear  their  vision  and  render  them
more  alert !  His  weapon  is  generally  the  blowing  cane,  from  which  he
propels  slender  darts  tipped  with  Uirari  poison.  Attached  to  the  quiver
that  holds  the  darts  is  a  slender  tube  of  bamboo,  two  inches  and  a  half
long,  filled  with  soot,  with  wliich  he  smears  his  face  when  he  approaches
his  hut,  if  he  returns  successful  from  the  chase.  By  this  signal  his  family
are  advertised  beforehand  whether  or  not  they  will  have  to  go  without
supper. — The  Catauixi  name  for  the  blowing-cane  darts  is  Arardicohi,
and  for  the  poison  Arinulihd — the  only  two  words  I  possess  of  their
language.

"  When  in  1852  the  ujjper  part  of  the  Amazon,  and  the  adjacent  ter-
ritory east  and  west  of  it  (corresponding  to  the  ancient  Caijitania  do  Rio
Negro),  were  separated  from  the  province  of  Para,  and  erected  into  a
province,  under  the  name  of  '  Amazonas,'  the  exploration  of  the  rivers
entering  the  Amazon  on  the  south  was  taken  up  in  earnest  by  the  new
president  and  the  provincial  assembly ;  and  Serafim  Salgado  was  ap-
pointed to  explore  the  Pmais,  with  instructions  "  to  seek  a  passage  to  the
toiuns  of  Bolivia.,  by  the  river  Puriis  and  the  savannahs  of  the  Beni,  shorter
than  that  hy  the  Madeira,  and  free  from  the  cataracts  of  that  river.''  Un-
fortunately he  was  not  fm-nished  with  a  single  instnmient — not  even  a
compass,  or  so  much  as  a  lead  Une  for  soimdings ;  and  his  diary  of  his
long  and  tedious  voyage  is  deficient  in  information  on  almost  every  point
of  importance  ;  yet,  meagre  as  it  is,  as  no  account  of  that  river  has  ever
appeared  in  print,  I  give  here  a  translation  of  it,  appending  thereto  a  few
deductions  wliich  I  tliink  may  be  legitimately  made  from  it.'

"  '  Report  of  Serafim  da  Silva  Salgado  on  the  Exploration  of  the  River
Furiis.

"  '  Most  illustrious  and  excellent  Sir, — I  have  the  honour  to  present  to
your  Excellency  the  report  of  the  voyage  which  I  made  from  this  capital
to  the  7th  Maloca  (village)  of  the  Purvis,  which  river  I  ascended  during
the  space  of  four  montlis  and  nineteen  days.     Along  with  it  your  Excel-


'  "The  original  exists  as  an  appendix  to  the  '  Falla  dirigida  li  asseni-
blea  legislativa  provincial  do  Amazonas,  no  dia  1"  ile  Oututu'o  de  18,58,'
by  Senhor  Herculano  Ferreira  Penna,  the  learned  and  patriolii'  ]»resident
of  the  province,  who  presented  me  with  a  copy  of  it  when  I  revisited  the
Barra  in  1854.


THE    RIVER    PURU8.  343

lency  will  find  also  a  list  of  the  articles  which  I  expended  during  this
long  and  painful  voyage,  and  another  of  the  presents  and  other  objects
which  were  fiu-nished  me  to  enable  me  to  undertake  it.

"Your  Excellency  will  allow  me  to  mention  that  I  have  not  yet  paid
the  Tuxaiia  (chief)  ]\Iamm-ite,  and  the  Piu-upurii  Indian  Baidil,  who
accompanied  me  on  tliis  voyage,  and  who  have  hitherto  received  no  pay
whatever.  The  first  will  be  satisfied  with  a  few  presents  and  clothes,
and  the  second  with  something  less.  I  regret  much  that  I  have  not  been
able  to  perform  better  the  task  which  your  Excellency's  most  excellent
predecessor  confided  to  me,  and  (from  circumstances  specified  in  the
Report)  that  I  could  not  go  forward  until  I  reached  some  Bolivian  town  ;
although  I  believe  there  is  none  such  on  the  banks  of  the  Puriis,  because
at  the  seventh  village  of  the  Cucamas,  which  is  the  highest  point  I
reached,  the  river  is  so  narrow  and  obstructed,  that  it  would  be  impossible
to  Jiscend  much  beyond  it  even  in  the  season  of  flood.

"  '  I  beg  your  excellency  to  kindly  excuse  the  incompleteness  of  my
performance,  and  to  honour  me  by  I'eceiving  it,  with  the  expressions  of
faithful  respect  and  attachment  that  I  offer  to  your  Excellency.

"  '•  Deos  guarde  a  V.  Ex°-.  Barra  do  Eio  Negi-o,  20  de  Dezembro  de
1852.  "  '  Serafim  da  Silva  Salgado.

"  '  To  the  most  illustrious  and  excellent  Senhor  Dr.  Manoel
Gomes  Correa  de  Miranda,  1st  Vice-president  of  the
Province  of  Amazonas.'

"  '  Report  of  the  voyage  made  by  the  undersigned  from  the  capital  of
the  Province  of  Amazonas  to  the  limit  of  navigation  of  the  river
Pur  (is.
"  '  Honoured  by  being  appointed,  on  the  5th  of  May  of  the  current
year,  by  liis  Excellency  the  President  of  the  Province,  to  exjilore  the  river
Punis,  and  fiu-nished  with  the  necessary  instructions,  I  set  out  from  this
city  of  the  Barra  on  the  evening  of  the  10th  of  INIay,  in  two  canoes,  manned
by  twelve  Indians,  and  accompanied  by  a  corporal  and  twelve  soldiers
with  their  arms  and  ammunition,  and  travelled  as  fax  as  the  lake  Curu-
pira,  twelve  hours'  jom-ney.  It  was  six  in  the  evening  of  the  11th  when
I  reached  that  lake,  where  I  remained  until  the  13th,  occupied  in  making
toldas^  for  the  canoes.  I  started  again  on  the  morning  of  the  14th,  and
at  nightfall  was  within  the  furo-  of  Aranduba,  and  as  we  could  not  pass
it  with  daylight  we  remained  there,  and  on  the  15th  passed  out  at  the
other  end,  and  that  day  reached  another /?<ro  called  Bode.


'  "  Tolda,  roof  to  shelter  the  after  part  of  a  canoe.

2  "  Furo^  a  channel  between  two  points  of  the  same  riveV,  or  from
one  river  to  another,  which  becomes  filled  with  water  in  the  time  of
flood.  A  narrow  channel  between  an  island  and  the  bank  is  generally
called  a  Parana -meritn,  or  little  river.


344  THE    RIVER    PURUS.

"  '  On  the  16th  reached  the  Caldeu-a6;>  the  17th  the  mouth  of  the
furo  Arapapa;  the  18th  the  farm  of  Jose  Antonio  Barrozo ;  the  19th  a
little  way  above  the  lake  Calado ;  the  20th  lake  IManacapimi,  where  we
had  to  remain  tiU  the  24th  to  mend  the  ironwork  of  the  hehn  of  one  of
the  canoes.  On  the  24th,  continuing  to  ascend  the  SoUmocs,-  we  reached
the  upper  point  of  the  island  Marrecao ;  on  the  25th  the  island  Para-
tary  ;  on  the  26th  the  paranu-merim  of  the  same  uame,^  along  Avhich  we
sailed  the  three  following  days,  passing  along  the  lake  Berury  (already
within  the  mouth  of  the  Purfis)  on  the  30th,  and  on  the  31st  the  Cas-
tanha  lake.  In  front  of  Berury  on  the  right  (ascending  the  Puiiis)  is
the  parand-merim  of  S.  Thome.

"  '  Miver  Purfis.

''  'June  1st.  Navigated  as  far  as  the  upper  point  of  the  island  Nauii,
passing  lake  Estopa  on  the  right  hand  as  night  closed  in.

"  'June  2nd.  Reached  the  mouth  of  lake  INIatliias,  passing  the  moutlis
of  lakes  Simara  and  Ubim.

"  'June  ord.  Reached  Paricatuba,  where  there  was  a  guard  of  soldiers,
having  passed  this  day  the  mouths  of  lakes  Cuiuana,  Caua,  and  Tapurii
ou  the  right,  and  Xaviana  on  the  left.  Here  we  remained  until  the  5th,
to  make  a  tolda  for  an  additional  canoe.

"  'June  6th.  Reached  the  mouth  of  lake  Uaiapua,  and  on  the  left
liand  lake  Paricatuba.

"  'June  7th.  To  the  beach  called  Carapana.^

"  'June  8th.  To  lake  Uarmna  on  the  left.

"  'June  9th.  To  the  parand-merim  of  Yary,  along  which  we  navigated
all  thi-ough  the  10th  and  11th.

"  'June  12th.  To  the  parand-merim  of  Macaco.

"  'June  13th.  To  the 2}(tr and -merim  of  Sapid.

"  'June  14th.  To  lake  Taboca,  on  the  right  bank.

"  'June  15th.  To  the  mouth  of  lake  Campina.

"  'June  16th.  To  the  parand-merim  of  Guajaratuba,  along  which  we
went  all  tlu'ough  the  17th,  before  we  got  out  again  into  the  main  river.


^  "  Caldeirao,  a  noted  whirlpool  in  the  Amazon,  near  the  left  bank,
above  the  mouth  of  the  Rio  Negro.

^  "  Solinioes,  the  Brazilian  name  of  the  Amazon  from  the  Rio  Negro
to  tlie  frontier,  or  even  as  far  ivp  as  to  the  mouth  of  Ucayali.

^  "The/wro,  ov  parand-merim,  of  Paratary  is  the  lowest  mouth  of  the
Piu-ils,  and  it  ajipears  that  Serafim  sailed  along  it  for  three  days  before
reaching  the  main  channel.  In  1851  I  spent  nearly  a  month  on  the
lakes  of  i\Iana(piii-y,  about  foity  miles  below  the  mouth  of  the  Puriis,  and
found  that  the  Paratary  had  many  ramifications,  communicating  not
only  -with  those  lakes,  but  also  with  the  nmch  larger  lake  of  Uauatas  to
the  eastward,  and  thence  with  the  river  JNIadeira.  In  the  rainy  season,
indeed,  it  is  iwssiblo  to  navigate  for  hundreds  of  miles  parallel  to  the
southern  side  of  the  Amazon  without  ever  entering  that  river."

■*  "  The  beaches  on  the  Amazon  and  its  tributaries  are  very  miportant
to  the  Indians,  being  the  places  where  the  turtles  lay  their  eggs ;  and
hence  they  all  have  a  siwcial  name.


THE    RIVER    PURUS,  345

"  'June  18th.  Along  the  parand-merlm  of  Chapeo.

"  'June  11).  Rested  this  day  below  Tana-merim,  the  site  of  an  ancient
maloca  of  the  ]\luras.  Started  again  on  the  20th,  and  on  the  21.st
reached  the  silio  of  Ilygino  (a  man  of  colour),  where  we  remained  all
through  the  22nd,  and  on  the  2;3rd  reached  the  beaches  of  Tabocul.

"  'June  24:th.  Went  on  until  we  passed  the  Paranil-pixuna.

"  'June  25th.  Reached  Itaituba,  so  called  from  its  rocky  cliffs.

"  'June  26th.  To  the  beaches  of  Quati.

"  'June  27th.  Drew  up  in  front  of  iVrhna,  a  place  where  they  are
founding  a  new  village.  We  passed  this  day  the  mouth  of  lake  Jacare,
on  the  left.

"  'June  28th.  Went  on  this  day  wdthout  stopping,  and  on  the  29th
reached  the  beach  called  Paxiuba,  and  on  the  30th  the  mouth  of  the
Tanariit  Grande.  Passed  the  outlet  of  lake  Manary  on  the  left,  and
that  of  the  Tauari  on  the  right.  Tlu-oughout  tliis  month  the  voyage  was
not  interrupted  by  any  untoward  occm-rence,  but  we  suffered  much
from  the  hea\'y  rains  and  the  great  plague  of  mosquitos.

"  'July  1st.  This  day  reached  the  beach  of  Tauauii  on  the  left.  Went
on  all  through  the  2nd,  3rd,  and  4th,  and  on  the  5th  reached  the  beach
of  Itud.  During  this  time  eight  Miira  Indians,  part  of  om*  crew,
deserted,  and  we  were  obliged  to  seek  hands  to  supply  their  place  in  the
village  of  Arima,  in  which  we  succeeded  by  the  aid  of  the  Tuxaua
Mary.  We  could  then  start  again,  and  on  the  6th  reached  the  beach  of
Jaburii.

"  'July  7th.  This  day  halted  in  front  of  the  furo  Muahtin,  and  on  the
8th  in  the  mouth  of  the  fm'o  Caiaupe.

"  'July  9tb.  To  the  mouth  of  the  river  Tapaua,  which  enters  on  the
right.

"  'July  10th.  Reached  the  beach  of  Macuquiry.

••  'July  11th.  To  the  beach  of  Aramia,  passing  the  mouth  of  the  Paua-
trary  on  the  right.

"  'July  12th.  To  the  beach  of  Mapuahiin.

"  'July  13th.  To  the  beach  of  Pucutilian.

"  'July  llrth.  To  the  beach  of  Cauarchan.

"  'July  15th.  To  beyond  lake  Capilnin.

"  'July  16th.  To  the  beach  of  Juihau.

"  'July  17th.  Below  lake  Caquatahan,  where  we  met  rafts  of  Puru-
puni  Indians.

"  'July  18th.  To  the  beach  Arapapa,  passing  the  mouths  of  the  rivers
Mucm'n  and  Caquatahan  on  the  left.  "NV'e  went  along  the  margin  of  the
same  beach  all  thi-ough  the  19th,  20th,  and  21st,  and  arrived  on  the  22nd
at  the  beach  of  Auaboneuy,  the  23rd  at  that  of  Uarima,  and  the  24:th
at  that  of  Curianhiin,  passing  this  day  the  mouth  of  the  river  Apituluin.

"  'July  25th.  Xa\^gated  this  day  along  the  i-iver  bank,  and  on  the
26th  reached  the  beach  of  Mapuahan ;  on  the  27th  that  of  Assaituba,
where  we  remained  all  the  28th  to  repair  one  of  the  canoes.


346  THE    RIVER    PURUS.

"  'July  29tli.  Reached  this  day  the  beach  of  Paciha,  having  passed
the  mouth  of  the  river  Mary,  and  on  the  31st  reached  the  beach  of
JurUiiin.

''  'During  this  month  the  voyage  was  continued  without  any  otlier
interruption  than  the  desertion  of  the  Miu-a  Indians,  and  the  necessity  of
repau-ing  the  canoes.  On  some  days  we  went  on  until  midnight  to  make
up  for  the  delay  in  the  mornings,  when  the  thick  fog  was  not  dissipated
by  the  sun's  rays  untU  eight  or  ten  o'clock.

"  'August  1st.  Reached  the  beach  of  Jurucua;  on  the  2nd  that  of
Capim ;  on  the  3rd  that  of  Situahan ;  on  the  -Ith  that  of  TeiTahan ;  on
the  5th  that  of  Catarrahiin ;  on  the  6th  that  of  Boto,  passing  this  day  a
point  called  Catatia  on  the  right.

"  'August  7th.  Reached  the  beach  of  I\Iaquu-ahan,  and  passed  the
mouth  of  the  river  Cunhuaryhtin.

"  'August  8th.  To  the  beach  of  Parahan,  ha\'ing  passed  this  day  some
high  chffs  called  Cumarihan.

"  'August  9th.  To  the  beach  of  Curiana,  passing  lake  Learihiin  on
the  right.

"  'August  10th.  To  the  beach  of  Quary,  passing  the  mouth  of  lake
Tmnehan,  where  there  are  rocky  cliffs.

"  'August  11th.  Reached  the  beach  of  MamurUian-merim,  wliich  is  on
the  right  bank ;  the  12th  the  beach  of  Gamuhim ;  the  13th  that  of
Itirapuii  ;  the  14th  that  of  Ca^adua  ;  the  15th  that  of  Guajara  ;  the  16th
that  of  Aruta  ;  the  17th  the  mouth  of  the  river  Paniny  ;  the  18th  the
beach  of  Parahiln ;  the  19th  the  mouth  of  the  river  Chiriuiny.  From
tliis  river  begins  a  very  long  beach,  along  which  we  navigated  all  through
the  20th,  21st,  22nd,  23rd,  21th,  and  25th,  and  on  the  26th  arrived  at
another  beach  called  Pedreira.  On  the  27th  we  were  alongside  another
extensive  beach,  by  which  we  went  on  uutd  the  end  of  the  mouth.
Nothing  worth  mentioning  happened  throughout  tlais  month ;  but  the
voyage  began  to  grow  more  difficult,  because  the  river  got  gradually
narrower,  much  obstructed  with  trunks  of  trees,  and  so  very  tortuous,
that  we  have  sometimes  gone  on  a  whole  day  without  advancing  scarcely
anytliing,  on  account  of  the  great  bends  of  the  river.

"  '  September.  Continuing  to  ascend  the  river  during  the  1st,  2nd,  and
3rd,  on  the  4th  passed  the  mouth  of  the  igarape  Macuiany,  said  to  be
inhabited  by  a  horde  of  cannibals,  of  the  tribe  Jamamadi,  to  the  nmnber
of  about  four  hundred.  Thus  we  went  on  until  the  11th,  when  we
passed  another  igarape,  the  Euaca,  on  the  left,  in  which  also  tliere  are
numerous  Jamamadi  Indians.  In  the  mouth  of  this  stream,  and  on  an
adjacent  beach,  there  was  an  encampment  of  more  than  a  liundrod
people  who  had  been  drawn  together  by  hearing  our  reveille.

"  'On  the  12th  passed  the  mouth  of  the  river  Canaquiry,  whose  sources
are  in  the  campos  of  the  river  Madeira.     In  this  river  api^eared  sixteen


THE    RIVER    PURUS.  347

ubds  and  cascas^  with  Indians  of  the  tribe  Canamary  (cannibals),  who
came  out  to  meet  us;  they  were  in  all  sixty-five  souls.  By  an  Indian
who  accompanied  our  expedition,  and  who  understood  a  little  of  their
language,  we  learnt  that  the  Canamarys  were  plotting  among  them-
selves to  surprise  our  canoes  by  night,  kill  us  all,  and  carry  off  our
goods.  Profiting  by  this  timely  warning,  I  had  the  canoes  anchored  in
the  middle  of  the  stream,  and  prepared  our  troops  to  resist  any  attack
that  should  be  attempted  by  night.  Early  in  the  morning  the  Indians
{hspereed,  but  not  before  we  had  bought  of  them  their  arrows  and
curabis  (poisoned  arrows),  and  then,  telling  them  that  another  canoe  was
following  us,  we  got  rid  of  them.

"'On  the  18th  reached  the  first  maloca  (village)  of  the  Cucama
Indians ;  on  the  23rd  we  drew  up  at  the  second ;  on  the  29th  at  the
third,  and,  although  the  voyage  began  to  be  very  arduous,  we  went  on  all
day  of  the  30th.

"  '  October.  After  having  gone  on  the  whole  of  the  1st,  we  arrived  on
the  2nd  of  this  month  at  the  fourth  maloca  of  Cucamas  ;  on  the  4th,  at
the  fifth  maloca  ;  on  the  6th,  at  the  sixth  maloca. ;  and  on  the  9th,  at  the
seventh  maloca.

"  'These  Indians,  gathered  together  in  malocas.,  to  the  number  of  thirty,
forty,  or  fifty  each,  subsist  on  ai^Am  {=Manihot  Aypi  Pohl.)"^and  bananas
of  which  they  have  plantations,  and  on  game.  They  are  light-coloured,
well-made  (that  is,  the  men,  for  of  women  we  saw  not  a  single  one,  be-
cause they  hide  them  away,  except  the  old  ones),  and  they  bore  the  under
lip.  They  wear  ponchos.  They  had  no  iron  tools  of  any  kind,  and  they
were  well  content  with  some  axes  which  we  gave  them.  They  would
employ  this  tool  to  make  their  canoes,  for  they  make  their  clearings  by
fire  alone.

"  '  They  were  highly  delighted  when  they  saw  us  ajjproach,  for  thoy
had  never  before  seen  civilised  peojjle ;  although  they  mentioned  a  few
names  of  persons  whom  they  had  seen  at  the  headwaters  of  the  Juruti.

"  '  Many  of  these  Indians  wished  to  go  down  the  river  with  our  expe-
dition, but,  as  our  farinha  was  nearly  exliausted,  I  did  not  venture  to
take  them  ;  besides,  as  their  principal  aliment  is  aiplm  and  bananas,  and
we  had  a  great  distance  to  go  before  coming  to  those  plants  again,  they
would  necessarily  have  suffered  much  by  the  way.

"  '  They  Uve  unceasingly  persecuted  by  the  tribes  Canamarys,  Apu-
rinas,  and  Oainomaris  (all  cannibals),  who  unite  to  harass  them,  rob
them,  and  kill  those  they  meet  in  order  to  devour  them.


1  "  Ubd.,  a  canoe  made  simply  of  a  hoUow  trunk,  and  stretched  to  the
form  of  a  boat  by  putting  fire  under  it  and  cross  pieces  of  wood  witliin  it.
Casca.,  a  bark  canoe.

■^  "  Tliis  is  the  yiica  of  Peru,  and  is  a  distinct  species  from  the  mandiocea
(^Manihot  utUissima  Pohl.),  which  is  the  staple  article  of  food  throughout
Brazil.


348  THE    RIVER    lURUS.

"•  '  Tlie  Cucamas  have  such  a  way  of  speaking  that  they  seem  to  us  to
belong  to  Bolivna,  for  they  make  use  of  several  Spanish  words,  and  call,
for  instance,  an  axe  hacha,  a  cutlass  machete^  a  knife  cnckillo,  etc.

''  '■  It  was  quite  impossible  to  ascend  liigher  than  the  seventh  maloca,
for  the  river  was  so  narrow,  and  so  much  obstructed,  that  it  did  not  admit
the  j)assage  of  even  the  smallest  canoes.

"  '  For  this  cause  we  set  out  to  return  on  the  10th,  and,  going  along
without  stopping,  we  reached  this  capital  on  the  oOth  of  November,  about
eight  o'clock  at  night.

"  '  Finally,  in  all  this  long  and  painful  voyage,  we  had  not  to  deplore
any  fatal  accident.

"  '  Barra  do  Rio  Xegi'o,  20th  of  December,  1852.

"  '  Serafim  da  Silva  Salgado.'

"  With  the  '  Report'  before  us,  let  us  endeavour  to  ascertain  the  ex-
treme point  of  Serafim's  na^dgation  on  the  Funis.  As  he  says  not  a  word
about  bearmgs  and  distances,  the  only  guide  we  have  to  the  latter  is  the
time  occupied  in  the  ascent,  and  I  find  that,  deducting  the  days  when  he
was  stationary,  he  travelled  from  the  Barra  to  the  head  of  navigation  on
the  Funis  in  141  days.  Xow,  if  we  take  a  known  distance  on  the  Ama-
zon, viz.  from  the  Barra  to  ^Manacapurii,  which  is  82  nautical  miles  (fol-
lowang  the  comse  of  the  river),  we  find  that  Serafim  spent  just  8  days
over  it,  being  at  the  rate  of  10|  miles  per  day.  In  the  month  of  INlay,
when  he  stai-ted,  the  Amazon  would  already  have  risen  considerably  and
the  current  would  be  difficult  to  stem  ;  hence  this  slow  rate  of  progi-ess.'
The  Fm-iTS  in  its  lower  part  has  a  much  gentler  current  than  the  Amazon,
and  there  he  would  no  doubt  get  on  better  ;  but  it  would  attain  its  highest
level  during  the  period  of  Serafim's  voyage  up  it,  and  would  then  run
much  more  than  usual :  and  he  mentions  expressly  that  in  its  upper  part
the  current  became  from  day  to  day  more  rapid  as  he  proceeded  ;  so  that
I  think  we  may  safely  assmne  10^  miles  a  day  as  the  average  rate  of  pro-
gress thi'oughout  the  voyage,  and  travellers  who  have  had  to  creep  up
South  American  rivers  in  canoes  will  agree  with  me  that  it  is  rather  over
than  under  the  mark.     This  woiUd  give  us  for

Distance  from  Barra  to  head  of  navigation  of  Funis  l-llo  miles
Deduct  distance  from  Barra  to  mouth  of  Funis       -     150  miles

And  we  get  1295  miles,  for
the  whole  length  of  Serafim's  navigation  of  the  Funis,  including  all  the
bends  of  the  river,  from  which  at  least  one-third  (but  probably  more)
would  have  to  be  deducted  to  reduce  it  to  a  straight  line.     Taking  off


'  ••  In  June  1851,  I  took  six  days  to  go  from  the  Barra  only  half  way
to  Maiiacapurii,  but  the  river  was  then  at  the  lieiglit  of  flood,  and  my
large  lK)at  was  manned  by  only  tlu'ee  men.


THE    RIVER    I'URUS.  349

tlie  third  part,  leaves  868  miles  for  the  shortest  distance  between  the
extreme  points  of  the  navigation  of  the  Piiriia,  or  say  in  round  numbers
800  miles,  which  is  possibly  still  in  excess  of  the  actual  distance.  Sup-
posing that  on  the  map  of  Spix  and  IMartius  (which  is  even  yet  the  best
we  ix)ssess  for  a  great  part  of  South  America)  the  general  direction
assigned  to  the  Puriis  is  correct  (N.E.,  or  rather  N.  40°  E.),  and  measur-
ing on  that  rhmnb  for  800  miles,  we  reach  a  point  which  is  in  lat.  12°  30'
S.,  long,  (from  Greenwich)  about  70°  W.  To  ascertain  where  this  takes
us  to  we  must  go  to  the  Andes  of  the  S.  E.  of  Peru,  and  inqviire  what  streams
flow  northward  from  thence,  between  the  headwaters  of  the  Ucayali  on  the
west,  and  those  of  the  ISIadeira  on  the  east.  The  fullest  and  probably  the
only  trustworthy  account  w^e  have  of  those  streams  is  contained  in  two
memoirs,  by  Mr.  Clements  Markliam,  published  in  the  journals  of  the
Royal  Geographical  Society,  giving  an  accoimt  of  an  expedition  made  to
the  north-east  of  Cuzco  in  1853,  and  of  another  in  the  adjacent  province
of  Carabaya  in  1860.  He  found  the  streams  there  divided  into  three
groups,  the  most  westerly  uniting  to  form  the  river  called  the  Madre  de
Dios,  or  Amaru-mayu,  while  the  streams  of  the  middle  group  formed  the
Inambari,  and  the  most  easterly  were  tributaries  of  the  Tambo-j^ata.  He
descended  the  Tono  (as  the  upper  part  of  the  Madre  de  Dios  is  called)  to
a  jioint  in  about  lat.  12°  45'  S.,  long.  70°  30'  W. ;  the  Sandia  to  where  it
unites  with  the  Huari-huari  to  form  the  Inambari,  in  lat.  about  13°  10'  S.,
long.  69°  15'  AV. ;  and  the  Tambo-pata  to  lat.  12°  18'  S.,  long.  68°  38' W.
Now  if  the  Piirus  be  prolonged  but  forty  miles  beyond  the  point  to  which
Serafim  is  supposed  to  have  ascended  in  1852,  it  brings  us  exactly  to
where  IMi'.  IMarkliam  descended  on  the  Madre  Dios  in  the  following  year
(1853).  In  so  savage  a  region  it  is  quite  possible  that  two  explorers,  the
one  starting  from  the  mouth  and  the  other  from  the  head  of  a  river,
might  reach  nearly  the  same  point  on  it,  at  the  very  same  time,  and  yet
not  only  be  unaware  of  each  other's  proximity,  but  afterwards,  in  com-
paring their  itineraries,  not  find  therein  a  single  name  common  to  both.
There  is,  however,  one  name  on  ]\lr.  ]Markham's  map,  that  of  the  river
Inambari,  which  I  feel  pretty  confident  is  the  same  as  the  Oainamari
mentioned  by  Serafim  as  the  name  of  an  Indian  nation  who  harassed  the
pacific  and  agTicultural  Cucamas  at  the  head  of  the  Pm'iis.  The  Indian
name  of  a  river  is  generally  that  of  a  nation  inhabiting  its  banks,  as  in
the  case  of  the  Piu-iis  itself.  Besides,  the  Indian  of  the  Amazon,  follow-
ing the  genius  of  their  language  (the  Tupi),  are  very  apt  to  prefix  to
names,  especially  such  as  begin  vnth.  a  vowel,  a  soimd  like  that  of  the
English  ■?<;,  which  the  Portuguese  and  Spaniards  have  variously  repre-
sented by  the  letters  u,  o,  oa,  hu,  ffu,  and  even  b  ;  thus,  to  the  northward
of  the  Amazon,  we  have  the  river  Guanpes,  Uaupes,  or  Aupes ;  the
Guasie,  Sie,  or  Xie  (pron.  Shie)  ;  precisely  analogous  instances  to  Oaina-
mari, Uinamarl,  or  Tnam(b)ari ;  for  (it  should  be  added)  the  letter  b  is


350  THE    RIVEE    PURUS.

generally  a  modern  interpolation  in  names  of  the  plain,  not  heard  from
the  month  of  a  native  Indian.'

"  Serafim  does  not  tell  ns,  and  probably  did  not  ascertain,  whether  his
Oainamari  Indians  lived  on  a  river  which  fell  into  the  Puriis.  INIr.  IVIark-
ham's  impression,  after  \Tsitiug  the  Madre  de  Dios,  the  Inambari,  and
the  Tambo-pata,  and  noting  their  direction  at  the  lowest  point  he
attained  on  them,  was  that  all  three  united  to  form  one  river,  which  he
supposed  to  be  the  Piinis ;  and  his  oi^inion  is  entitled  to  great  weight,  as
that  of  the  only  person  capable  of  giving  an  account  of  what  he  saw,  who
has  visited  all  the  three  rivers.  Here,  however,  is  the  difficulty,  which
only  a  new  and  thorough  exploration  can  clear  up ;  for  all  speculation  on
such  a  point  is  uncertain  and  valueless.  Comparing  the  maj^s  of  INIartius
and  Markham,  and  bearing  in  mind  the  statement  of  Baena,  one  would
be  tempted  to  say  that  the  Tambo-imta  was  the  head  of  the  Puriis,  the
Inambari  of  the  Yutahy,  and  the  Madre  de  Dios  of  the  Yauary ;  or  the
INIadre  de  Dios  may  really  be  the  origin  of  the  Piu-iis,  and  the  other  two
streams  may  flow  into  the  Beni.  There  are  other  jjossible  modes  of  com-
bination, and  there  is  even  another  tributary  of  the  Amazon,  intermediate
between  the  Yutahy  and  the  Funis,  I  mean  the  Yurud,  which,  though  a
smaller  river,  has  so  long  a  course,  that  we  see  (in  Serafim's  story)
Cucamas  of  the  Funis  having  intercourse  with  people  at  the  head  of
the  Y'urua.

"It  is  clear  from  Serafim's  report,  that  the  plain  tlu-ough  which  the
Funis  flows  has  a  scarcely  perceptible  declivity,  for  he  nowhere  en-
countered cataracts,  or  even  rapids.  Indeed,  on  referring  to  the  maps,
and  considering  the  nature  of  the  ground,  we  see  that  the  head  of  naviga-
tion of  the  Puriis  must  needs  be  on  a  lower  level  than  that  of  the  Beni
and  ]\Iamore  ;  and  yet  on  a  tributary  of  the  latter  (the  Chapare)  Gibbon
found  that  water  boiled  at  209°  5',  indicating  an  elevation  above  the  sea
of  only  four  hundi-ed  and  sixty-five  feet.  Tliis  goes  far  to  show  that
Humboldt  may  be  correct  in  his  suj^position  of  a  strip  of  low  land
extendino-  fi-om  the  Amazon  valley,  between  the  Andes  on  the  one  hand.


>  "I  should  suppose  the  Uainamaris  to  be  a  tribe  of  the  savage  Chun-
chos.  Many  of  the  large  Indian  nations  spoken  of  by  old  authors  are  now
much  subdivided ;  thus  of  the  Jibaros,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Quite-
nian  Andes,  have  been  constituted  in  modern  times  the  tribes  Achuales,
Pindus,  Huambisas,  etc.

"The  Cucamas  are  a  section  of  the  great  Tupi  nation,  and  speak  a
very  euphonious  dialect  of  Tupi.  Tliey  are  now  found  scattered  in  most
of  the  villages  on  the  ]\Iarafion  (or  upper  Amazon)  in  Peru,  and  formerly
existed  in  much  greater  numbers  than  at  i^resent  in  the  collage  of  La
Laguna,  within  the  Huallaga.  It  is  curious  to  find  a  remnant  of  them
so  far  separated  from  the  bulk  of  their  nation  as  at  the  head  of  the
Funis,  but  it  is  explicable  enough  when  we  come  to  trace  the  migrations
of  the  Tiipis  and  Cucama.s.  as  narrated  by  Acuiia  and  other  -ftTiters."


THE    RIVER    PURUS.  351

and  the  mountains  of  Brazil  on  the  other,  all  through  tlic  provinces  of
Mtijos  and  CIii(|uitos  to  the  basin  of  tlie  river  Plate.  The  navigable  part
of  tiie  Funis  extends  to  the  southward,  along  this  lowland,  apparently  to  far
beyond  the  last  falls  of  the  INladeira ;  its  depth  is  probably  great  enough
to  admit  of  its  being  navigated  by  steamers  at  least  up  to  within  two
hundred  miles  of  the  highest  point  reached  by  Serafim ;  and  we  may
therefore  be  allowed  to  predict  that  the  Piunis  will  at  some  future  day
become  one  of  the  great  highways  between  the  Andes  and  the  Amazon.

"Like  other  affluents  of  the  Amazon  flowing  tlu-ough  a  champaign
country,  the  Puriis  has  numerous  lakes,  and  but  very  few  rivers  tributary
to  it.  I  have  ascended  two  rivers,  entering  the  Amazon  from  the  north-
ward, which  have  precisely  the  same  character,  viz.,  the  Trombetas  and
the  Pastasa.  The  latter  of  these  two  rivers  is  in  some  parts  nearly  two
miles  in  breadth,  but  its  stream  is  generally  sluggish  and  so  shallow  that,
although  I  entered  it  when  the  waters  were  at  their  highest  level,  yet
when  they  partially  subsided  during  the  voyage,  we  had  great  difficulty
in  finding  a  channel  sufficiently  deep  to  float  our  canoes,  although  the
latter  were  merely  hollowed  trunks,  and  we  were  still  some  distance
below  the  confluence  of  the  Bobonasa.  On  the  Purus,  however,  Serafim
does  not  once  mention  being  impeded  by  insufficient  depth  of  water.
He  complains  of  the  foggy  mornings,  such  as  I  have  experienced  on  all
the  rivers  whose  coiu-se  is  northerly  or  southerly ;  whereas  on  the  Amazon,
and  even  on  the  Rio  NegTo,  so  long  as  its  course  (in  ascending)  is
westerly,  the  easterly  trade-wind  usually  prevents  any  accmniUation  of
fog,  especially  in  the  dry  season,  when  that  wind  prevails  most."

"Richard  Spruce."

"June  13th,  1864."


352  THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    XCYI.


How  the  Indians  carry  herbs  or  roots  in  their  mouths,  and  concerning
the  herb  called  coca,  which  they  raise  in  many  parts  of  this  king-
dom.

In  all  parts  of  tlie  Indies  thx'ougli  which  I  have  travelled  I
have  observed  that  the  natives  take  great  delight  in  having
herbs  or  roots  in  their  mouths.  Thus,  in  the  district  of  the
city  of  Antioquia,  some  of  the  peoj)le  go  about  with  a  small
leaf  in  their  mouths,  and  in  the  province  of  Arma  they
chew  another  leaf.  In  the  districts  of  Quinbaya  and  Au-
zerma  they  cut  small  twigs  from  a  young  green  tree,  which
they  rub  against  their  teeth  without  ceasing.  In  most  of
the  villages  subject  to  the  cities  of  Cah  and  Popayan  they
go  about  with  small  coca  leaves  in  their  mouths,  to  which
they  apply  a  mixture,  which  they  carry  in  a  calabash,  made
from  a  certain  earth-like  hme.  Throughout  Peru  the  Indians
carry  this  coca  in  their  mouths,  and  from  morning  until
they  lie  down  to  sleep,  they  never  take  it  out.  When  I
asked  some  of  these  Indians  why  they  carried  these  leaves
in  their  mouths  (which  the}^  do  not  eat,  but  merely  hold
between  their  teeth),  they  replied  that  it  prevents  them
from  feeling  hungry,  and  gives  them  great  \ngour  and
strength.  I  believe  that  it  has  some  such  effect,  although,
perhaps,  it  is  a  custom  only  suited  for  people  like  these
Indians.  They  sow  this  coca  in  the  forests  of  the  Andes,
from  Guamanga  to  the  town  of  Plata.  The  trees  are  small,
and  they  cultivate  them  with  great  care,  that  they  may  yield
the  leaf  called  coca.  They  put  the  leaves  in  the  sun,  and
afterwards  pack  them  in  long  narrow  bags,  containing  a-
little  more  than  an  arroha  each.  This  coca  was  so  highly
valued  in  Peru  in  the  years  1548,  1549,  1550,  and  1551,
that  there  was  not  a  root  nor  anything  gathered  from  a  tree,
except  spice,  which  was  in  such  estimation.     In  those  years


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  353

they  valued  the  rcparthnlentos  of  Cuzco,  La  Paz,  and  Plata
at  eighty  thousand  dollars,  more  or  less,  all  arising  from
this  coca.  Coca  was  taken  to  the  mines  of  Potosi  for  sale,
and  the  planting  of  the  trees  and  picking  of  the  leaves  was
carried  on  to  such  an  extent,  that  coca  is  not  now  worth  so
much,  but  it  will  never  cease  to  be  valuable.  There  are
some  persons  in  Spain  who  are  rich  from  the  produce  of
this  coca,  having  traded  with  it,  sold  and  re-sold  it  in  the
Indian  markets.^


CHAPTER    XCVII.


Of  the  road  from  Cuzco  to  the  city  of  La  Paz  ;  and  of  the  villages,  until
the  Indians  called  Canches  are  passed.

The  distance  from  the  city  of  Cuzco  to  the  city  of  La  Paz
is  eighty  leagues,  a  little  more  or  less.  It  must  be  known
that,  before  La  Paz  was  founded,  all  the  towns  and  villages
now  subject  to  that  city  were  within  the  limits  of  the  city  of
Cuzco.  Setting  out  from  Cuzco  by  the  royal  road  of  CoUa-
suyu,  it  leads  to  the  narrow  pass  of  Mohina,  leaving  the
buildings  of  Quispicanchi  on  the  left  hand.  The  road  goes
by  this  place,  after  leaving  Cuzco,  and  is  paved  with  stones.
In  Mohina  there  is  a  large  swamp,  across  which  the  road  is
carried  on  a  paved  causeway.  There  were  great  edifices  in
Mohina,  which  are  now  in  ruins.  When  the  governor  Don
Francisco  Pizarro  entered  Cuzco  with  the  Spaniards,  they
found  much  gold  and  silver,  and  rich  and  precious  clothing  in
these  edifices.  I  have  heard  some  Spaniards  say  that  there
was  a  block  of  stone  in  this  place,  in  the  shape  of  a  man,
with  long  ropes,  and  beads  in  the  hand,  besides  other
figures,  some  of  which  they  adored  as  idols.

*  See  my  chapter  on  coca  cultivation  in  Travels  in  Peru  and  India,
chap,  xiv,  p.  232.


354  THE    TRAVELS    OF

Beyond  Mohina  is  the  ancient  village  of  Urcos^  which  is
about  six  leagues  from  Cuzco.^  On  this  road  there  is  a
very  large  and  strong  wall,  and  the  natives  say  that  along
the  top  of  it  a  channel  of  water  was  conducted  with  great
labour  from  a  river,  with  the  same  skill  and  order  as  they
make  their  other  irrigating  channels.  In  this  great  wall
there  was  a  broad  doorway,  at  which  there  were  porters  who
collected  the  tribute  which  the  Indians  were  obliged  to  pay
to  the  lords.  There  were  other  overseers  of  the  same  Yncas
at  this  place,  to  seize  and  punish  those  who  had  the  audacity
to  take  gold  or  silver  out  of  the  city  of  Cuzco.  In  this
place  there  were  quarries  whence  they  took  stones  for
building  edifices,  which  are  well  worth  seeing.  Urcos  is
built  on  a  hill,  where  there  were  palaces  for  the  lords.
Thence  to  Quiquixana  the  distance  is  three  leagues  over  a
rugged  country.  Here  the  river  of  Yucay  flows  through
the  valley,  over  which  there  is  a  bridge  made  like  others  in
this  country.  Near  this  place  the  Indians  called  Cavinas
are  settled,  who,  before  they  were  subjugated  by  the  Yncas,
wore  a  large  ornament  in  their  ears.  They  say  that  Manco
Ccapac,  the  founder  of  the  city  of  Cuzco,  secui-ed  the
friendship  of  these  Indians.  They  go  about  dressed  in
wooUen  clothes,  with  a  black  fillet  twisted  round  their
heads.  In  the  mountains  there  are  villages  in  which  the
houses  are  built  of  stone.  In  former  times  they  held  a
temple  in  great  veneration,  called  Ausancata,  near  which
they  say  that  their  ancestors  saw  an  idol  or  devil  in  the
same  dress  as  their  own.  These  Indians  held  for  certain
that  the  souls  which  departed  from  the  bodies  went  to  a
great  lake,  where,  in  their  vain  behef,  they  held  that  they
had  their  origin,  and  where  they  again  entered  into  the
bodies  of  those  who  were  born.  After  they  were  subjugated
by  the   Yncas  they  became  more  civilised  and  intelligent,

'  Cieza  de  Leon  now  conducts  the  reader  up  the  beautiful  valley  of
Vilca-mayu,  or  Yucay.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  '  355

and  adored  the  sun^  without  forgetting  their  former  temple.
Beyond  this  province  is  that  of  the  Canches,  who  are
intelligent  and  homely  Indians,  without  malice^  and  always
skilful  in  working,  especially  gold  and  silver.  They  also
had  large  flocks  of  sheep.  Their  villages  are  Hke  those  of
their  neighbours ;  they  wear  the  same  clothes,  with  a  black
fillet  round  the  head,  the  ends  of  which  hang  down  as  low
as  the  chin.  They  say  that,  in  ancient  times,  they  waged
great  wars  with  Huira-ccocha  Ynca,  and  with  some  of  his
predecessors,  and  that,  when  they  submitted  to  their  rule,
the  Yncas  valued  them  highly.  Their  arms  were  darts,
slings,  and  weapons  called  Ayllos,  with  which  they  captured
their  enemies.  Their  methods  of  interment  were  the  same
as  those  already  described ;  their  tombs  were  built  of  stone,
on  the  heights,  and  here  they  put  the  bodies  of  their  chiefs,
together  with  some  of  their  wives  and  servants.  They  do
not  value  the  vanities  and  honours  of  the  world,  though  it
is  true  that  some  of  the  chiefs  are  haughty  to  the  Indians,
and  treat  them  with  asperity.  At  certain  seasons  of  the
year  they  celebrate  their  festivals,  for  which  they  have
fixed  days.  In  the  buildings  of  the  chiefs  there  were  places
where  they  had  their  dances,  and  where  the  chiefs  ate  and
drank.  They  conversed  with  the  devil,  like  all  the  other
Indians.  Throughout  all  the  land  of  these  Canches  there
is  maize  and  wheat,  and  plenty  of  partridges  and  condors,
and  in  their  houses  the  Indians  have  many  fowls.  They
also  catch  excellent  fish  in  the  rivers.


356  THE    TRAVELS    OP


CHAPTER    XCVIII.


Of  the  provinces  of  Canas,  and  of  Ayavire.

After  leaving  the  province  of  Canches,  tliat  of  Canas^  is
entered^  which  is  the  name  of  another  tribe,  and  the  names
of  the  villages  are  Hatuncana,  Chiquana,  Horuro,  Cacha,
and  others  which  I  shall  not  enumerate.^     These  Indians  all

'  Canas  was  conquered  by  Lloque  Yupanqui,  the  third  Ynca.  G.  de
la  Vega,  i,  hb.  ii,  cap.  18.

^  The  country  inhabited  by  the  Indian  tribes  of  Canas  and  Canches
was,  in  Spanish  tunes,  included  within  the  Corrigimiento  of  Tinta,  one  of
the  divisions  of  the  Presidency  of  Cuzco.  It  now  comprises  the  two  pro-
vinces of  Canas  and  Canches.  It  consists  of  lofty  plateaux  or  punas  of
the  Andes,  intersected  by  the  deep  and  fertile  ravine  tlirough  which
flows  the  river  Vilcamayu  or  Yucay  ;  and  is  bounded  on  the  south  by  the
equally  lofty  plains  of  the  CoUao.  The  punas  are  covered  with  flocks  of
llamas  ;  and  the  more  inaccessible  fastnesses  are  the  haunts  of  huanacus,
vicunas,  deer,  and  viscachas  (a  kind  of  rabbit).

In  the  most  remote  times  the  tribe  of  Canas  inhabited  one  side  of  the
Vilcamayu  ravine,  and  that  of  Canches  the  other.  The  former  were
proud,  cautious,  and  melancholy,  their  clothing  was  usually  of  a  sombre
colour,  and  their  music  was  plaintive  and  sad.  The  latter  were  joyous,
light  hearted,  and  sociable,  but  very  poor,  their  clothing  consisting  of
skins.  They  made  wars  upon  each  other,  and  built  their  vOlages  in
strong  fortified  positions  called  pucaras.  These  tribes  were  brought
under  the  yoke  of  the  Yncas  by  Sinchi  Rocca,  the  second  of  his  dynasty.
He  permitted  the  ancient  chiefs  to  retain  their  power,  but  insisted  upon
their  children  being  educated  at  Cuzco.  The  Canas,  however,  were  con-
stantly in  a  state  of  revolt,  untU  the  Ynca  Huayna  Ccapac  gave  one  of
his  daughters  in  marriage  to  their  chief.

The  Canches  were  of  middle  height,  very  bold,  restless,  inconstant,  but
good  workmen,  industrious,  and  brave.  The  Canas,  though  of  a  darker
complexion,  were  stouter  and  better  made.  The  Canches  loved  sohtude  and
were  veiy  silent,  and  built  their  huts  in  secluded  ravines  and  valleys.  The
villages  of  the  Canches  were  Sicuani,  Cacha,  Tinta,  Checacupe,  Pampa-
marca,  Yanaoca,  and  Lanqui ;  and  those  of  the  Canas  were  Checa,  Pichi-
gua,  Yacuri,  Coparaque,  Tungasaca,  Surimani.  Sicuani,  in  the  ravine
of  the  Vilcamayu,  is  the  principal  place  in  the  country  of  the  Canches
and  Canas.  At  the  end  of  the  last  century  it  contained  a  population  of
four  thousand   Indians,   and  one  thousand   Mestizos.     The  number  of


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  357

wear  clotlies,  both  meu  and  women,  and  they  have  large,
round,  high  woollen  caps  on  their  heads.  Before  they
were  subjugated  by  the  Yncas,  they  had  their  villages  in
the  mountain  fastnesses,  whence  they  came  forth  to  make
war;  afterwards  they  descended  into  the  valley.  Their
customs  with  regard  to  burials  are  the  same  as  those  of  the
Canches.  In  the  province  of  these  Canas  there  was  a
temple  which  they  called  Ancocahua,  where  they  performed
sacrifices,  in  their  blindness ;  and  in  the  village  of  Cacha
there  were  great  edifices,  built  by  order  of  Tupac  Ynca
Yupanqui.  On  the  other  side  of  the  river  there  is  a  small
enclosure,  within  which  they  found  some  gold.  This  temple
was  built  in  memory  of  their  god  Huira-ccocha,  whom  they
call  the  Creator.  Within  it  there  was  a  stone  idol  the
height  of  a  man,  with  a  robe,  and  a  crown  or  tiara  on  the
head.  Some  said  that  this  might  be  the  statue  of  some
apostle  who  arrived  in  this  land.^     In  the  second  part  of

Indians  in  the  whole  district  was  calculated,  at  the  same  time,  to  amount
to  twenty-six  thousand  souls.  Mercurio  Peruana  {^Nueva  Edicion),  i,
p.  193.

'  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  relates  a  tradition  respecting  this  temple  at
Cacha,  which  is  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river  Yucay,  sixteen  leagues
south  of  Cuzco.  A  supernatural  being  is  said  to  have  appeared  to  the
Ynca  Huii-a-ccocha,  before  the  battle  with  Anco-hualluc  and  his  allies  on
the  plain  of  Yahuar-pampa  (see  note  to  p.  280),  and  after  his  victory  the
grateful  prince  caused  a  temple  to  be  erected  at  Cacha,  in  memory  of  the
phantom.  As  the  vision  appeared  in  the  open  air,  so  the  temple  was  to
have  no  roof,  and  as  he  was  sleeping  at  the  time  imder  an  overhanging
rock,  so  there  was  to  be  a  small  covered  chapel  opening  into  the  temple,
which  was  120  feet  long  by  80.  The  edifice  was  biult  of  large  stones
carefully  dressed  and  finished.  It  had  four  doors,  three  of  them  being
merely  ornamental  recesses,  and  the  fourth,  facing  to  the  east,  was  alone
used.  Within  the  temple  there  were  walls  winding  round  and  round  and
forming  twelve  lanes,  each  seven  feet  A^ade,  and  covered  overhead  with
huge  stone  slabs  ten  feet  long.  As  these  lanes  went  round  and  round
they  approached  the  centre  of  the  temple,  and  at  the  end  of  the  twelfth
and  last  there  was  a  flight  of  steps  leading  to  the  top.  At  the  end  of
each  lane  or  passage  there  was  a  window  by  which  light  was  admitted.
The  steps  were  double,  so  that  people  could  go  up  on  one  side  and  down


358  THE    TRAVELS    OF

this  work  I  shall  treat  of  what  I  believe,  and  of  what  I  was
able  to  collect  respecting  the  report  that  fire  came  down  from
heaven,  and  converted  many  stones  into  cinders.  Through-
out this  province  of  Canas  the  climate  is  cold,  as  well  as  in
Canches,  but  the  country  is  well  supplied  with  provisions
and  flocks.  To  the  west  is  the  South  Sea,  and  to  the  east
the  forests  of  the  Andes.  From  the  village  of  Chiquana,  in
this  province  of  Canas,  to  Ayavire  the  distance  is  fifteen
leagues,  vnthin  which  limits  there  are  some  villages  of  the
Canas,  many  plains,  and  great  meadows  well  suited  for
flocks,  if  it  were  not  so  cold.  Now  the  great  quantity  of
herbage  is  only  useful  for  guanacos  and  vicuiias.

In  ancient  times  it  was  a  grand  thing  to  see  this  town  of
Ayavire,  and  the  place  is  still  worthy  of  note,  especially  the
great  tombs,  which  are  so  numerous  that  they  occupy
more  space  than  the  habitations  of  the  hving.  The  Indians
positively  assert  that  the  natives  of  this  town  of  Ayavire  are
of  the  same  descent  and  lineage  as  those  of  Canas;  and
that  the  Ynca  Tupanqui  waged  wars  and  fought  battles
with  them,  in  which  they  suSered  so  severely  that  they
submitted  to  his  service,  to  save  themselves  from  entire
destruction.  But  as  some  of  the  Yncas  were  vindictive,
after  the  Ynca  had  killed  a  great  number  of  the  Indians  of
Copacopa  and  other  villages  in  the  fCrests  of  the  Andes,
whom  he  had  got  into  his  power  by  deceit,  he  did  the  same
to  the  natives  of  Ayavire,  in  such  sort  that  few  or  none  were
left  alive.  It  is  notorious  that  those  who  escaped  wandered
in  the  fields  for  a  long  time,  calling  on  their  dead,  and
mourning  with  groans  and  great  sorrow  over  the  destruc-
tion that  had  come  upon  their  people.  As  Ayavire  is  a
large  district,  through  which  a  good  river  flows,  the  Ynca
Yupanqui  ordered  that  a  great  palace  should  be  built  hci-e,

on  the  other.  The  floor  above  was  paved  with  polished  black  stones,  and
on  one  side  there  was  a  chapel,  within  which  was  the  statue  representing
the  phantom.     The  Spaniards  entirely  demolished  this  temple.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  359

which  was  accordingly  done^  together  with  many  buildings
where  the  tribute  was  stored  up.  A  temple  of  the  sun
was  also  built^  as  one  of  the  most  important  things.  The
Ynca  then  ordered  that  Indians  (who  are  called  Mitimaes)
should  come  here  with  their  wives,  for  there  were  few
natives  left,  and  the  Mitimaes  became  lords  of  the  soil,  and
heirs  to  the  dead  natives,  and  they  were  directed  to  form  a
large  town  near  the  temple  of  the  sun  and  the  principal
edifices.  The  town  went  on  increasing  until  the  Spaniards
arrived  in  this  kingdom,  but  since  that  time,  what  with  the
civil  wars  and  other  calamities,  it  has  greatly  decreased,
like  all  the  others.

I  entered  it  at  the  time  when  it  was  held  in  encomienda
by  Juan  de  Pancorbo,  a  citizen  of  Cuzco ;  and  I  learnt  these
particulars,  which  I  have  wi^itten  down,  from  the  best  in-
formation within  my  reach.  Near  this  town  there  is  a
ruined  temple,  where  once  they  offered  up  sacrifices.  And
the  multitude  of  tombs  which  appear  all  round  this  town  is
held  to  be  a  notable  sisrht.


CHAPTER    XCIX.


Of  the  great  district  which  is  iiiliabited  by  the  CoUas^  of  the  appearance
of  the  laud  where  their  villages  are  built,  and  how  Mitimaes  were
stationed  to  supply  them  with  provisions.

The  region  which  they  call  Collao  appears  to  me  to  be  the
largest  province  in  all  Peru,  and  the  most  populous.  The
Collas  are  first  met  with  at  Ayavire,  and  they  extend  as  far
as  Caracoto.  To  the  east  of  their  province  are  the  forests
of  the  Andes,  to  the  west  are  the  peaks  of  the  snowy
mountains,  which  descend  on  the  other  side  to  the  South
Sea.  Besides  the  lands  which  the  natives  occupy  with
their  fields  and  houses,  there   are  vast  uninhabited  tracts


360  THE    TEAVELS    OF

full  of  wild  flocks.     The  land  of  the  Collas  is  level  in  most
parts,  and  rivers  of  good  water  flow  through  it.

These  plains  form  beautiful  and  extensive  meadows,  the
herbage  of  which  is  always  plentiful,  and  at  times  very
green,  although  in  the  spring  it  is  parched  up  as  in  Spain.
The  winter  begins  (as  I  have  already  said)  in  October,  and
lasts  until  April.  The  days  and  nights  are  almost  equal,
and  the  cold  in  this  district  is  greater  than  in  any  other
part  of  Peru,  excepting  the  snowy  peaks,  because  the  land
is  high,  and  comes  up  to  the  mountains.  Certainly  if  this
land  of  the  Collao  had  a  deep  valley  like  those  of  Xauxa  or
Chuquiapu,  which  would  yield  maize,  it  would  be  one  of  the
richest  in  all  the  Indies.  When  the  wind  is  blowing  it  is
hard  work  to  travel  over  these  plains  of  the  Collao,  but
when  there  is  no  wind,  and  the  sun  is  shining,  it  is  very
pleasant  to  see  the  beautiful  and  well-peopled  meadows.
But  the  climate  is  so  cold  that  there  is  no  maize,  nor  any
kind  of  tree ;  and  the  land  is  too  sterile  to  yield  any  of  the
fruits  which  grow  in  other  parts. ^  The  houses  in  the
villages  are  built  of  stone,  and  roofed  with  straw  instead  of
tiles,  and  they  are  placed  close  together.  This  coimtry  of
the  Collao  was  once  very  populous,  and  was  covered  with
large  villages,  round  which  the  Indians  had  their  fields,
where  they  raised  crops  for  food.  Their  principal  food  is
potatoes,^  which  are  like  earth  nuts,  as  I  have  before  de-

»  This  description  of  the  Collao  is  veiy  accurate.  South  of  the  Vilca-
uota  mountains  the  Andes  separate  into  two  distinct  chains,  namely  the
Cordillera  or  coast  range  and  the  Eastern  Andes,  which  include  the  loftiest
peaks  in  South  America,  IlHmani  and  Sorata.  The  Collao  is  the  region
between  these  two  ranges.  It  contains  the  great  lake  of  Titicaca,  and
consists  of  elevated  plains  intersected  by  rivers  flowing  into  the  lake.

2  The  potatoe  was  indigenous  to  the  Andes  of  Peru,  and  the  best
potatoe  in  the  world  is  grown  at  a  place  called  Huamantango,  near  Lima.
I  am  surprised  to  find  that  Humboldt  should  have  doubted  this  fact,
("  La  pomme  de  terre  n'est  pas  indigene  au  Perou.''  Nouv.  Espagne,
ii,  p.  400),  seeing  that  there  is  a  native  word  for  potatoe,  and  that  it  is
mentioned  as  the  stabile  food  of  the  people  of  the  Collao,  by  Cieza  de


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  3G1

clared  in  this  history.  They  dry  these  potatoes  in  the  sun,
and  keep  them  from  one  harvest  to  another.  After  they
are  dried  they  call  these  potatoes  chunus,  and  they  are
highly  esteemed  and  valued  among  them.^  They  have  no
water  in  channels  for  irrigating  the  fields,  as  in  many  other
parts  of  this  kingdom,  so  that,  if  the  natural  supply  of
water  required  for  the  crops  fails,  they  would  suffer  from
famine  and  want  if  they  had  not  this  store  of  dried  potatoes.
Many  Spaniards  have  enriched  themselves  and  returned
prosperous  to  Spain  by  merely  taking  these  chunvs  to  sell
at  the  mines  of  Potosi.  They  have  another  kind  of  food
called  oca,^  which  is  also  profitable,  but  not  so  much  so  as  a
seed  which  they  also  raise,  called  qidnua,^  a  small  grain
like  rice.  When  the  harvest  is  abundant,  all  the  inhabitants
of  the  Collao  live  contented  and  free  from  want,  but  when
there  is  want  of  water  they  suffer  great  distress.

But,  in  truth,  the  Kings  Yncas  who  ruled  over  this  em-
pire were  so  wise,  and  such  excellent  governors,  that  they
established  laws  and  customs  without  which  the  majority  of
their  people  would  have  suffered  great  hardships,  as  they
did  before  they  came  under  the  rule  of  the  Yncas,  In  the
Collao,  and  in  all  the  parts  of  Peru,  where,  owing  to  the
cold  climate,  the  land  is  not  so  fertile  and  abundant  as  in
the  warm  valleys,  they  ordered  that,  as  the  great  forests  of

Leon,  and  other  early  writers.  Moreover  the  Solanacece  are  the  com-
monest plants  in  several  parts  of  Peru.  The  ancient  Quichua  for  potatoe
is  ascu  or  acsu,  and  the  same  word  exists  in  the  Chinchaysuyu  dialect.
{Torres  Rubio,  p.  219.)

'  Chunus  or  frozen  potatoes  are  still  the  ordinary  food  of  the  natives
of  the  Collao.  They  dam  up  square  shallow  pools  by  the  sides  of
streams,  and  fill  them  with  potatoes  during  the  cold  season  of  June  and
July.  The  frost  soon  converts  them  into  chunus^  which  ai'e  insipid  and
tasteless.

2  The  oca  {Oxalis  tuber osa  Lin.)  is  an  oval  shaped  root,  the  skm  pale
red,  and  the  inside  white.  It  is  watery,  has  a  sweetish  taste,  and  is
much  liked  by  the  Peruvians.


See  note  at  page  143.


>i


Hr^.W'


362  THE    TRAVELS    OP

the  Andes  bordered  on  these  sterile  tracts,  a  certain  number
of  Indians  with  their  wives  should  be  taken  from  each
village,  and  stationed  to  cultivate  the  land  in  the  places
where  the  chiefs  directed  them  to  settle.  Here  they  sowed
the  things  which  would  not  grow  in  their  own  country,
sending  the  fruits  of  their  labours  to  their  chiefs,  and  they
were  called  Mitimaes.  At  the  present  day  they  serve  the
principal  encomienderos,  and  cultivate  the  precious  coca.

Thus,  although  no  maize  can  be  raised  throughout  the
Colloa,  the  chiefs  and  people  did  not  fail  to  obtain  it  by  this
arrangement,  for  the  Mitimaes  brought  up  loads  of  maize,
coca,  and  fruits  of  all  kinds,  besides  plenty  of  honey,  which
abounds  in  all  parts  of  the  forests,  where  it  is  foi-med  in  the
hollows  of  trees  in  the  way  I  have  described  when  treating
of  Quinbaya.^  In  the  province  of  Charcas  this  honey  is
excellent.  It  is  said  that  Francisco  de  Carbajal,  master
of  the  camp  to  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  always  ate  this  honey,  and
though  he  drank  it  as  if  it  had  been  water  or  wine,  he
always  remained  strong  and  healthy,  as  he  was  when  I  saw
him  judged  in  the  valley  of  Xaquixaguana,  although  he  was
over  eighty  years  of  age  according  to  his  own  account.


CHAPTER    C.


Of  what  is  said  concerning  the  origin  of  these  Collas,  of  their  appearance,
and  how  they  buried  their  dead.

Many  of  these  Indians  say  that  they  have  heard  from  their
fathers  that,  in  times  past,  there  was  a  great  deluge,  in  the
manner  described  by  me  in  the  third  chapter  of  the  second
part.  They  also  declare  that  the  origin  of  their  ancestors
was  very  ancient,  and  they  relate  so  many  sayings  and
fictions  that  I  shall  not  stop  to  write  them  down,  for  some
1  See  chapter  xxv,  p.  9U.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  363

say  that  their  ancestors  came  out  of  a  fountain,  others  from
a  rock,  and  others  out  of  a  lake,  so  that  no  sense  can
be  learnt  from  them  concerning  their  origin.  But  they  all
agree  that  their  ancestors  Hved  in  a  wild  state  before  they
were  subjugated  by  the  Yncas,  that  they  had  strongholds
in  the  mountains  whence  they  came  out  to  fight,  and  that
they  had  many  vicious  customs.  Afterwards  they  learnt  from
the  Yncas  all  that  had  been  made  known  to  the  other  vassals,
and  they  built  their  villages  in  the  same  way  as  they  have
them  now.  Both  men  and  women  are  clothed  in  woollen
dresses.  They  say  that,  before  marriage,  the  women  may  go
loosely,  but  that  they  are  punished  with  death  if  they  are
guilty  of  infidelity  after  thej-  have  been  delivered  to  husbands.
These  people  wear  woollen  caps  called  cliucos  on  their  heads.
Their  heads  are  very  long,  and  flattened  behind,  ■  because
they  are  pressed  and  forced  into  what  shape  they  choose
during  childhood.  The  women  wear  hoods  on  their  heads,
almost  of  the  same  shape  as  those  worn  by  friars.  Before
the  Yncas  conquered  the  country,  many  of  the  Indians
declare  that  there  were  two  great  lords  in  the  CoUoa,  the
one  called  Sapana  and  the  other  Cari,  who  conquered  many
jpucarasy  which  are  their  fortresses.  They  add  that  one  of
these  chiefs  entered  the  large  island  in  the  lake  of  Titicaca,
and  found  there  a  white  people  who  had  beards ;  that  they
fought  with  them  in  such  a  manner  that  all  were  killed;
and  that  they  also  fought  great  battles  with  the  Canas  and
Canches.  After  they  had  performed  notable  deeds,  these
tyrants,  or  lords,  who  had  risen  up  in  the  CoUao,  turned
their  arms  against  each  other,  seeking  also  for  the  friend-
ship of  the  Ynca  Huira-ccocha,  who  then  reigned  in  Cuzco.
The  Ynca  made  a  treaty  of  peace  with  Cari  at  Chucuito,
and  intrigued  so  skilfully  that  he  became  lord  of  a  great
part  of  the  Collao  without  fighting.  The  principal  chiefs  of
this  country  go  about  with  a  large  retinue,  and,  when  they
travel,  they  are  carried  in  litters,  and  treated  with  great


364  THE    TRAVELS    OP

respect  by  all  the  Indians.  They  had  their  temples  and
huacas  in  secret  places^  where  they  adored  their  gods^  and
those  who  were  selected  for  that  duty  conversed  with  the
devil.

The  things  which^  to  my  mind^  are  most  worthy  of
notice  in  the  Collao,  are  the  tombs  of  the  dead.  When  I
travelled  over  this  country  I  stopped  to  write  down  all  that
deserved  mention  concerning  the  Indians ;  and  I  was  truly
astonished  to  see  how  little  they  cared  for  having  large  and
handsome  houses  for  the  living,  while  they  bestowed  so
much  care  on  the  tombs  where  the  dead  were  interred,  as  if
all  happiness  did  not  consist  in  something  else.  Thus,  in
the  plains  and  meadows  near  their  villages,  the  tombs  were
built  in  the  form  of  small  towers,  some  of  stones  only,  and
others  of  stones  mixed  with  earth,  some  broad  and  others
narrow,  according  to  the  rank  and  wealth  of  those  who
built  them.^  Some  of  them  were  roofed  with  straw,  and
others  with  large  slabs.  I  observed  that  the  doors  of  these
towers  were  towards  the  east.  When  the  natives  of  the
Collao  died  they  were  mourned  for  during  many  days,  the
women  holding  staves  in  their  hands,  and  putting  ashes  on
their  bodies.  The  relations  of  the  deceased  each  con-
tributed something,  as  well  sheep,  lambs,  and  maize,  as
other  things,  and,  before  they  buried  the  corpse,  they
killed  sheep,  put  the  cooked  meat  into  the  rooms  of  their
houses,  and  made  much  drink  from  the  maize.  The  deceased
is  honoured  according  to  the  quantity  of  this  beverage  that
is  made.  When  the  drink  is  ready,  and  the  sheep  and
lambs  killed,  they  carry  the  coi'pse  to  the  place  where  the

'  The  most  remarkable  of  these  tower  tombs  of  the  Collao  are  at  a
place  called  Sillustani,  on  a  promontory  running  out  into  the  lake  of
Umayu,  near  Puno.  This  promontory  is  literally  covered  with  places  of
sepulture.  Four  of  them  are  towers  of  finely  cut  masonry,  with  the  sides
of  the  stones  dovetailing  into  each  other.  See  a  full  description  of  them
in  my  Travels  in  Peru  and  lacUa,  p.  Ill  ;  also  Vigne's  Travels  in  South
America^  ii,  p.  31 ;  and  Antiguedades  Peruunas^  p.  293.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  3G5

tomb  is  prepared,  accompanied,  if  the  deceased  was  a  chief,
by  the  people  of  the  village.  Then  they  burnt  ten,  twenty,
or  more  sheep,  according-  to  the  rank  of  the  dead  man,  and
killed  the  women,  boys  and  servants  who  were  to  accompany
him,  according  to  their  vain  belief.  All  these  are  buried  in
the  same  tomb  with  the  body,  into  which  they  also  put
some  people  alive.  Having  interred  the  deceased  in  this
manner,  they  all  return  to  the  house  whence  they  had  taken
the  body,  and  there  eat  the  food  and  drink  the  cliicha,
coming  out  from  time  to  time  to  dance  mournful  dances  in
the  appointed  places  near  the  house.  This  goes  on  for
some  days,  at  the  end  of  which  the  poorest  men  and  women
are  assembled,  and  given  what  remains  of  the  food  and
chlcha.  If  the  deceased  was  a  great  chief,  they  did  not
bury  him  immediately,  but,  before  doing  so,  they  practised
superstitious  vanities  for  some  days,  which  I  shall  not
describe.  When  these  are  finished,  the  women  and  servant-
girls  who  have  not  been  killed  come  out  into  the  village  in
their  mantles  and  hoods,  some  carrying  the  arms  of  the
chief,  others  his  ornamental  head-dress,  and  others  his
clothes  and  other  things.  They  walk  along  uttering  sad  and
sorrowful  words,  while  an  Indian  goes  before  them  mourn-
ing and  playing  on  a  drum.  Thus  they  traverse  the  greater
part  of  the  village,  declaring,  in  their  songs,  the  deeds
of  the  dead  chief,  and  other  things  concerning  him.  I
remember  that  when  I  was  going  to  Charcas  in  company
with  Diego  de  Uzeda,  who  now  lives  in  the  city  of  La  Paz,
we  saw  certain  women  walking  in  this  way  through  the
village  of  Nicasio,^  and  we  learnt  from  the  people  of  the
village  that  they  were  saying  what  I  have  described  in  this
chapter.  One  of  the  Indians  added  that  when  these  women
had  finished  their  lamentations,  they  would  be  made  drunk,

^  A  small  village  of  the  CoUao,  ou  the  banks  of  the  river  Pucara,  near
the  point  where,  uniting  with  the  Azangaro,  it  forms  the  Kamiz,  which
empties  itself  into  lake  Titioaca  at  the  uorth-west  corner.


366  THE    TRAVELS    OF

and  some  of  them  would  be  killed  to  accompany  tlie  dead
man.  In  many  other  villages  I  have  seen  them  mourn  for
the  dead  during  many  days,  and  put  ropes  of  sedge  round
their  heads  as  a  sign  of  grief.


CHAPTER    CI.


How  these  Indians  perform  their  annual  ceremonies,  and  of  the  temples
they  had  in  ancient  times.

In  the  last  chapter  I  have  declared  how  these  people  made
great  ado  when  they  put  their  dead  into  the  tombs.  After
the  interment  the  women  and  servants  shaved  their  heads,
put  on  their  commonest  clothing,  and  took  no  care  of  their
persons.  Besides  this,  in  order  to  show  their  grief,  they
twisted  ropes  of  sedge  round  their  heads,  and  uttered  con-
tinual lamentations  during  a  whole  year  if  the  deceased  was
a  chief,  and  had  no  light  in  the  house  for  several  days.
These  people,  by  the  permission  of  God,  were,  like  all  the
others,  deceived  by  the  devil  with  the  false  and  delusive
apparitions  of  some  people  who  were  dead,  dressed  and
adorned  in  the  way  their  bodies  had  been  put  into  the  tombs.
In  order  to  show  more  care  for  the  dead  they  held  annual
festivals,  when  they  brought  animals  and  killed  them  near
the  tombs,  also  emptying  many  vases  of  liquor  over  the
tombs,  which  completed  this  vain  and  foolish  ceremony.

As  this  nation  of  the  CoUao  was  so  numerous,  they  had,
in  former  times,  great  temples  and  superstitious  rites,
venerating  those  whom  they  set  apart  as  priests,  and  who
conversed  with  the  devil.  They  held  their  festivals  at  the
season  when  they  got  in  their  potatoes,  which  is  their  prin-
cipal food,  and  then  they  killed  animals  as  sacrifices.  At
the  present  time  we  do  not  know  that  they  have  any  public


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  367

temple,  but,  by  the  will  of  our  God  and  Lord,  many  Catholic
cliurclies  have  been  founded,  where  our  priests  preach  the
holy  gospel,  and  teach  the  faith  to  all  the  Indians  who
desire  to  receive  the  water  of  baptism.  I  verily  believe
that  if  there  had  been  no  civil  wars,  and  if  we  had  sincerely
and  earnestly  endeavoured  to  convert  these  people,  many
would  have  been  saved,  who  have  now  been  damned.  At
present  there  are  priests  and  friars  in  many  parts  of  the
Collao,  appointed  by  those  who  hold  encomiendas  over  the
Indians ;  and  I  pray  to  God  that  he  Avill  carry  this  work
forward  without  weighing  our  sins.

The  natives  of  the  Collao  say  the  same  as  all  the  other
people  of  the  Sierra,  that  the  Creator  of  the  world  was
called  Huira-ccocha,  and  they  know  that  his  principal  abode
is  in  heaven;  but,  deceived  by  the  devil,  they  adored
various  gods,  like  all  the  other  gentiles.  They  have  certain
romances  or  songs  in  which  they  preserve  the  memory  of
their  deeds,  and  prevent  their  being  forgotten,  although
they  have  no  letters.

Among  the  people  of  the  Collao  there  are  men  of  great
intelligence,  who  reply  to  what  is  asked  from  them ;  and
they  take  account  of  time,  and  know  some  of  the  movements
both  of  the  sun  and  the  moon.  They  count  their  years
from  ten  months  to  ten  months,  and  I  learnt  from  them
that  they  called  the  year  Mari,  the  moon  or  month  Ales-
]jaquexe,  and  the  day  Auro.  When  they  submitted  to  the
Yncas  they  made  great  temples  by  their  order,  both  on  the
island  of  Titicaca  and  at  Hatun-colla,  as  well  as  in  other
parts.


368  THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    CII.

Of  the  ancient  ruins  at  Pncara,  of  the  former  greatness  of  Hatiin-coUa,
of  the  village  called  Azangaro,  and  of  other  things  wliich  are  here
related.

Now  that  I  have  related  certain  things  that  I  was  able  to
collect  respecting  the  Collao  as  briefly  as  possible^  I  propose
to  continue  my  writing  by  giving  an  account  of  the  villages
along  the  royal  road^  as  far  as  the  city  of  La  Paz,  which  is
built  in  the  valley  of  Chuquiapu,  on  the  confines  of  the  great
province  of  the  Collao.

Coming  from  Ayavire  along  the  royal  road,  the  tra-
veller reaches  Pucara  (which  means  a  strong  place),  four
leagues  from  Ayavire.  I  remained  a  whole  day  at  Pucara
looking  at  everything.^  It  is  reported  by  the  Indians  that
there  was  formerly  a  large  population  in  this  place,  but  at
present  there  is  scarcely  an  inhabitant.  The  neighbouring
Indians  say  that  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui  besieged  the  place
during  many  days,  for,  before  they  could  be  conquered,  the
natives  showed  themselves  to  be  so  valorous,  that  they  killed
many  people.  When  they  were  finally  conquered,  the
Ynca  ordered  great  stone  pillars  to  be  set  up  in  memory  of
the  victory.  Whether  this  be  really  so  or  not  I  cannot  say,
but  the  Indians  declare  it.     I  saw  the  ruins  of  great  edifices

'  Tlie  editor  also  remained  a  whole  day  at  Pucara  in  1860,  looking  at
everything,  but  more  than  tliree  centuries  had  elapsed  since  the  visit  of
Cieza  de  Leon,  and  there  is  no  longer  a  vestige  of  the  ruins  mentioned
in  the  text.  Pucara  is  a  little  town  at  the  foot  of  an  ahnost  perpen-
dicular mountain,  which  closely  resembles  the  northern  end  of  the  rock  of
Gibraltar.  The  precipice  is  composed  of  a  reddish  sandstone,  and  is
upwards  of  twelve  himdi'ed  feet  above  the  plain,  the  crevices  and  summit
being  clothed  with  long  grass  and  slu-ubby  quemias  {Polylepis  tomentella
AVedd.)  Here  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron,  the  rebel  who  led  an  insur-
rection to  oppose  the  abohtion  of  personal  service  amongst  the  Indians,
was  finally  defeated  in  1554.  In  1860  the  aged  cura,  Dr.  Jose  Faustino
Dasa,  was  one  of  tlie  best  Quichua  scliolars  in  Peru.


PTilDRO    DR    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  3G9

in  Pucara,  and  many  pillars  of  stono  carved  in  the  form  of
men,  besides  otlier  tilings  worthy  of  note.

The  distance  from  Pucara  to  Hatun-colla  is  fifteen  leagues,
and  on  the  road  there  are  some  villages,  such  as  Nicasio,
Juliaca,  and  others.  In  former  times  Hatun-colla  was  the
principal  place  in  the  Collao,  and  the  natives  aflSrm  that
before  the  Yncas  conquered  the  country,  the  chief  Sapana
and  some  of  his  descendants  ruled  here,  who  were  so
powerful  that  they  gained  many  spoils  from  the  neighbour-
ing people  whom  they  defeated  in  battle.  Afterwards  the
Yncas  adorned  the  place  with  new  edifices  and  many  store-
houses, where,  by  their  order,  the  tribute  was  received
from  the  surrounding  districts.  There  was  also  a  temple  of
the  sun,  with  many  Mama-cunas  and  priests  for  its  service,
and  a  great  quantity  of  Mitimaes  and  soldiers  to  watch  the
frontier,  and  to  prevent  any  tyrant  from  rising  against  him
whom  they  held  as  sovereign  lord.  Thus  it  may  be  affirmed
that  Hatun-colla  was  a  grand  place,  as  its  name  implies,
for  Hatwi  means  "  great "  in  their  language.  In  these
times  all  is  in  ruins,  and  most  of  the  inhabitants  have  been
killed  in  the  wars.^

From  Ayavire  another  road  goes  to  Omasuyu,  which
leads  round  the  other  side  of  the  great  lake  of  which  I  shall
treat  presently,  and  nearer  to  the  forests  of  the  Andes.
It  passes  by  the  large  villages  of  Asillo,  Azangaro,  and
others  of  less  importance,  and  the  country  is  very  rich  both
in  flocks  and  provisions.  When  the  Yncas  conquered  this
country,  the  people  of  these  villages  had  large  flocks  of
sheep.  In  the  same  district,  in  the  forests  of  the  Andes,  is
the  famous  and  very  rich  river  of  Caravaya,  whence,  in
former  years,  they  took  more  than  1,700,000  j-^e.sos  of  gold
of  such  fineness  that  it  exceeded  the  standard  ;  and  gold  is
still  found  in  the  river,  but  it  is  only  obtained  with  great

1  Hatun-colla  is  now  a  wretched  little  villag'^,  not  far  from  the  towers
of  Sillustani,  already  alluded  to.


370  THE    TRAVELS    OF

labour,  and  by  the  deatb  of  the  Indians  who  work  in  it,

for   the    climate   is  unhealthy,  though   the  wealth    of  the
river  is  e'reat.^


CHAPTEH     cm.


Of  the  great  lake  which  is  within  the  province  of  the  Collao,  of  its
depth,  and  of  the  temple  of  Titicaca.

This  land  of  the  Collao  is  very  extensive  (as  I  have  said  in
former  chapters),  and,  besides  the  inhabited  parts,  there
are  many  deserts,  snowy  mountains,  and  grassy  plains
which  yield  sustenance  to  the  wild  flocks  which  wander  in
all  directions.  In  the  centre  of  the  province  there  is  the
largest  and  broadest  lake  that  has  been  found  in  the  Indies,
near  which  are  most  of  the  villages  of  the  Collao.  The
people  raise  their  crops  on  large  islands  in  the  lake,  where
they  also  keep  their  valuables,  as  being  safer  than  in  the
villages  along  the  roads.  I  remember  that  I  have  already
said  that  it  is  so  cold  in  this  province,  that  not  only  are
there  no  fruit  trees,  but  they  cannot  raise  maize.  In  the
beds  of  reeds  in  this  lake  there  are  many  kinds  of  birds,
such  as  large  ducks,  and  they  kill  two  or  three  kinds  of  fish
in  the  lake,  which  are  very  good,  though  they  are  held  to  be
unwholesome.

This  lake  is  so  large  that  it  has  a  circumference  of  eighty
leagues,  and  so  deep  that  the  captain  Juan  Ladrillero  told
me  that  in  some  parts,  when  he  was  saihng  with  his  brigan-
tines,  he  found  the  depth  to  be  seventy  or  eighty  hrazas,  in
some  places  more,  in  others  less.  In  this  respect,  and  in  regard
to  the  waves  that  are  formed  when  the  wind  rises,  it  appears
like  some  gulf  of  the  sea.^     If  it  is  desired  that  I  should  say

'  See  my  chapter  on  the  province  of  Caravaya,  in  Travels  in  Peru  and
India,  chap,  xii,  p.  190.

2  A  thorough  survey  of  the  great  lake  of  Titicaca  is  still  a  desideratum


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  371

how  SO  much  water  was  collected  into  this  lake,  I  am
unable  to  do  so,  for,  though  many  rivers  and  streams  fall
into  it,  I  do  not  think  that  they  would  suffice  to  make  it  what
it  is,  especially  as  a  river  flows  out  of  it  into  another  smaller
lake  called  Aullagas.  It  may  be  that,  after  the  deluge,  this
lake  remained  with  the  water  we  now'  see  in  it,  for  if  it
communicated  with  the  sea  the  water  would  be  salt  and  not
fresh ;  besides  it  is  at  a  distance  of  sixty  leagues  from  the
sea.  All  this  water  flows  out  in  a  deep  river  which  they
called  the  Desaguadero,  and  falls  into  the  lake  which,  as  I
have  already  said,  is  called  Aullagas.

Another  thing  worthy  of  attention  is,  that  we  see  how
the  water  of  one  lake  enters  the  other  (that  is,  the  water  of
the  lake  of  the  Collao  flows  into  the  Aullagas),  but  not  how
it  flows  out  of  the  lake  of  Aullagas,  although  it  has  been
examined  on  all  sides.  On  this  subject  I  have  heard  both
Spaniards  and  Indians  say  that,  in  some  of  the  valleys  near
the  South  Sea,  they  had  seen  streams  of  water,  which  flow

in  geograpliy.  The  lake  is  about  80  miles  long  by  40  broad,  being  by
far  the  large.st  in  South  America.  It  is  divided  into  two  parts  by  the
peninsula  of  Copacabana.  The  southern  division,  called  the  lake  of  Huaqui,
is  8  leagues  long  by  7,  and  is  united  to  the  greater  lake  by  the  strait  of
Tiquina.  A  number  of  rivers,  which  are  of  considerable  volume  during
the  rainy  season,  ilow  into  the  lake.  The  largest  of  these  is  the  Ramiz,
which  is  formed  by  the  junction  of  the  two  rivers  of  Pucara  and  Azan-
garo,  and  enters  the  lake  at  its  north-west  corner.  The  Suchiz,  formed
by  the  rivers  of  Cavanilla  and  Lampa,  also  flows  into  the  lake  on  its  west
side,  as  well  as  the  Yllpa  and  Ylave  ;  while  on  the  eastern  side  are  the
rivers  Huarina,  Escoma,  and  Achacache.  ]\Iuch  of  the  water  thus  flow-
ing in  is  drained  off  by  the  great  river  Desaguadero,  which  flows  out  of
the  south-west  corner,  and  disappears  in  the  swampy  lake  of  Aullagas,
in  the  south  of  Boli\'ia.  Perhaps  a  great  quantity  is  taken  up  by  evapo-
ration. On  the  eastern  side  lake  Titicaca  is  very  deep,  but  on  parts  of
the  west  shore  it  is  so  shoal  that  there  is  only  just  water  enough  to  force
a  balsa  through  the  forests  of  rushes.  Tlie  winds  blow  from  the  eastward
all  the  year  round,  sometimes  in  strong  gales,  so  as  to  raise  a  heavy  sea.
Along  the  western  shore  there  are  acres  of  tall  rushes.  The  principal
islands  are  those  of  Titicaca  and  Coati,  near  the  peninsula  of  Copa-
cabana, Campanario,  Escoma,  Soto,  and  Esteves.


372  THE   TRAVELS    OF

under  the  eartli  towards  the  said  sea ;  and  they  believe
that  this  may  be  the  water  of  the  lake,  draining  out  and
opening  for  itself  a  road  through  the  bowels  of  the  earth,
until  it  reaches  the  place  to  which  all  waters  go,  which  is
the  sea.

The  great  lake  of  the  Colloa  is  called  Titicaca,  from  the
temple  which  was  built  on  an  island  in  it.  The  natives
held  a  very  vain  and  foolish  belief,  which  was,  that  in  the
time  of  their  ancestors  there  was  no  light  for  many  days,
and  that,  when  all  was  wrapped  in  darkness  and  obscu-
rity, the  resplendent  sun  came  up  out  of  this  island  of
Titicaca,  for  which  reason  it  was  considered  sacred,  and
the  Yncas  erected  a  temple  on  it  in  honour  of  the  sun,
which  was  much  revered  and  venerated  among  them,  and
which  contained  many  virgins  and  priests,  and  great  store
of  treasure,  of  which  the  Spaniards,  at  different  times,  have
collected  a  great  deal,  but  most  of  it  is  still  missing.^  If,
in  truth,  the  Indians  ever  really  were  in  want  of  light,
as  they  say,  it  must  have  been  owing  to  some  eclipse  of  the
sun ;  and,  as  they  are  such  sorcerers,  they  invented  this
fable,  in  which  they  were  assisted  by  the  illusions  of  the
devil,  God  permitting  it  for  their  sins.


CHAPTER    CIV.


Ill  which  the  narrative  continues,  and  the  villages  are  described  as  far
as  Tiahuanaco.

Eeturning  to  the  road  where  I  left  it,  which  was  at  Hatun-
colla,  I  have  to  say  that  it  passes  thence  by  Paucar-colla,

>  The  temple,  on  the  island  of  Titicaca,  was  one  of  the  most  sacred
in  Peru,  and  the  ruins  are  still  in  a  good  state  of  preservation.  The
buildings  are  of  hewn  stone,  with  doorways  wider  below  than  above.
But  they  are  inferior  to  those  on  the  adjacent  island  of  Coati.  See
Rlvero^  Antigvedadcs  Pernanas^  chap.  x.


PEDRO    DE    CTEZA    DE    LEON.  373

and  other  villages  of  this  nation  of  the  Collas,  to  Chucuito,
which  is  one  of  the  principal  and  most  complete  towns  in
any  part  of  this  great  kingdom,  and  is  the  chief  place  of
the  Indians  owned  by  his  Majesty  in  this  province.  It  is
certain,  too,  that  the  Yncas  in  former  times  held  Chucuito
to  be  an  important  place,  and,  according  to  the  accounts  of
the  Indians,  it  is  the  most  ancient  place  of  any  that  I  have
yet  described.  Cariapasa  was  the  chief  of  this  place,  and,
for  an  Indian,  was  a  very  intelligent  man.  There  are  large
buildings  here ;  and,  before  the  chiefs  were  subjugated
by  the  Yncas,  they  were  very  powerful,  among  whom  the
Indians  mention  two  as  the  principal,  named  Cari  and
Yumalla.  Chucuito  is  now,  as  I  have  said,  the  principal
village  of  the  Indians  of  his  Majesty,  whose  other  villages
are  Juli,  Chilane,  Acos,  Pomata,  and  Zepita,  in  which
there  are  chiefs  who  command  the  Indians.  When  I  passed
through  these  parts  the  corregidor  was  Simon  Pinto,  and
the  governor  was  an  Indian  named  Gaspar,  an  intelligent
and  clever  man.  The  natives  are  rich  in  flocks,  and  they
have  plenty  of  provisions.  In  other  parts  they  have  Miti-
maes  stationed  to  raise  their  maize  and  coca.  There  are
fine  churches  in  these  villages  founded  by  the  reverend  father
friar  Tomas  de  San  Martin,  principal  of  the  Dominicans.
The  young  men,  and  others  who  most  desire  it,  assemble  to
hear  the  evangehcal  doctrine  preached  by  the  friars  and
clergymen.  Most  of  the  chiefs  have  turned  Christians.
Near  Zepita  flows  the  Desaguadero,  where,  till  the  days  of
the  Yncas,  there  used  to  be  toll  takers  who  received  tribute
from  those  who  passed  over  the  bridge,  which  is  made  of
bundles  of  stalks,  in  such  sort  that  men  and  horses  can
cross  over  it.  In  one  of  these  \'illages,  called  Juli,  the
master  of  the  camp,  Francisco  de  Carbajal,  hung  the  captain
Hernando  Bachicao.^     This  is  one  of  the  examples  which

1  We  first  meet  ^vith  Hernando  Bachicao  as  a  captain  of  pikemen  in
the  army  of  Vaca  de  Castro.     Wlien  Gouzalo  Pizarro  rose  against  the


374  THE    TRAVELS    OP

show  us  that  the  civil  wars  and  troubles  in  Peru  were  the
scourges  of  God,  for  they  killed  each  other  with  great
cruelty,  as  I  shall  relate  in  the  proper  place.

Beyond  these  villages  is  Huaqui,  where  there  were  build-
ings of  the  Yncas,  one  of  which  is  now  a  church,  where  the
children  may  hear  the  Christian  doctrine  at  the  proper
hours.


CHAPTER     CV.

Of  the  village   of  Tiahuanaco,   and  of  the  great  and  ancient  edifices
wliich  are  to  be  seen  there.

Tiahuanaco  is  not  a  very  large  village,  but  it  is  celebrated
for  the  great  edifices  near  it,  which  are  certainly  things
worth  seeing.^     Near  the  buildings  there  is  a  hill  made  by

viceroy  Blasco  Nuiiez  de  Vela,  he  entrusted  Bachicao  with  the  formation
of  a  navy.  That  officer  took  command  of  a  brigantine  at  Callao,  which
had  just  arrived  from  Quilca,  and  sailed  up  the  coast.  At  Tumbez  he
found  the  viceroy,  who  fled  inland  on  his  approach  ;  and  Bachicao  seized
two  vessels.  Sailing  northward  he  captured  several  others,  and  with  the
fleet  thus  formed,  he  got  possession  of  the  city  of  Panama  in  ISIarch  1545.
Soon  afterwards  Gonzalo  Pizarro  appointed  Hinojosa  to  command  the
fleet,  and  superseded  Bachicao ;  who  then  joined  his  chief  with  reinforce-
ments from  Panama,  and  took  part  in  the  final  defeat  of  the  viceroy  at
Afiaquito,  where  he  commanded  the  pikemen.  At  the  battle  of  Huarina,
where  he  also  commanded  the  pikemen,  believing  that  the  forces  of
Centeno  were  about  to  gain  the  victory,  he  turned  traitor  and  deserted
his  colours ;  but  he  was  mistaken,  for  his  old  commander  Gonzalo  Pizarro
won  that  bloody  fight.  Bachicao,  therefore,  returned  to  Ms  own  side,
and  would  have  been  glad  if  his  conduct  had  escaped  observation.  But
the  eagle  eye  of  the  fiery  old  master  of  the  camp,  Carbajal,  was  not  to
be  deceived,  and  the  captain  Hernando  Bachicao  was  hung  by  his  order,
a  few  days  afterwards,  in  the  little  village  of  Juli,  on  the  western  shore
of  lake  Titicaca.

1  These  ruins  are  in  lat.  16°  42'  S.  long.  68"  42'  W.,  12,930  feet  above
the  level  of  the  sea,  and  twelve  miles  from  the  south  shore  of  lake  Titi-
caca. (See  ]VIr.  Bollacrt's  paper,  in  the  Intellectual  Observer  for  ]\lay
186;}.)


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  375

the  hands  of  men,  on  great  foundations  of  stone.^  Beyond
this  hill  there  are  two  stone  idols,  of  the  human  shape  and
figure,  the  features  very  skilfully  carved,  so  that  they  appear
to  have  been  done  by  the  hand  of  some  great  master.  They
are  so  large  that  they  seem  like  small  giants,  and  it  is  clear
that  they  have  on  a  sort  of  clothing  different  from  those
now  worn  by  the  natives  of  these  parts.  They  seem  to
have  some  ornament  on  their  heads.-  Near  these  stone
statues  there  is  another  building.  Their  antiquity  and  the
want  of  letters,  are  the  causes  why  it  is  not  known  who
built  such  vast  foundations,  and  how  much  time  has  since
elapsed;  for  at  present  there  is  only  a  wall  very  well
built,  and  which  must  have  been  standing  for  many  ages.
Some  of  the  stones  are  much  worn.  At  this  part  there  are
stones  of  such  enormous  size  that  it  causes  wonder  to  think
of  them,  and  to  reflect  how  human  force  can  have  sufficed  to
move  them  to  the  place  where  we  see  them,  being  so  large.
Many  of  these  stones  are  carved  in  different  ways,  some  of
them  having  the  shape  of  the  human  body,  which  must  have

»  It  is  918  feet  long,  -400  broad,  and  100  to  120  in  height.

2  The  head  of  one  of  these  statues  is  3  feet  6  inches  long,  from  the
point  of  the  beard  to  the  upper  part  of  the  ornamental  head  dress  ;  and
from  the  nose  to  the  back  of  the  head  it  measures  2  feet  7  inches.  It  is
adorned  with  a  species  of  round  cap,  1  foot  7  inches  high,  and  2  feet
5  inches  in  width.  In  the  upper  part  are  certain  wide  vertical  bands,
and  in  the  lower  are  symbohcal  figui-es  with  himian  faces.  From  the
eyes,  which  are  large  and  round,  two  wide  bands,  each  with  three  double
cii'cles,  project  to  the  chin.  From  the  outer  part  of  each  eye  a  band
descends,  adorned  with  two  squares  terminating  in  a  serpent.  The  nose
is  shghtly  prominent,  siuTounded  on  the  lower  side  by  a  wide  semicircular
band,  and  terminating  towards  the  inner  side  of  the  eyes  in  two  corners.
The  mouth  fonus  a  transverse  oval,  garnished  with  sixteen  teeth.  From
the  imder  hp  projects,  in  the  form  of  a  beard,  six  bands,  towards  the
edge  of  the  cliin.  The  ear  is  represented  by  a  semi-lunar  figure  in  a
square,  and  in  the  fore-part  of  it  is  a  vertical  band  with  thi-ee  squares,
terminating  in  the  head  of  a  wild  beast.  On  the  neck  there  are  many'
himian  figures.  The  sculptiu-e  of  this  head  is  very  remarkable.  Anti-
(jneUades  Ftruanas,  p.  295.


376  THE    TEAVELS    OF

been  their  idols.  Near  the  wall  there  are  many  holes  and  hol-
low places  in  the  ground.  In  another,  more  to  the  westward,
there  are  other  ancient  remains,  among  them  many  doorways,
with  their  jambs,  lintels,  and  thresholds,  all  of  one  stone.^
But  what  I  noted  most  particularly,  when  I  wandered  about
over  these  ruins  writing  down  what  I  saw,  was  that  from
these  great  doorways  there  came  out  other  still  larger  stones,
upon  which  the  doorways  were  formed,  some  of  them  thirty
feet  broad,  fifteen  or  more  long,  and  six  in  thickness.  The
whole  of  this,  with  the  doorway  and  its  jambs  and  lintel,  was
all  one  single  stone.  The  work  is  one  of  grandeur  and
magnificence,  when  well  considered.  For  myself  I  fail  to
understand  with  what  instruments  or  tools  it  can  have  been
done ;  for  it  is  very  certain  that  before  these  great  stones
could  be  brought  to  perfection  and  left  as  we  see  them,  the
tools  must  have  been  much  better  than  those  now  used  by
the  Indians.  It  is  to  be  noted,  from  what  now  appears  of
these  edifices,  that  they  were  not  completed,  for  there  is
nothing  but  these  portals,  and  other  stones  of  strange  big-

'  Of  these  huge  monolithic  doorways  there  is  one  block  of  hard  tra-
chytic  rock  measuring  10  feet  in  height  by  13  wide,  and  another  7  feet
in  height.  In  the  former  block  a  doorway  is  cut,  which  is  6  feet  4  inches
high,  and  3  feet  2  inches  wide.  On  its  eastern  side  there  is  a  cornice,
in  the  centre  of  which  a  hirnian  figure  is  carved.  The  head  is  ahnost
square,  and  there  proceed  from  it  several  rays,  amongst  which  four
snakes  can  be  discerned.  The  arms  are  extended,  and  each  hand  holds
a  snake  with  a  crowned  head.  The  body  is  covered  with  an  em-
broidered garment,  and  the  short  feet  rest  upon  a  pedestal,  also  orna-
mented with  symbolical  figures.  On  each  side  of  this  figure  there  are
a  number  of  small  squai'es  on  the  cornice,  in  tlu-ee  rows,  each  containing
a  human  figure  in  profile  with  a  walking-stick  in  the  hand.  Each
row  has  sixteen  figures,  the  central  row  with  birels'  heads.  Aniiguedades
Feruanas^  p.  296.

Acosta  says  that  he  measured  one  of  the  great  stones  at  Tiahuanaco,
and  found  it  to  be  38  feet  long,  18  broad,  and  6  deep,  llistoria  Natural
de  las  Indias,  lib.  vi,  cap.  1-4,  p.  419.

(In  the  Intellectual  Observer  for  jNIay  1SG3,  there  is  an  excellent  en-
graving of  one  of  the  great  monolithic  doorways  at  Tiahuanaco,  to  illus-
trate a  paper  by  Mr.  Bollaert.)


I'EDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  377

ncss  wliich  I  saw,  some  of  them  shaped  aud  dressed  ready-
to  be  placed  on  the  edifice,  which  was  a  little  on  one  side.
Here  there  was  a  great  idol  of  stone,  which  must  have  been
placed  there  to  be  worshipped.  It  is  rumoured  that  some
gold  was  found  near  this  idol ;  and  all  round  there  are  more
stones,  large  and  small,  all  dressed  and  fitted  like '  those
already  described.^

•  The  famous  ruins  of  Tiahuanaco,  generally  considerefl  to  be  long
anterior  to  the  time  of  the  Yncas,  appear,  like  those  at  Ollantay-tambo,
to  be  remains  of  edifices  which  were  never  completed.

Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  gives  the  following  account  of  Tiahuanaco.
"  Amongst  other  works  in  this  place,  one  of  them  is  a  hill,  made  artifi-
cially, and  so  high  that  the  fact  of  its  having  been  made  by  man  causes
astonishment ;  and,  that  it  might  not  be  loosened,  it  was  built  upon  great
foundations  of  stone.  It  is  not  known  why  tliis  edifice  was  made.  In
another  part,  away  from  the  liill,  there  were  two  figures  of  giants  carved
in  stone,  with  long  robes  down  to  the  ground,  and  caps  on  their  heads  :
all  well  worn  by  the  hand  of  time,  which  proves  their  great  antiquity.
There  is  also  an  enormous  wall  of  stones,  so  large  that  the  greatest  won-
der is  caused  to  imagine  how  hiunan  force  could  have  raised  them  to  the
place  where  they  now  are.  For  there  are  no  rocks  nor  quarries  within  a
gi-eat  distance,  from  whence  they  could  have  been  brought.  In  other
parts  there  are  grand  edifices,  and  what  causes  most  astonishment  are  some
great  doorways  of  stone,  some  of  them  made  out  of  one  single  stone.  The
marvel  is  increased  by  their  wonderful  size,  for  some  of  them  were  found
to  measuj-e  30  feet  in  length,  15  in  breadth,  and  6  in  depth.  And  these
stones,  with  their  doorways,  are  all  of  one  single  piece,  so  that  it  cannot
be  understood  with  what  instnunents  or  tools  they  can  have  been  worked.

"  The  natives  say  that  all  these  edifices  were  built  before  the  time  of  the
Yncas,  and  that  the  Yncas  biult  the  fortress  of  Cuzco  in  imitation  of  them.
They  know  not  who  erected  them,  but  have  heard  their  forefathers  say
that  all  these  wonderful  works  were  completed  in  a  single  night.  The
ruins  appear  never  to  have  been  finished,  but  to  have  been  merely  the  com-
mencement of  what  the  founders  intended  to  have  buUt.  All  the  above
is  from  Pedro  de  Cieza  de  Leon,  in  his  105th  chapter ;  to  which  I  pro-
pose to  add  some  further  particular  obtained  from  a  schoolfellow  of  mine,
a  priest  named  Diego  de  Alcobasa  (who  I  may  call  my  brother,  for  we
were  born  in  the  same  house,  and  his  father  brought  me  up).  Amongst
other  accounts,  which  he  and  others  have  sent  me  from  my  native  laud,
he  says  the  following  respecting  these  great  edifices  of  Tiahuanaco.
'  In  Tiahuanaco,  in  the  province  of  CoUao,  amongst  other  things,  there
are  some  ancient  ruins  worthy  of  immortal  memory.     They  are  near  the


378  THE    TRAVELS    OF

There  are  other  things  to  be  said  concerning  Tiahuanaco,
which  I  pass  over^  concluding  with  a  statement  of  my  be-
Hef  that  this  ruin  is  the  most  ancient  in  all  Peru.  It  is
asserted  that  these  edifices  were  commenced  before  the
time  of  the  Yncas^  and  I  have  heard  some  Indians  affirm

lake  called  by  the  Spaniards  Chucuito,  the  proper  name  of  which  is
Chuquivitu.  Here  there  are  some  very  grand  edifices,  and  amongst  them
there  is  a  square  coiu-t,  15  brazas  each  way,  with  waUs  two  stories  high.  On
one  side  of  this  court  there  is  a  hall  45  feet  long  by  22  broad,  apparently  once
covered,  in  the  same  way  as  those  buildings  you  have  seen  in  the  house  of
the  sun  at  Cuzco,  with  a  roof  of  straw.  The  walls,  roofs,  floor,  and  door-
ways are  aU  of  one  single  piece,  carved  out  of  a  rock,  and  the  walls  of
the  court  and  of  the  ball  are  three-quarters  of  a  yard  in  breadth.  The
roof  of  the  hall,  though  it  appears  to  be  thatch,  is  really  of  stone.  For
as  the  Indians  cover  their  houses  with  thatch,  in  order  that  this  might
appear  like  the  rest,  they  have  combed  and  carved  the  stone  so  that  it
resembles  a  roof  of  thatch.  The  waters  of  the  lake  wash  the  walls  of  the
court.  The  natives  say  that  this  and  the  other  buildings  were  dedicated
to  the  Creator  of  the  imiverse.  There  are  also  many  other  stones  carved
into  the  shape  of  men  and  women  so  naturally  that  they  appear  to  be
alive,  some  drinking  with  cujjs  in  their  hands,  others  sitting,  others
standing,  and  others  walking  in  the  stream  which  flows  by  the  walls.
There  are  also  statues  of  women  with  their  infants  in  their  laps,  others
with  them  on  their  backs,  and  in  a  thousand  other  postiu-es.  The  Indians
say  that  for  the  great  sins  of  the  people  of  those  times,  and  because  they
stoned  a  man  who  was  passing  tln-ough  the  province,  they  were  all  con-
verted into  these  statues.'

"  Thus  far  are  the  words  of  Diego  de  Alcobasa,  who  has  been  a  vicar
and  preacher  to  the  Indians  in  many  provinces  of  this  kingdom,  having
been  sent  by  his  superiors  from  one  part  to  another  :  for,  being  a  mestizo
and  native  of  Cuzco,  he  knows  the  language  of  the  Indians  better  than
others  who  are  born  in  the  country,  and  his  laboiu's  bear  more  fruit."

The  part  of  the  country  in  which  Tia-huanaco  is  situated,  was  first
conquered  by  Mayta  Ccapac,  the  fourth  Ynca.  The  name  is  derived
from  a  circumstance  connected  with  the  conquest.  It  is  said  that,  while
the  Ynca  was  engaged  in  this  campaign  against  the  Aymara  nation,  and
being  encamped  amongst  the  ruins,  a  Cauari  Indian,  serving  as  a  chasqui
or  cornier,  arrived  from  Cuzco  in  an  extraordinarily  short  space  of  time.
The  Ynca  exclaimed  Tia  (Be  seated)  Huanaco  :  the  huanaco  being  the
swiftest  anunal  in  Peru.  Thus,  like  Luxor,  and  so  many  other  famous
places,  these  wonderful  ruins  have  received  a  compai'atively  modern  name,
which  has  no  real  connection  with  their  liistory.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  379

that  the  Yncas  built  their  grand  edifices  at  Cuzco  on  the
plan  which  they  had  observed  at  the  wall  near  these  ruins.
They  even  say  that  the  first  Yncas  thought  of  estabhshing
their  court  at  Tiahuanaco.  Another  remarkable  thing  is,
that  in  all  this  district  there  are  no  quarries  whence  the
numerous  stones  can  have  been  brought,  the  carrying  of
which  must  have  required  many  people.  I  asked  the
natives,  in  presence  of  Juan  de  Varagas  (who  holds  them
in  encomienda),  whether  these  edifices  were  built  in  the  time
of  the  Yncas,  and  they  laughed  at  the  question,  affirming
that  they  were  made  before  the  Yncas  ever  reigned,  but
that  they  could  not  say  who  made  them.  They  added  that
they  had  heard  from  their  fathers  that  all  we  saw  was  done
in  one  night.  From  this,  and  from  the  fact  that  they  also
speak  of  bearded  men  on  the  island  of  Titicaca,  and  of  others
who  built  the  edifice  of  Vinaque,^  it  may,  perhaps,  be  in-
ferred that,  before  the  Yncas  reigned,  there  was  an  intelli-
gent race  who  came  from  some  unknown  part,  and  who  did
these  things.  Being  few,  and  the  natives  many,  they  may
all  have  been  killed  in  the  wars.

Seeing  that  all  these  things  are  hidden  from  us,  we  may
well  say.  Blessed  be  the  invention  of  letters  !  by  virtue  of
which  the  memory  of  events  endures  for  many  ages,  and
their  fame  flies  through  the  universe.  We  are  not  ignorant
of  what  we  desire  to  know  when  we  hold  letters  in  our
hands.  But  in  this  new  world  of  the  Indies,  as  they  knew
nothing  of  letters,  we  are  in  a  state  of  bhndness  concerning
many  things.  Apart  from  these  ruins  there  are  the  build-
ings of  the  Yncas,  and  the  house  where  Manco  Ynca,  the
son  of  Huayna  Ccapac,  was  born.  Close  by  are  the  tombs
of  the  native  chiefs  of  this  place,  as  high  as  towers,  broad
and  square,  with  doors  towards  the  rising  sun.

>  See  chapter  Ixxxvii.


380  THE    TRAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    CYI.

Of  the  fovmding  of  the  city  called  of  Our  Lady  of  Peace,  who  was  its
founder,  and  of  the  road  thence  to  the  town  of  Plata.

From  the  village  of  Tialiuanaco  the  road  leads  to  Yiaclia,  a
distance  of  seven  leagues^  leaving  tlie  villages  called  Cacay-
avire,  Caquinhora^  MaUama^  and  otliers  on  tlie  left  liand ;
but  it  seems  to  me  of  little  use  to  name  them  all.  In  the
midst  of  them  is  the  plain  near  another  village  called
Huarina ;  the  place  where,  in  the  days  that  are  passed,
there  was  a  battle  between  Diego  Centeno  and  Gonzalo
Pizarro.^  It  was  a  memorable  event,  as  I  shall  show  in  the
proper  place,  and  many  captains  and  knights  of  the  King's
party  fell,  fighting  under  the  banner  of  the  captain  Diego
Centeno,  as  well  as  some  of  those  who  were  the  accom-
phces  of  G-onzalo  PizaiTO.  God  was  served  by  the  rebel
being  the  victor  in  this  battle.  To  reach  the  city  of  La
Paz,  it  is  necessary  to  leave  the  royal  road  of  the  Yncas,
and  to  go  to  the  village  of  Laxa.  The  city  is  a  day's  journey
further  on,  built  in  the  narrow  part  of  a  small  valley  formed
by  the  mountains.  It  was  founded  in  the  most  level  part
that  could  be  selected,  for  the  sake  of  the  wood  and  water,
of  which  there  is  much  in  this  small  valley,  as  the  chmate  is
warmer  than  on  the  plains  of  the  CoUao,  which  are  higher,
and  where  there  are  none  of  the  things  necessary  for  a
large  city.  Notwithstanding  all  this,  the  citizens  have
thought  of  moving  nearer  to  the  great  lake  of  Titicaca,
between  the  villages  of  Huaqui  and  Tiahuanaco.  Yet  the
city  has  remained  in  the  vaUey  of  Chuquiapu  where,  in
former  years,  great  quantities  of  gold  were  taken  out  of  the

»  On  the  26th  of  October  1547  Centeno  mustered  a  thousand  men,  of
whom  250  were  mounted.  Gonzalo  Pizarro's  force  barely  amoimted  to  400
infantry  and  85  cavalry.  Pizarro  gained  a  complete  victory,  and  350  of .
Centeno's  followers  were  killed.


I'EDRO    DK    CIEZA    DE    LEON.


381


rich  mines  that  are  there.  The  Yncas  held  this  Cliuquiapu
in  great  estimation.  Near  it  is  the  valley  of  Oyune^  where
they  say  that  there  is  a  great  treasure  hidden  in  a  temple
on  the  summit  of  a  snowy  mountain,  but  it  cannot  be  found,
nor  is  it  known  where  it  is.

This  city  of  La  Paz  was  founded  by  the  captain  Alonzo
de  Mendoza,  in  the  name  of  the  Emperor  our  lord,  when
the  licentiate  Pedro  de  la  Gasca  was  president  of  this  king-
dom, in  the  year  of  our  redemption  1549.^  In  the  valley
formed  by  the  mountains,  where  the  city  is  built,  they  raise
a  few  trees,  some  maize,  and  the  pulses  and  garden  stuffs
of  Spain.  The  Spaniards  are  here  well  supphed  with  pro-
\nsions  and  with  fish  from  the  lake,  as  well  as  with  plenty
of  fruit  from  the  warm  valleys,  where  they  also  grow  a
great  quantity  of  wheat,  and  breed  goats,  cows,  and  other
animals.  This  city  has  very  rugged  and  difficult  approaches,
being,  as  I  have  said,  amongst  the  mountains.  A  small
river  of  excellent  water  flows  near  it.

The  distance  from  this  city  of  La  Paz  to  the  town  of
Plata,  which  is  in  the  province  of  Charcas,  is  ninety  leagues,
a  little  more  or  less.  I  will  now  return  to  the  royal  road
which  I  had  left,  and  I  have  to  say  that  it  goes  from  Viacha
to  Hayohayo,  where  there  were  great  buildings  for  the
Yncas.  Beyond  Hayohayo  is  Sicasica,  to  which  point  the
province  of  Colloa  extends.  On  both  sides  of  these  villages
there  are  several  more.  Eleven  leagues  beyond  Sicasica  is
the  village  of  Caracollo,  which  is  built  in  a  certain  plain  near
the  great  province  of  Paria,  which  was  highly  esteemed  by

'  The  president  Gasca  ordered  Don  Alonzo  de  INIendoza,  an  officer  who
had  come  over  to  hmi  from  the  party  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  to  found  a  new
city  south  of  lake  Titicaca,  which  was  to  be  called  "  La  Ciudad  de
Nuestra  Senora  de  la  Paz  ;"  to  commemorate  the  peace  which  had  been
established,  after  the  overthrow  of  the  rebel  Gonzalo  Pizarro.  It  was
deemed  convenient  that  there  should  be  a  Spanish  settlement  between
Cuzco  and  the  rich  silver-yielding  province  of  Charcas,  and  thus  the
building  of  the  city  of  La  Paz  was  commenced.  It  is  now  one  of  the
principal  towns  in  the  modern  Republic  of  Bolivia.


382  THE    TEAYELS    OF

tlie  Yncas.  The  natives  of  this  province  of  Paria  are
clothed  hke  all  the  rest^  and  thej  wear,  as  an  ornamental
head-dress,  a  small  woollen  cap.  The  chiefs  were  much
reverenced  by  the  Indians,  and  there  were  rojal  edifices
and  store-houses  of  the  Yncas,  and  a  temple  of  the  sun.
Here  there  are  a  great  many  lofty  tombs  where  they  buried
their  dead.  The  villages  of  Indians  subject  to  Paria  are
Caponota  and  many  others,  some  near  the  lake,  and  some
in  different  parts  of  the  district.  Beyond  Paria  are  the
villages  of  Pocoata,  Macha,  Coracora,  Moromoro,  and  near
the  Andes  there  are  other  provinces  and  great  chiefs.


CHAPTER    CYII.


Of  the  founding  of  the  town  of  Plata,  wliich  is  situated  in  the  province
of  Charcas.

The  noble  and  loyal  town  of  Plata,  a  settlement  of  Spaniards
in  Chuquisaca  (in  the  province  of  Charcas),  is  very  famous
throughout  the  kingdoms  of  Peru,  and  in  other  parts  of  the
world,  for  the  great  treasure  which,  in  these  latter  years,
has  been  brought  thence  to  Spain.  This  town  is  built  in
the  best  situation  that  could  be  found,  in  a  place,  as  I  have
abeady  said,  which  is  called  Chuquisaca.^  The  climate  is
temperate,  and  well  suited  for  the  growth  of  fruit  trees,
vines,  wheat  and  barley,  and  other  things.  At  present  the
farms  and  lands  are  very  valuable  by  reason  of  the  rich
mines  that  have  been  discovered  at  Potosi.  Several  rivers
of  very  good  water  flow  near,  and  many  cows,  mares,  and
goats  are  bred  on  the  estates  of  the  Spaniards.  Some  of
the  citizens  of  this  town  are  among  the  richest  and  most
prosperous  people  in  the  Indies,  for  in  the  years  1548  and

>  It  is  now  known  as  the  city  of  Chuquisaca,  or  Sucre,  and  is  the  capital
of  the  repubhc  of  BoHvia.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  383

1549  a  reparUmiento  belonging  to  the  general  Pedro  de
Hinojosa^  yielded  a  rent  of  more  than  one  hundred  thousand
castellanos,  and  others  yielded  eighty  thousand,  some  even
more.  The  treasure  that  was  found  in  those  times  was  a
wonderful  thing.  This  town  of  Plata  was  settled  and  founded
by  the  captain  Peransurez,  in  the  name  of  his  Majesty  the
emperor  and  king  our  lord,  the  Adelantado  Don  Francisco
Pizarro  being  his  governor  and  captain-general  of  Peru,  in
the  year  1538.  Besides  the  villages  already  mentioned,
this  town  has  jurisdiction  over  Totora,  Tapacan,  Sipisipe,
Cochabamba,  the  Carangues,  Quillanca,  Chayanta,  Chaqui,
the  Chichas,  and  many  others,  all  very  rich,  and  some,  like
the  valley  of  Cochabamba,  suited  for  the  growth  of  wheat
and  maize,  and  for  breeding  cattle.  Beyond  this  town  is
the  province  of  Tuquma,  and  the  regions  which  were  entered
and  discovered  by  the  captains  Felipe  Gutierrez,  Diego  de
Eojas,  and  Nicolas  de  Heredia,  in  which  direction  they
discovered  the  river  of  La  Plata,  and  reached  the  fortress
which  was  built  by  Sebastian  Cabota.  Diego  de  Rojas
died  of  a  wound  from  an  arrow  poisoned  with  the  herb  used
by  the  Indians,  and  afterwards  Francisco  de  Mendoza
seized  Felipe  Gutierrez,  and  obliged  hiin  to  return  to  Peru.
The  same  Francisco  de  Mendoza,  when  he  returned  to
discover  the  river,  was  killed,  together  with  his  heutenant

1  Pecli-o  de  Hinojosa  is  first  heard  of  as  fighting  bravely  against
Ahnagro  the  younger,  in  the  battle  of  Chiipas.  He  afterwards  joined
the  fortunes  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  and  that  ill-fated  cliief  entrusted  him
with  the  command  of  Panama  and  of  the  fleet.  On  the  arrival  of  the
president  Gasca  from  Spain,  Hinojosa,  after  some  montlis  of  hesitation,
betrayed  his  trust,  and  handed  over  the  fleet  to  the  wily  ecclesiastic  on
November  19th,  1546.  He  was  rewarded  by  being  appointed  Gasca's
general  by  land  and  sea,  and  commanded  the  troops  at  the  final  over-
throw of  his  old  commander  on  the  plain  of  Xaquixaguana.  Gasca
granted  Gonzalo  Pizarro's  valuable  estates  and  mines  in  Charcas  to
Hinojosa.  He  was  also  apjiointed  corregidor  of  Charcas,  where  he  was
assassinated  two  years  afterwards  in  a  mutiny  headed  by  Sebastian  dc
Castilla.


384  THE    TRAVELS    OF

Ruy  Sanchez  de  Hinojosa^  by  Nicolas  de  Heredia.  Tlius
these  parts  were  not  entirely  discovered^  owing  to  the
quarrels  and  feuds  amongst  the  explorers,  who  returned  to
Peru.  Here  they  met  with  Lope  de  Mendoza,  the  lieu-
tenant of  Diego  Centeno,  who  was  flying  from  the  fury  of
Carbajal,  Gonzalo  Pizarro^s  captain  ;  and  joined  him.  They
were  defeated  by  the  same  Carbajal  at  a  village  called
Pocona,  and  soon  afterwards  Lope  de  Mendoza  and  Nicolas
de  Heredia  fell  into  his  power,  and  were  put  to  death  by
him,  with  others.'

Further  on  is  the  government  of  Chile,  of  which  Pedro  de
Valdivia  is  the  governor,  and  other  lands  bordering  on  the
strait  which  is  called  Magellanes.  But  as  the  affairs  of
Chile  are  important,  and  require  a  special  narrative,  1  have
only  written  what  I  saw  between  Uraba  and  Potosi,  which
is  near  this  town,  a  road  of  such  length  that  it  must  be
(from  the  borders  of  Uraba  to  the  further  end  of  the  town
of  Plata)  a  good  two  thousand  two  hundred  leagues,  as  I
have  already  stated.  I  shall  not  go  further  in  this  my  first
part,  except  to  say  that  the  Indians  subject  to  the  town  of
Plata  have  the  same  customs  as  those  of  other  parts.  After
they  were  conquered  by  the  Yncas,  their  villages  were  well
ordered,  and  both  men  and  women  wore  clothes.  They
worshipped  the  sun  and  other  things,  and  had  temples  in
which  they  performed  their  sacrifices.  Many  of  them,  such
as  the  Charcas  and  Carangues,  were  very  warlike.      From

•  Before  the  defeat  and  death  of  the  viceroy  Blasco  Nunez  de  Vela,
near  Quito  in  January  1546,  Gonzalo  Pizarro  had  sent  his  lieutenant
Carbajal  to  reduce  the  province  of  Charcas,  and  put  down  a  revolt
headed  by  Diego  Centeno  and  Lope  de  Mendoza.  Centeno  fled,  closely
pursued  by  Carbajal,  and  hid  himself  in  a  cave  somewhere  near  Arequipa
for  eight  months.  The  aged  veteran  Francisco  de  Carbajal,  having  run
this  fox  to  earth,  then  marched  into  Charcas,  and  captured  Lope  de
Mendoza  and  Nicolas  de  Heredia,  both  of  whom  he  hung.  Carbajal
sent  the  heads  of  his  victims  to  Arequipa,  while  he  busied  himself  in  col-
lecting silver  from  the  rich  mines  of  Potosi,  to  supply  the  needs  of  his
commander.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  386

this  town  captains  and  soldiers  set  out  to  serve  his  Majesty
several  times  during  the  late  wars,  and  they  sei"ved  loyally.
With  this  I  make  an  end  of  what  I  have  to  say  touching
the  founding  of  the  town  of  Plata.


CHAPTER    CVIII.


Of  the  riches  in  Porco,  and  how  there  are  large  veins  of  silver  near
that  town.

It  appears  from  what  the  Indians  now  say  that,  in  the
times  when  the  Kings  Yncas  governed  this  kingdom  of  Peru,
they  obtained  a  great  quantity  of  silver  from  some  parts
of  this  province  of  Charcas,  and  Indians  were  stationed
there,  who  gave  the  metal  to  the  overseers  or  their  deputies.'
In  the  hill  of  Porco,  which  is  near  the  town  of  Plata,  there
were  mines  out  of  which  the  Indians  got  silver  for  their  lords.
Much  of  the  silver  which  was  in  the  temple  of  the  sun,
called  Ccuri-cancha,  is  said  to  have  been  taken  from  this
hill,  and  the  Spaniards  have  also  got  a  great  deal  out  of  it.
In  the  present  year  a  mine  belonging  to  the  captain  Her-
nando Pizarro  has  been  cleaned  out,  which  was  worth  more
than  two  hundred  thousand  pe^ios  of  gold  every  year,  An-
tonio Alvarez,  an  inhabitant  of  this  town,  showed  me,  in  the
City  of  the  Kings,  a  little  ore  taken  from  this  hill  of  Porco,
which  appeared  to  be  nearly  all  silver.  In  short,  Porco  was
in  former  times  extremely  rich,  and  is  so  still,  and  it  may  be
behoved  that  it  always  will  be.  In  many  neighbouring-
hills,   within    the  jurisdiction  of  this  town   of  Plata,   rich

>  The  ancient  Peruvians  knew  of  gold,  silver,  copper,  tin,  and  quick-
silver. They  took  the  silver  from  mines  which  were  not  very  deep,  aban-
doning them  as  soon  as  the  hardness  of  the  ore  offered  a  resistance  sufficient
to  withstand  their  imperfect  tools.  They  not  only  knew  native  silver,  but
also  its  chemical  combinations,  such  as  the  sulphate,  antimonial  silver,  etc.
They  also  knew  how  to  extract  the  pure  metal  from  these  compounds  by
fusion,  or  in  portable  stoves.

cc


386  THE    TRAVELS    OP

mines  of  gold  and  silver  have  been  found.  It  may  be  held
for  certain  that  there  is  so  much  of  this  metal  that  if  there
were  those  to  seek  and  extract  it^  they  would  get  httle  less
than^  in  the  province  of  Biscay,  they  get  iron.  But  as  it
must  be  got  out  by  Indians,  and  as  the  country  is  too  cold
for  Negroes,  there  are  reasons  enough  why  such  great
wealth  is  lost.  I  have  also  to  say  that  in  some  parts  of  the
district  belonging  to  the  town  of  Plata  there  are  rivers
which  bring  down  very  fine  gold.  In  the  Chichas,  villages
given  in  encoinienda  to  Hernando  Pizarro,  and  subject  to
this  town,  it  is  said  that  there  are  some  silver  mines ;  and
great  rivers  rise  in  the  Andes,  near  which,  if  gold  mines
were  sought  for,  I  hold  that  they  would  be  found.^


CHAPTER    CIX.


How  they  discovered  the  mines  of  Potosi,  whence  they  have  taken  riches
such  as  have  never  been  seen  or  heard  of  in  other  times  ;  and  how,
as  the  metal  does  not  run,  the  Indians  get  it  by  the  invention  of
the  huayras.

The  mines  of  Porco,  and  others  in  this  kingdom,  have  been
open  since  the  time  of  the  Yncas,  when  the  veins  whence
they  extract  the  metal  were  discovered ;  but  those  which
they  have  found  in  the  hill  of  Potosi  (concerning  which  I
now  desire  to  write)  were  never  worked  until  the  year
1546.  A  Spaniard  named  Villaroel  was  searching  for  veins
of  metal  with  some  Indians,  when  he  came  upon  this  wealth
in  a  high  hill,  being  the  most  beautiful  and  best  situated  in
all  that  district.  As  the  Indians  call  all  hills  and  lofty
eminences  Potosi,  it  retained  that  name.  Although  Gonzalo
Pizarro  was  then  waging  war  against  the  viceroy,  and  the

^  The  gold  mines  of  Tipuani,  to  the  eastward  of  the  Andes  of  BoUvia,
are  the  richest  in  South  America.  See  an  account  of  the  method  of
working  them  in  Bonelh's  Travels  in  Bolivia^  i,  p.  268.


PBDKO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  387

whole  kingdom  was  troubled  with  this  rebellion,  the  skirts
of  the  hill  were  soon  peopled,  and  many  large  houses  were
built.  The  Spaniards  made  their  principal  settlement  in  this
place,  the  court  of  justice  was  removed  to  it,  and  the  town  of
Plata  was  almost  deserted.  They  discovered  five  very  rich
veins  on  the  upper  part  of  the  hill,  called  the  ''rich  vein,'^  the
"vein  of  tin,^^  etc.  This  wealth  became  so  famous,  that  Indians
came  from  all  parts  to  extract  silver  from  the  hill.  The  climate
is  cold,  and  there  are  no  inhabited  places  in  the  vicinity.
When  the  Spaniards  had  taken  possession,  they  began  to
extract  the  silver,  and  he  who  had  a  mine  gave  each  Indian
who  entered  it  a  marc,  or,  if  he  was  very  rich,  two  marcs
every  week.  So  many  people  came  to  work  the  mines,  that
the  place  appeared  hke  a  great  city.  That  the  greatness
of  these  mines  may  be  known,  I  will  say  what  I  saw  in  the
year  of  our  Lord  1549  in  this  place,  when  the  licentiate
Polo^  was  corregidor  of  the  town  of  Plata  for  his  Majesty.
Every  Saturday  the  metal  was  melted  down  in  his  house,
and  of  the  royal  fifths  there  came  to  his  Majesty  thirty
thousand  or  twenty-five  thousand  pesos,  and  sometimes
forty  thousand.  And  while  extracting  such  immense  wealth,
that  the  fifth  of  the  silver,  which  belonged  to  his  Majesty,
came  to  more  than  one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  cas-
tellanos"  every  month,  they  said  there  was  little  silver,  and

>  The  licentiate  Polo  de  Ondegardo  was  aj^poiuted  corregidor  of
Charcas  by  the  president  Gasca,  and  subsequently  of  Cuzco,  where  he
remained  for  several  years.  He  was  the  author  of  two  Eelaciones,  or
reports  to  the  government,  the  first  addi-essed  to  the  viceroy  INIarquis  of
Canete  in  1561,  and  the  second  to  the  Coimt  of  Nieva.  They  contain
an  account  of  the  laws,  habits,  religion,  and  poUcy  of  the  Yncas.  Un-
fortunately these  valuable  documents  have  never  been  printed,  and  IVIr.
Prescott  obtained  copies  both  of  them  and  of  the  equally  important
manuscript  of  Sarmiento  from  Lord  Kingsborough's  collection,  through
the  agency  of  ]\Ir.  Rich.  Their  pubhcation  would  be  a  great  boon  to
the  student  of  ancient  South  American  civilisation.  See  Prescott's
Peru,  i,  p.  162,  etc.

-  A  castellano  was  worth  about  £2  12s   6d.  of  our  money.

CC  2


388  THE    TRAVELS    OF

that  the  mines  were  not  well  worked.  Yet  this  metal,
which  was  brought  to  be  melted,  was  only  what  belonged  to
the  Christians^  and  not  even  all  that,  for  a  great  deal  was
taken  in  pure  bits  and  carried  oflf ;  and  it  may  be  believed
that  the  Indians  took  a  great  deal  to  their  own  homes.  It
may  with  truth  be  asserted  that  in  no  part  of  the  world
could  so  rich  a  hill  be  found,  and  that  no  prince  receives
such  profits  and  rents  as  this  famous  town  of  Plata.  From
the  year  1548  to  1551  the  royal  fifths  were  valued  at  more
than  three  millions  of  ducats,  which  is  more  than  the  Span-
iards got  from  Atahualpa,  and  more  than  was  found  in  the
city  of  Cuzco,  when  it  was  first  occupied.^  It  appears  that
the  silver  ore  cannot  be  made  to  run  by  the  bellows,  nor
can  it  be  converted  into  silver  by  means  of  fire  at  Potosi.
In  Porco,  and  in  other  parts  of  the  kingdom  where  they
extract  metal,  they  make  great  plates  of  silver,  and  the
metal  is  purified  and  separated  from  the  dross  by  fire,  in
which  operation  large  bellows  are  used.  But  in  Potosi,
although  this  plan  has  been  tried,  it  has  never  succeeded ;

'  Acosta  says  that  in  his  time  there  were  four  principal  veins  of  silver
on  the  hill  of  Potosi,  called  La  Rica^  Centeno^  Estano  (tin),  and  Mendietu.
They  were  all  on  the  east  side,  and  ran  in  a  north  and  south  direction.
There  were  many  other  smaller  veins  which  branch  off  from  these  four,
and  in  each  vein  there  were  several  mines.  In  La  Rica  there  were
seventy-eight  mines,  which  were  very  deep ;  and  to  remedy  the  evils
caused  by  their  great  depth,  horizontal  excavations,  called  socabones,
were  made  in  the  sides  of  the  hill,  and  continued  untd  they  met  the  veins.
The  mines  of  Potosi  were  discovered  by  an  Indian  named  Hualpa,  a
native  of  Chumbivilica  near  Cuzco.  He  was  clmibing  up  a  steejj  part  of
the  hiU  in  chase  of  deer,  and  helj^ing  his  ascent  by  catching  hold  of  the
quenua  shrubs  {Polylepis  tomentella^  Wedd.)  wliich  grow  there.  One
of  the  shrubs  came  ujo  by  the  roots,  and  disclosed  a  quantity  of  native
silver,  which  was  the  commencement  of  the  vein  called  La  Rica.  He
secretly  worked  the  vein  himself  for  some  time,  but  eventually  disclosed
the  secret  to  a  native  of  Xauxa,  who  told  his  master,  a  Simniard  of
Porco,  named  Villaroel,  and  the  latter  began  to  work  the  vein  in  April
1545.  The  three  other  principal  veins  were  discovered  between  April
and  August  of  the  same  year.  People  soon  flocked  from  all  parts  to  seek
their  fortunes  at  the  hill  of  Potosi.     Acosta,  lib.  iv,  cap,  6,  7,  8.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  389

and  though  great  masters  have  endeavoured  to  work  with
bellows^  their  diligence  has  availed  them  nothing.

As  a  remedy  may  be  found  in  this  world  for  all  evils,
there  has  not  been  wanting  an  invention  for  extracting  this
metal,  which  is  the  strangest  imaginable.  The  Indians,
who  were  so  ingenious,  found  that  in  some  parts  the  silver
could  not  be  extracted  with  the  aid  of  bellows,  as  was  the
case  at  Potosi.  They,  therefore,  made  certain  moulds  of
clay,  in  the  shape  of  a  flower-pot  in  Spain,  with  many  air-
holes in  all  parts.  Charcoal  was  put  into  these  moulds,
with  the  metal  on  the  top,  and  they  were  then  placed  on  the
part  of  the  hill  where  the  wind  blew  strongest,  and  thus  the
metal  was  extracted,  which  was  then  purified  and  refined
with  small  bellows.  In  this  manner  all  the  metal  that  has
been  taken  from  the  hill  is  extracted.  The  Indians  go  to
the  heights  with  the  ores  to  extract  the  silver,  and  they  call
the  moulds  Guayras.^  In  the  night  there  are  so  many  of
them  on  aU  parts  of  the  hill,  that  it  looks  Hke  an  illumina-
tion. When  the  wind  is  fresh  they  extract  much  silver,
but  when  there  is  no  wind  they  cannot  by  any  means
extract  silver ;  so  that,  as  the  wind  is  profitable  in  the  sea
for  navigating,  it  is  so  here  for  extracting  silver.  As  the
Indians  have  no  overseers  when  they  carry  the  metal  up  to
the  heights,  it  must  be  supposed  that  they  have  enriched
themselves,  and  taken  much  silver  to  their  own  homes.
This  is  the  reason  that  Indians  have  come  from  all  parts  of
the  kingdom  to  this  settlement  of  Potosi,  to  take  advantage
of  the  great  opportunities  offered  for  enriching  themselves."

'  Huayra  is  ''wind"  or  "air"  in  Quichua.

-  Acosta  tells  us  that,  when  he  wrote  in  1608,  most  of  the  silver  was
extracted  from  the  ore  by  means  of  quicksilver.  Formerly,  however,
he  says  that  there  Avere  more  than  six  thousand  hiiayras  on  the  sides  and
stmimit  of  the  hUl  of  Potosi.  "  The  huayras  were  small  ovens  in  which  the
metal  was  melted,  and  to  see  them  burning  at  night  with  a  red  heat,  and
tlirowing  their  light  to  a  distance,  was  a  pleasant  spectacle.  At  present
if  the  nimiber  of  huayras  reaches  to  one  thousand  or  two  thouscind,  it  is


390  THE    TRAVELS    OP


CHAPTER    ex.


There  was  the  richest  market  in  the  world  at  this  liill  of  Potosi,  at  the
time  when  these  mines  were  prosperous.

In  all  parts  of  this  kingdom  of  Peru  we  who  have  travelled
over  it  know  that  there  are  great-  fairs  or  markets^  where
the  natives  make  their  bargains.    Among  these  the  greatest

the  outside,  because  the  melting  is  done  on  a  small  scale,  nearly  all  the
metal  being  extracted  by  quicksilver."     Acosta,  lib.  iv,  cap.  9,  p.  218.

The  hill  of  Potosi  is  in  21°  40'  S.  lat.,  and  seventeen  thousand  feet
above  the  level  of  the  sea.  The  name  is  said  to  be  derived  from  the
Aymara  word  Potocsi  ("he  who  makes  a  noise"),  because,  when  Huayna
Ccapac  in  1462  ordered  search  to  be  made  for  a  silver  mine  on  the  hill,  a
terrible  voice  cried  out  from  undergTound  that  the  riches  it  contained
were  reserved  for  other  masters.     O.  de  la  Vega.

Zarate  says,  that  in  a  short  time  after  the  discovery  of  the  silver,  seven
thousand  Indians  were  at  work,  who  had  to  give  two  marcs  of  silver  to
their  masters  every  week,  which  they  did  with  such  ease,  that  they
retained  more  silver  for  themselves  than  they  paid  to  their  employers.
Historia  del  Peru,  lib.  vi,  cap.  4.

In  1563  Potosi  was  constituted  a  town,  and  was  granted  a  coat  of  arms
by  Philip  II ;  and  in  1572  the  viceroy  Don  Francisco  de  Toledo  went  in
person  to  this  great  seat  of  mining  wealth,  and  established  regulations
for  its  government.  This  viceroy  also  introduced  the  use  of  quicksilver,
a  mine  of  which  had  been  discovered  at  Huancavehca,  by  a  Portuguese
named  Enrique  Garces,  in  1566.  Toledo  also  regulated  and  legaHsed
the  atrocious  system  of  mitas,  or  forced  labour  in  the  mines.  He  caused
a  census  to  be  taken  of  Indians  in  Peru,  between  the  ages  of  eighteen
and  fifty,  the  result  of  which  gave  a  total  of  1,677,697  men  liable  for
service,  who  were  divided  into  614  ayllus  or  lineages.  Of  these  he
assigned  a  seventh  part  of  those  Uving  in  the  seventeen  nearest  pro^dnces,
or  11,199  Indians,  to  work  at  the  mines  of  Potosi,  under  certain  rules  for
their  protection,  which  were  generally  evaded.  According  to  Toledo's
law,  each  Mitayo,  or  forced  laboiu-er,  would  only  have  to  serve  for
eighteen  months  dmmg  the  thirty-two  years  that  he  was  liable.  They
were  to  receive  twenty  rials  a  week,  and  half  a  rial  for  every  league  of
distance  between  their  native  village  and  Potosi.  In  1611  there  was  a
population  of  one  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  inhabitants  in  the  town  of
Potosi,  of  whom  seventy-six  thousand  were  Indians,  three  thousand
Spaniards,  tliirty-five  thousand  Creoles,  forty  thousand  Europeans,  and
six  thousjind  Negroes  and  IMulattoes.     The  riches  accumulated  by  in-


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.


301


and  richest  was  formerly  in  the  city  of  Cuzco,  for  even  in
the  time  of  the  Spaniards  its  greatness  was  caused  by  the
gold  which  was  bought  and  sold  there,  and  by  the  other
things  of  all  kinds  that  were  sent  into  the  city.  But  this
market  or  fair  at  Cuzco  did  not  equal  the  superb  one  at
Potosij  where  the  traffic  was  so  great  that,  among  the
Indians  alone,  without  including  Christians,  twenty-five
or  thirty  thousand  golden  2^esos  exchanged  hands  daily.
This  is  wonderful,  and  I  believe  that  no  fair  in  the  world
can  be  compared  to  it.  I  saw  this  fair  several  times,  and
it  is  held  in  a  plain  near  the  town.  In  one  place  there  were
ccstos  (bags)  of  coca,  the  most  valuable  product  in  these
parts.  In  another  place  there  were  bales  of  cloth  and
fine  rich  shirtings.  Here  were  heaps  of  maize,  dried  pota-
toes, and  other  provisions,  there  great  quantities  of  the
best  meat  in  the  country.  This  fair  continued  from  early
morning  until  dusk ;  and  as  these  Indians  got  silver  every
day,  and  are  fond  of  eating  and  treating,  especially  those
who  have  intercourse  with  Spaniards,  they  all  spent  what
they  got,  so  that  people  assembled  from  all  parts  with  pro-
visions and  other  necessaries  for  their  support.  Many
Spaniards  became  rich  in  this  settlement  of  Potosi  by
merely  employing  two  or  three  Indian  women  to  traffic  in
this  fair.  Great  numbers  of  Yana-cuna,'^  who  are  free
Indians  with  the  right  of  serving  whom  they  please,  flocked

dividuals  were  enormous,  and  a  man  named  Sinteros,  "the  rich,"  who
died  in  1650,  was  worth  twenty  million  dollars.     Mercnrio  Peruano.

In  1825  there  were  about  five  thousand  mouths  of  mines  on  the  momi-
tain,  of  which  only  fifty  or  sixty  were  then  worked.  The  upjier  portion
of  the  mountain,  indeed,  was  so  completely  honeycombed,  that  it  was
considered  as  nearly  worked  out.  The  lower  part,  about  one-thii-d  of  the
cone,  was  then  hardly  touched,  in  consequence  of  the  number  of  springs
which  impede  the  working.

>  }7«ia,  in  Quichua,  is  a  "companion,"  and  also  a  "servant."  The
word  also  means  "black."  Ciina  is  a  particle  denoting  the  plural  num-
ber. The  Tana-cnna  were  a  class  of  Indians  forced  to  labour  as  domestic
servants,  but  with  tlie  power  to  choose  their  masters.


392  THE    TRAVELS    OF

to  the  fair^  and  the  prettiest  girls  from  Cuzco  and  all  parts
of  the  kingdom^  were  to  be  met  with  at  the  fair.

I  observed  that  many  frauds  were  committed^  and  that
there  was  little  truth  spoken.  The  value  of  articles  was
not  great,  and  cloths,  linens,  and  Hollands  were  sold  almost
as  cheap  as  in  Spain.  Indeed,  I  saw  things  sold  for  so
small  a  price,  that  they  would  have  been  considered  cheap
in  Seville.  Many  men,  possessed  of  great  wealth,  owing
to  their  insatiable  avarice,  lost  it  by  this  traffic  of  buying
and  selhng,  some  of  whom  fled  to  Chile,  Tucuman,  and
other  parts,  from  fear  of  their  debts.  There  were  also  many
disputes  and  lawsuits  among  the  traffickers.

The  climate  of  Potosi  is  healthy,  especially  for  the  Indians,
for  few  or  none  fall  ill  there.  The  silver  is  conveyed  by  the
royal  road  to  Cuzco,  or  to  the  city  of  Arequipa,  which  is
near  the  port  of  Quilca.  Most  of  it  is  carried  by  sheep,
without  which  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  travel  in  this
kingdom,  owing  to  the  great  distance  between  the  cities,
and  the  want  of  other  beasts.


CHAPTER    CXI.


Of  the  sheep,  huanacus,  and  vicunas,  which  they  have  in  most  parts  of
the  mountains  of  Peru.

It  appears  to  me  that  in  no  part  of  the  world  have  sheep
like  those  of  the  Indies  been  found  or  heard  of.  They  are
especially  met  with  in  this  kingdom  and  in  the  government
of  Chile,  as  well  as  in  some  parts  of  the  province  of  the  Rio
de  la  Plata.  It  may  be  that  they  will  also  be  found  in
parts  that  are  still  unknown.  These  sheep  are  among  the
most  excellent  creatures  that  God  has  created,  and  the  most
useful.     It  would  seem  that  the  Divine  Majesty  took  care


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  398

to  create  these  animals,  that  the  people  of  this  country
might  be  able  to  live  and  sustain  themselves,  for  by  no
other  means  could  these  Indians  (I  speak  of  the  moun-
taineers of  Peru)  preserve  their  hves  without  these  sheep,
or  others  which  would  supply  them  with  the  same  neces-
saries.    In  this  chapter  I  shall  relate  how  this  is.

In  the  valleys  on  the  coast,  and  in  other  warm  regions,
the  natives  sow  cotton,  and  make  their  clothes  from  it,  so
that  they  feel  no  want,  because  the  cotton  cloth  is  suitable
for  their  climate.

But  in  the  mountainous  parts,  such  as  the  Collao  and
Charcas,  no  tree  -will  grow,  and  if  the  cotton  was  sown  it
would  yield  nothing,  so  that  the  natives,  unless  they  ob-
tained it  by  trading,  could  have  no  clothing.  To  supply
this  need,  the  Giver  of  all  good  things,  who  is  God  our
Lord,  created  such  vast  flocks  of  these  animals  which  we
call  sheep,  that,  if  the  Spaniards  had  not  diminished  their
number  in  the  wars,  there  would  be  no  possibility  of  count-
ing them,  such  would  have  been  their  increase  in  all  parts.
But,  as  I  have  already  said,  the  civil  wars  of  the  Spaniards
have  been  like  a  great  pestilence,  both  to  the  Indians  and
to  their  flocks.

The  natives  call  these  sheep  llamas,  and  the  males  urcos.
Some  are  white,  others  black,  and  others  grey.  Some  of
them  are  as  large  as  small  donkeys,  with  long  legs,  broad
bellies,  and  a  neck  of  the  length  and  shape  of  that  of  a
camel.  Their  heads  are  large,  like  those  of  Spanish  sheep.
The  flesh  of  these  animals  is  very  good  when  it  is  fat,  and
the  lambs  are  better  and  more  savoury  than  those  of  Spain.
The  llamas  are  very  tame,  and  carry  two  or  three  arrohas
weight  very  well.  Truly  it  is  veiy  pleasant  to  see  the
Indians  of  the  Collao  go  forth  with  their  beasts,  and  return
with  them  to  their  homes  in  the  evening,  laden  with  fuel.
They  feed  on  the  herbage  of  the  plains,  and  when  they
complain  they  make  a  noise  like  the  groaning  of  camels.


394  THE    TRAVELS    OP

There  is  anotlier  kind  called  huanacus,  of  the  same  shape
and  appearance^  but  they  are  very  large  and  wander  over
the  plains  in  a  wild  state,  running  and  jumping  with  such
speed  that  the  dog  which  could  overtake  them  must  be
very  swift.  Besides  these,  there  is  another  sort  of  llamas,
called  vicunas.  These  are  more  swift  than  the  Imanacus,
though  smaller.  They  wander  over  the  uninhabited  wilds,
and  eat  the  herbage  which  Grod  has  created  there.  The
wool  of  these  vicunas  is  excellent,  and  finer  than  the  wool
of  merino  sheep  in  Spain.  I  know  not  whether  cloth  can  be
made  from  it,  but  the  cloths  that  were  made  for  the  lords  of
this  land  are  worth  seeing.  The  flesh  of  these  huanacus
and  vicunas  tastes  like  that  of  wild  sheep,  but  it  is  good.
In  the  city  of  La  Paz  I  ate  a  dinner  ofi"  one  of  these  fat
huanacus,  in  the  inn  kept  by  the  captain  Alonzo  de  Mendoza.
and  it  seemed  to  me  to  be  the  best  I  ever  had  in  my  life.
There  is  yet  another  kind  of  tame  llamas,  which  are  called
alpacas,  but  they  are  very  ugly  and  woolly.  They  are  of  the
shape  of  llamas,  but  smaller,  and  their  lambs  when  young-
are  very  hke  those  of  Spain.  Each  of  these  llamas  brings
forth  once  in  the  year,  and  no  more.^

'  "  The  domestic  animals,"  says  Padre  Bias  Valera,  "which  God  has
given  to  these  Indians  of  Peru,  are  bland  and  gentle,  like  their  masters,
so  that  a  child  can  lead  them  where  he  likes.  There  are  two  kinds,  one
larger  than  the  other.  The  Indians  call  the  animals  llamas,  and  their
shepherds  llama-michec.  They  are  of  all  colours,  like  the  horses  of  Spain,
when  domesticated,  but  the  wild  kind,  called  huanacus^  have  only  one
colour,  which  is  a  washed-out  chestnut.  The  llama  stands  as  high  as  a
deer  of  Spain,  but  no  animal  does  it  resemble  more  than  a  camel  without
a  hump,  and  a  thu-d  part  of  the  size.  The  neck  of  the  llama  is  long  and
smooth.  The  Indians  used  the  skin,  softened  with  grease,  as  soles  for
their  sandals,  but,  as  they  had  not  the  art  of  tanning,  they  took  them  off
in  crossing  brooks  or  in  rainy  weather.  The  Spaniards  make  very  good
reins  of  it  for  their  horses.  The  skin  is  also  used  for  girths  and  cruppei-s
of  saddles,  and  for  whips.  Besides  this,  the  animals  are  useful  to  both
Indians  and  Spaniards  as  beasts  of  burden,  to  carry  merchandise
whithersoever  they  list,  but  they  are  generally  used  on  the  road  from
Cuzco  to  Putosi,  a  distance  of  near  two  hundred  leagues.     They  carry


PEDUO    DH    CIKZA    1)K    LK(W.  395


CHAPTER    CXII.

Of  a  tree  called  molle^  and  of  other  lierbs  and  roots  in  this  kingdom
of  Peru.

When  I  wrote  concerning  the  city  of  Guayaquil  I  treated  of
the  sarsaparilla,  an  herb  the  value  of  which  is  well  known  to

three  or  four  arrobas'''  (lb  or  100  lbs.)  "weight,  and  only  make  jour-
neys of  three  leagues  a  day.  When  they  are  tired  they  lie  down,
and  nothing  will  induce  them  to  stir,  for  if  any  one  tries  to  force
them  to  rise,  they  spit  in  his  face.  They  have  no  other  means  of  defend-
ing themselves,  having  no  horns  like  a  stag.  That  they  may  not  be
easily  tired,  some  forty  or  fifty  unladen  animals  accomjiany  the  drove,
that  they  may  take  their  turn  with  the  burdens.  Their  flesh  is  the  best
in  the  woi'ld ;  it  is  tender,  wholesome,  and  savoury.  The  doctors  order
the  flesli  of  their  lambs  of  foiu-  or  five  months,  for  sick  persons,  in  jirefer-
ence  to  chickens.

"  The  Yncas  possessed  enormous  flocks  of  llamas  of  all  colours,  and
each  colour  had  a  special  name.  The  flocks  were  divided  according  to
their  colours,  and  if  a  lamb  was  born  of  a  different  colour  from  its
parents,  it  was  passed  into  the  flock  of  its  own  colour.  The  Quipus  had
knots  for  each  flock,  according  to  the  colour,  and  thus  an  account  of  their
number  was  easily  kept.

"  There  is  another  domestic  kind,  called  Pnco.  The  Pacos  are  not  reared
for  carrying  burdens,  but  for  the  sake  of  their  flesh,  and  for  their  wool,
which  is  excellent  and  very  long.  The  Indians  make  very  fine  cloths  of
it,  dotted  with  rich  colours.  The  Indians  do  not  use  the  milk  of  either
of  the  kinds,  nor  do  they  make  cheese  of  it.  Indeed,  they  only  have  suf-
ficient to  nourish  their  lambs,  and  the  Indians  call  the  milk,  the  udder,
and  the  act  of  sucking,  by  the  same  word  nnnti.

"  The  wild  kind  was  called  huanacu,  and  these  hnanacus  are  of  the
same  size  and  form  as  the  llamas.  Their  flesh  is  good,  though  not  so
good  as  that  of  the  domesticated  Uama.  The  males  always  remain  on
lofty  heights,  while  the  females  come  do^vn  into  the  plains  to  feed,  and
when  the  males  see  any  one  coming,  they  bleat  like  the  neighing  of  a
horse,  to  warn  the  females,  and  they  gallop  away  with  the  females  in
front.  Their  wool  is  short  and  rough,  yet  it  was  also  used  by  the  Indians
for  their  cloths.  There  is  another  wild  kind  called  vicuna^  a  deli-
cate animal  with  plenty  of  fine  wool.  Tlie  vicuna  stands  higher  than  a
goat,  and  the  colour  of  its  wool  is  a  clear  chestnut.  Tliey  are  so  fleet  that
no  dog  can  overtake  them,  and  frequent  the  loftiest  fastnesses  near  the
line  of  snow."     G.  de  la  Vega  i,  lib.  viii,  caps.  IG  and  17.

"Among  the  notable  things  possessed  by  the  Indians  of  Peru."  says


396  THE    TRAVELS    OP

all  who  have  visited  those  parts.  In  this  place  I  propose  to
treat  of  the  trees  called  moUes,  and  of  their  uses.     In  the

Acosta,  "  are  the  vicunas  and  llamas.  These  llamas  are  tame  and  very-
useful  ;  the  vicuiias  are  wild.  The  vicunas  live  in  the  loftiest  and  most
iininhabited  parts  of  the  mountains,  wliich  are  called  punas.  Snow  and
frost  do  not  harm  them,  and  they  run  very  swiftly.  They  are  not  very
prolific,  and  the  Yncas  therefore  prohibited  the  hunting  of  these  anunals,
except  on  special  occasions.  Tlieir  wool  is  like  silk  and  very  durable,
and,  as  the  colour  is  natural  and  not  a  dye,  it  lasts  for  ever.  Acosta  also
says  that  vicuiia  flesh  is  excellent  for  sore  eyes.

"The  domestic  flocks  are  of  two  kinds,  one  small,  and  called  jjacos.,
the  others  Avith  less  wool,  and  useful  as  beasts  of  burden,  called  llamas.
The  llamas  have  long  necks  hke  those  of  camels,  and  this  is  necessary
to  enable  them  to  browse,  as  they  stand  high  on  their  legs.  They
are  of  various  colours,  some  white  all  over,  others  black  all  over,
others  grey,  others  black  and  white,  which  they  call  moro-nioro.  For
sacrifices  the  Indians  were  very  particular  to  select  the  projDer  colour,
according  to  the  season  or  occasion.  The  Indians  make  cloth  from  the
wool,  a  coarse  sort  called  auasca,  and  a  fine  sort  called  ccompi.  Of  this
ccompi  they  make  table  clotlis,  napkins,  and  other  cloths  very  skiLfuUy
worked,  wliich  have  a  lustre  like  silk.  In  the  time  of  the  Yncas  the
principal  ccompi  workers  lived  at  Capacliica,  near  the  lake  of  Titicaca.
They  use  dyes  which  are  gathered  from  various  plants.

"  The  llamas  carry  loads  weighing  from  four  to  six  arrobas  (100  to
150  lbs.),  but  do  not  go  further  than  three,  or  at  the  most  four  leagues
a  day.  They  are  all  fond  of  a  cold  climate,  and  die  when  they  are
taken  down  into  the  warm  valleys.  They  have  a  very  pleasant  look,  for
they  will  stop  in  the  road  and  watch  a  person  very  attentively  for  some
time  without  moving,  with  their  necks  raised  up,  so  that  it  causes  laughter
to  see  their  serenity  ;  but  sometimes  they  suddenly  take  fright  and  run
off  to  inaccessible  places  with  their  loads."  Acosta^  lib.  iv,  cap.  41,  p.  293.

The  Uama  measures,  from  the  sole  of  the  hoof  to  the  top  of  the  head,
4  feet  6  to  8  inches,  and  from  the  sole  of  the  hoof  to  the  shoulders  2  feet
1 1  inches  to  3  feet.  The  female  is  usually  smaller,  but  her  wool  is  finer
and  better.  The  young  llamas  are  left  with  their  dams  for  about  a  year.
In  Acosta's  tune  (1608)  a  llama  was  worth  six  or  seven  dollars,  and  in
1840  about  from  three  to  four  dollars.  The  Indians  are  very  fond  of
these  anunals.  They  adorn  them  by  tying  bows  of  ribbon  to  their  ears,
and,  before  loading,  they  always  fondle  and  caress  them  affectionately.
See  Von  Tschudi's  Travels^  i^p.  307-14.

The  Uama  is  invaluable  to  the  Peruvian  Indians,  and  Cieza  de  Leon
truly  says  that  without  this  useful  animal  they  could  scarcely  exist.  Tlieir
food  is  llama  flesh,  which  may  be  preserved  for  a  long  time  in  the  form


I'KDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  397

valleys  and  great  forests  of  Peru  there  are  many  trees  of
different  kinds,  and  with  different  uses,  very  few  of  which
are  like  those  of  Spain.  Some  of  them,  such  as  the  agua-
cates,  guayavos,  caymltos,  and  gnavas  bear  fruits  such  as  I
have  already  mentioned  in  various  parts  of  this  work;  others
are  covered  with  thorns,  and  others  are  very  large,  with
great  hollows  in  their  trunks,  where  the  bees  make  their
honey  with  marvellous  great  order  and  concert.  In  most  of
the  inhabited  parts  of  this  land,  large  and  small  trees  are  to
be  seen,  which  they  call  riioUes.  These  trees  have  very
small  leaves,  with  a  smell  like  that  of  fennel.  Their  bark  is
possessed  of  such  virtue  that,  if  a  man  has  great  pain  and
swelling  in  his  legs,  it  is  removed,  and  the  swelling  is  re-
duced, by  merely  soaking  this  bark,  and  washing  the  place
several  times.  The  small  branches  are  very  useful  for  clean-
ing the  teeth.  They  also  make  a  very  good  drink  from  the
very  small  berries  which  this  tree  bears,  as  well  as  vinegar,
by  merely  steeping  the  quantity  required  in  vases  of  water,
and  putting  them  on  the  fire.  After  they  have  stood  some
time,  the  residue  of  the  liquor  is  converted  into  wine,  vine-
gar, or  treacle,  according  to  the  manner  of  treating  it.  The
Indians  hold  these  trees  in  great  estimation.^

of  chnrqui  or  smoke-dried  meat,  their  clothing  is  made  from  llama  wool,
all  the  leather  they  use  is  from  llama  hides,  the  ouly  fuel  they  have  in
many  parts  of  the  Collao  is  llama  dung,  and,  while  living,  the  llama  is
their  beast  of  burden.

1  The  moUe  tree  {Schinns  MoUe :  Lin.)  is  well  known  in  the  countries
bordering  on  the  Mediterranean,  and  ]Mrs.  Clements  Markham  introduced
it  into  the  Neilgherry  hills  in  Southern  India  in  1861.  It  is  the  com-
monest tree  in  some  parts  of  the  Andes,  especially  in  the  valleys  of
Xauxa,  Guamanga,  Andahuaylas,  Abancay,  and  the  Yilcamayu,  and  in
the  campina  of  Ai-equipa  ;  where  its  graceful  fohage  and  bimches  of  red
berries  overshadow  the  roads.

Acosta  says  that  the  molle  tree  possesses  rare  virtues,  and  that  the
Indians  make  a  wine  of  the  small  twigs  (lib.  iv,  cap.  30).  Garcilasso  de
la  Vega  describes  it  as  forming  its  fruit  in  large  bunclies.  "  The  fruits
are  small  round  grains  like  coriander  seeds,  the  leaves  are  small  and
always  green.     "NMien  ripe  the  berry  has  a  slightly  sweet  taste  on  the


398  THE    TRAVELS    OP

There  are  also  herbs  of  great  virtue  in  these  parts^  and  I
will  mention  some  which  I  saw  myself.  In  the  province  of
Quinbaya,  where  the  city  of  Cali  stands,  they  raise  certain
roots  among  the  trees,  which  are  so  efficacious  for  purging,
that  it  is  merely  necessary  to  take  a  little  more  than  a  bniza
in  length,  of  the  thickness  of  a  finger,  place  it  in  a  small
jar  of  water,  and  drink  the  greater  part  of  the  water  during
the  night,  to  cause  the  required  effect,  as  well  as  rhubarb.
There  are  also  beans  which  have  the  same  effect,  but  some
praise  them,  while  others  say  they  do  harm.  In  the  build-
ings of  Vilcas  one  of  my  slave  girls  was  very  ill  with  certain
tumours,  and  I  saw  that  the  Indians  carried  yellow  flowers,
which  they  reduced  to  powder  by  applying  a  light  to  them.
By  anointing  her  once  or  twice  with  this  powder  she  was
cured.

In  the  province  of  Andahuaylas  there  is  another  herb  so
good  for  cleaning  the  teeth,  that  by  rubbing  them  with  it
for  an  hour  or  two,  the  teeth  become  as  white  as  snow.
There  are  many  other  herbs  in  these  parts,  which  are  useful
for  curing  men,  and  others  which  do  harm,  and  form  the
poisons  of  which  men  die.^

sm-face,  but  the  rest  is  very  bitter.  They  make  a  beverage  of  the  berries
by  gently  rubbing  them  in  the  hand,  in  warm  water,  until  all  their  sweet-
ness has  come  out,  without  any  of  the  bitter.  The  water  is  then  allowed
to  stand  for  three  or  four  days,  and  it  makes  a  very  pleasant  and  healing
drink.  When  mixed  with  chicha  it  improves  the  flavour.  The  same
water  boiled  until  it  is  ciu-dled,  forms  treacle,  and  when  put  in  the  sun
it  becomes  vinegar.  The  resin  of  the  molle  is  very  efficacious  m  curing
woimds,  and  for  strengthening  the  gums.  The  leaves  boiled  in  water  also
have  healing  virtues.  I  remember  when  the  valley  of  Yucay  was  adorned
with  great  numbers  of  these  useful  trees,  and  in  a  few  years  afterwards
there 'were  scarcely  any;  for  they  had  all  been  used  to  make  charcoal."
Comm.  Real.,  i,  lib.  viii,  cap.  12,  p.  280.

The  resin  of  the  molle  is  a  substance  Uke  mastick,  and  the  Peruvians
still  use  it  for  strengthening  their  gums.

1  The  Collahua>/as,  or  itinerant  native  doctors  of  Peru,  still  carry
about  a  vast  number  of  herbs  and  roots,  which  are  sujjposed  to  cure  all
diseases.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  399


CHAPTER     CXIII.

riow  there  are  large  salt  lakes  and  baths  in  this  kingfloni ;  and  how  the
land  is  suited  for  the  grov/th  of  olives  and  other  fruits  of  Spain,  and
for  some  animals  and  birds  of  that  country.

Having  concluded  what  I  have  to  say  concerning  the  found-
ing of  the  new  cities  in  Peru,  it  Avill  be  well  to  give  an
account  of  some  of  the  most  noteworthy  thing.s  in  the  coun-
try, before  I  bring  this  first  part  of  my  work  to  a  conclusion.

I  will  now  make  mention  of  the  great  salt  lakes  in  this
country,  a  thing  very  important  for  the  sustenance  of  the  peo-
ple. I  have  mentioned  how  there  were  no  salt  lakes  through-
out the  government  of  Poj^ayan,  and  how  God  our  Lord  has
provided  salt  springs,  from  the  water  of  which  the  people
make  the  salt  for  their  support.  Here  in  Peru  there  are
such  large  and  fine  salt  lakes  that  they  would  suffice  to
supply  all  the  kingdoms  of  Spain,  France,  Italy,  and  other
parts.  Near  Tumbez  they  get  large  rocks  of  salt  from  water
near  the  sea  shore,  which  they  take  in  ships  to  the  port  of
the  city  of  Cali,^  and  to  the  Tierra  Firme.  In  the  sandy
deserts,  not  very  far  from  the  valley  of  Huara,  there  are
some  large  and  valuable  salt  lakes,  and  great  heaps  of  salt
which  are  lost,  for  few  Indians  take  advantage  of  this
supply.-  In  the  mountains  near  the  province  of  Huaylas
there  are  other  still  larger  salt  lakes  ;  and  half  a  league
from  the  city  of  Cuzco  there  are  wells,  where  the  Indians
make  enough  salt  to  supply  all  the  province.  In  Cunti-suyu,
and  in  parts  of  the  Anti-suyu,  there  are  some  very  large  salt
deposits.  In  short  it  may  be  said  that  Peru  is  well  supplied
with  salt.

There  are  also  baths  in  many  pai-ts  of  the  countiy,  and
fountains  of  warm  water,  where  the  natives  bathe.  I  have
^  Buenaventura.  '^  See  p.  2G.


400  THE    TRAVELS    OF

seen  many  of  these,  in  the  parts  through  which  I  have
travelled. 1

Many  places  in  this  kingdom,  such  as  the  coast  valleys
and  the  land  on  the  banks  of  rivers,  are  very  fertile,  and
yield  wheat,^  maize,  and  barley'  in  great  quantities.  There
are  also  not  a  few  vineyards  at  San  Miguel,  Truxillo,  the
City  of  the  Kings,  Cuzco,  and  Guamanga,  and  they  are
beginning  to  plant  them  in  other  parts,  so  that  there  is
great  hope  of  profitable  vine  cultivation.  There  are  orange
and  pomegranate  trees,  and  other  trees  brought  from  Spain,
besides  those  of  the  country  ;  and  pulses  of  all  sorts.

In  short  Peru  is  a  grand  country,  and  hereafter  it  will  be
still  greater,  for  large  cities  have  been  founded,  and  when
our  age  has  passed  away,  Peru  may  send  to  other  countries,
wheat,  meat,  wool,  and  even  silk,  for  there  are  the  best
situations  in  the  world  for  planting  mulberries.     There  is

'  The  best  known  hot  medicinal  springs  in  Peru  are  those  near  Caxa-
marca  (129.7°  Fahr.),  those  at  Laris,  in  the  mountains  overhanging  the
valley  of  the  Vilcamayu,  and  those  at  Ym-a,  near  Arequipa.

Great  attention  was  paid  by  the  Yncas  to  the  formation  of  their  batlas,
called  armana  in  Quichua.  The  springs  (puqtiio),  or  hot  springs  (ccohic
pnquio)^  were  carefully  paved  with  a  mixture  of  small  stones  and  a  species
of  bitmnen,  and  over  them  was  arranged  the  figure  of  an  animal,  bird,
or  serpent  in  marble,  basalt,  or  even  gold  or  silver,  which  threw  water
from  the  mouth,  either  perpendicularly  into  the  air,  when  the  jet  was
called  huraca,  or  horizontally,  when  it  was  called  paccha.  The  flowing
water  was  conducted  through  a  pipe  of  metal  or  stone  into  jars  of  sculp-
tured stone.  The  baths  had  small  dressing-rooms  attached,  which  were
ornamented  with  statues  in  stone  and  metal.  Antiguedades  Penianas,  p.
238.

^  Wheat  was  introduced  into  Peru  by  a  lady  named  Maria  de  Escobar,
wife  of  Don  Diego  de  Chaves,  a  native  of  Truxillo ;  and  one  of  those
noble  knights  who  raised  their  voices  against  the  murder  of  the  Ynca
Atahualpa.  She  first  sowed  it  in  the  valley  of  the  Rimac,  but  there  were
so  few  seeds  to  begin  with,  that  three  years  elapsed  before  any  wheaten
bread  was  made.

'^  Garcilasso  says  he  does  not  know  who  introduced  the  barley,  but
thinks  it  probable  that  a  few  grains  may  have  come  with  the  wheat.
Comm.  Real.,  i,  lib.  ix,  cap.  24.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  401

only  one  thing  that  has  not  yet  been  broug-ht  to  this  coun-
try, and  that  is  the  olive  tree,  which,  after  bread  and  the
vine,  is  the  most  important  product.  It  seems  to  me  that  if
young  plants  were  brought  from  Spain,  and  planted  in  the
coast  valleys,  and  on  the  banks  of  rivers  in  the  mountains,
there  would  soon  be  as  large  olive  woods  as  there  are  at
Axarafe  de  Sevilla.  For  if  they  require  a  warm  climate  it
is  here ;  if  they  want  much  water,  or  none,  or  little,  all  these
requirements  can  be  found  here.  In  some  places  in  Peru  it
never  thunders,  lightning  is  not  seen,  nor  do  snows  fall  in
the  coast  valleys,  and  these  are  the  things  which  damage
the  fruit  of  olive  trees.  Wlien  the  trees  are  once  planted,
there  will  soon  come  a  time  when  Peru  will  be  as  weU  sup-
plied with  oil  as  with  everything  else.^  No  woods  of  oak
trees  have  been  found  in  Peru,  but  if  they  were  planted  in  the
CoUao,  in  the  district  of  Cuzco,  and  in  other  parts,  I  believe
that  they  would  give  the  same  result  as  olive  trees  in  the
coast  valleys.^

^  Olive  trees  from  Seville  were  introduced  into  Peru  in  1560,  by  Don
Antonio  de  Ribera,  a  citizen  of  Lima,  ten  years  after  Cieza  de  Leon  left
the  country.  Ribera  brought  more  tlian  a  hundred  young  plants  out
very  carefully  in  two  jars,  but,  as  might  have  been  expected,  there  were
only  three  aliye  when  he  reached  Lima,  and  he  was  very  fortunate  in
preserving  any.  He  planted  them  in  a  fruit  garden  near  Lima,  and  sta-
tioned an  army  consisting  of  a  hundred  negroes  and  tliirty  dogs,  to  guard
and  watch  over  them  night  and  day.  Li  spite  of  aU  tliis  care,  one  of  the
three  plants  was  stolen  and  carried  off  to  Chile,  where  it  yielded  many
cuttings,  which  eventually  formed  flourishing  plantations.  At  the  end
of  three  yeare  the  same  oUve  tree  was  secretly  planted  agam  in  Ribera's
garden,  and  he  was  never  able  to  discover  who  had  stolen  it,  nor  who  had
restored  it.  There  are  now  several  ohve  plantations  in  the  coast  valleys
of  Peru,  especially  at  Tambo,  near  Ai-equipa,  where  there  are  five  thou-
sand ohve  trees  and  seven  mills.     G.  de  la  Vega.

-  This  excellent  suggestion,  which  Cieza  de  Leon  made  more  than  three
hundred  years  ago,  has  never  been  adopted  by  the  indolent  Peru\dans.
I  am  convinced  that  plantations,  not  perhaps  of  oak,  but  of  larch,  fir,
and  birch,  might  be  successfully  formed  in  the  more  sheltered  ravines  of
the  Collao,  and  of  other  treeless  parts  of  the  Andes,  for  the  supply  of
timber  and  fuel.     The  wintei-s,  from  IMay  to  September,  are  not  nearly


402  THE    TRAVELS    OP

My  opinion  is  tliat  the  conquerors  and  settlers  of  these
parts  should  not  pass  their  time  in  fighting  battles  and
marching  in  chase  of  each  other ;  but  in  planting  and  sow-
ing, which  would  be  more  profitable.  I  have  to  mention  a
thing  here,  that  there  is  in  the  mountains  of  Peru.  I  allude
to  certain  foxes,  not  very  large,  which  have  the  property  of
emitting  so  foul  and  pestiferous  an  odour,  that  there  is
nothing  with  which  it  can  be  compared.  If  one  of  these
creatures,  by  any  accident,  comes  in  contact  with  a  lance  or
anything  else,  the  evil  smell  remains  for  many  days,  even
when  the  lance  is  well  washed.^  I  have  not  seen  wolves,
nor  other  mischievous  animals,  in  any  part,  except  the  great
tigers  which  I  have  mentioned  as  frequenting  the  forests  of
the  port  of  Buenaventura,  in  the  province  of  the  city  of
Cali,  which  have  killed  some  Spaniards,  and  many  Indians.
Ostriches^  have  been  met  with  beyond  Charcas,  and  the
Indians  value  them  very  highly.  There  is  another  kind  of
animal  called  Imis-cacha,^  of  the  size  and  shape  of  a  hare,
except  that  the  tail  is  like  that  of  a  fox.  They  breed  in
stony  places,  and  amongst  rocks,  and  many  are  killed  with
slings  and  arquebuzes.  They  are  good  to  eat,  and  the
Indians  make  mantles  of  their  skins,  which  are  as  soft  as
silk,  and  very  valuable.  There  are  many  falcons,  which
would  be  prized  in  Spain.  I  have  already  said  that  there
are  two  kinds  of  partridges,  one  small,  and  the  other  the
size  of  fowls.*     There  are  the  best  ferrets  in  the  world  in

so  cold  as  in  Scotland,  though  very  dry  ;   and  during  the  rainy  season,
though  it  is  cold,  there  is  plenty  of  moisture.     The  introduction  of  these
plantations  would  change  the  whole  face  of  the  covmtry,  and  the  intro-
ducer would  confer  an  inestimable  blessing  on  the  inhabitants.
'  This  nasty  animal  is  called  aims  in  Quichua.

2  Called  Suri  in  Quichua.     {Rhea  Americana  L.)

3  'Jlie  Huis-cacha  {Lagldium  Peruvianum  IMay)  is  a  large  rodent  very
common  in  the  Andes,  and  frequenting  rocky  ridges.  It  has  a  long
bushy  tail.  In  the  morning  and  evening  it  creeps  out  from  amongst  its
rocks  to  nibble  the  aljiine  grass.

*  One  called  chvy  in  Quichua ;  the  other  i/ntu.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  403

this  country.  There  are  also  certain  very  obscene  birds,
both  in  the  coast  valleys  and  in  the  mountains,  called  auras,
which  oat  dead  bodies,  and  other  noisome  substances.^  Of
the  same  kind  arc  the  enormous  condors,  which  almost  ap-
pear like  griffins,  and  carry  off  the  lambs  and  small  huanacus
in  the  fields.


CHAPTER    CXIV.


How  the  native  Indians  of  this  kingdom  were  great  masters  of  the  arts
of  working  in  silver,  and  of  building ;  and  how  they  had  excellent
dyes  for  their  fine  cloths.

From  the  accounts  given  to  us  by  the  Indians,  it  appears
that,  in  ancient  times,  they  had  not  the  same  order  in  their
affairs  as  they  established  after  they  were  subdued  by  the
Yncas.  For  verily  things  may  be  seen  made  by  their  hands
with  such  skill,  that  they  cause  admiration  to  all  who  have
any  knowledge  of  them.  And  what  is  more  curious  is  that
they  have  few  tools  for  making  what  they  do  make,  and  yet
that  they  work  with  great  skill.  When  this  kingdom  was
gained  by  the  Spaniards,  they  saw  pieces  of  gold,  silver,
and  clay  welded  together  in  such  fashion  that  they  appeared
to  have  been  born  so.  They  also  saw  very  curious  figures
and  other  things  of  silver  which  I  do  not  describe,  as  I  did
not  see  them  myself.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  I  have  seen
vases  made  of  pieces  of  copper  or  stone,  and  jars,  fountains,
and  other  things  richly  ornamented  by  means  of  the  tools  they
have.     When  they  work,  they  make  a  small  furnace  of  clay,

^  He  here  alludes  to  the  turkey  buzzards,  or  cjallinazos^  obscene  vul-
tures, which  act  as  scavengers  in  the  streets  of  Lima  and  other  coast
towns,  but  are  imknown  in  tlie  mountains.  The  Quichua  word  for  them
is  siiT/nnitii/.     Aura  is  the  word  used  in  Mexico.


404  THE    TRAVELS    OP

where  they  put  the  charcoal^  and  they  then  blow  the  fire  with
small  caneSj  instead  of  bellows.  Besides  their  silver  utensils,
they  make  chains,  stamped  ornaments,  and  other  things  of
gold.  Even  boys,  who  to  look  at  them  one  would  think
were  hardly  old  enough  to  talk,  know  how  to  make  these
things.^  Few  are  the  things  they  now  make  in  compari-
son with  the  great  and  rich  ornaments   they  made  in  the

>  The  ancient  Peruvian  silversmiths  knew  how  to  melt  the  metal,  to
cast  it  in  moulds,  to  solder  it,  and  to  hammer  it.  For  melting  they  used
small  ovens,  with  tubes  of  copper  tlrrough  which  the  air  passed.  The
moulds  were  made  of  a  clay  mixed  with  gypsum,  and  the  moulded  figures
were  finished  off  with  a  chisel.  They  hammered  out  figm-es  on  the
sides  of  open  vases  with  wonderful  skill,  and  soldered  the  parts  with
great  art,  after  burnishing  so  that  the  points  of  junction  can  scarcely  be
discerned.  They  supphed  the  place  of  gilding  by  fastening  very  thin
leaves  of  gold  or  silver  to  copper,  timber,  and  even  stone.  They  also
extracted  fine  threads  from  the  precious  metal,  and  wove  them  into
cloths.  Unfortunately,  all  their  best  works  were  either  destroyed  by
the  covetous  Spaniards,  or  concealed  by  the  Indians  themselves  at  the
time  of  the  conquest.  Zarate  mentions  foiu-  Uamas  and  ten  statues
of  women,  of  the  natural  size,  of  the  finest  gold,  as  having  been  found
at  Xauxa;  and  all  the  ancient  writers  agree  in  their  accounts  of  the
vast  number  and  great  merit  of  the  gold  and  silver  ornaments  of  the
Yncas.

The  ancient  pottery  of  Peru  is  very  remarkable.  The  Indians  imitated
every  quadruped,  bird,  fish,  shell,  plant,  fruit,  besides  heads  of  men  and
women.  All  these  varied  forms  were  moulded  in  clay,  and  the  vessels
thus  made  were  used  as  sacred  urns  to  be  buried  with  the  dead,  or  for
sacrificial  purposes.  Those  for  domestic  uses  were  more  simple.  The
material  made  use  of  was  coloured  clay  and  blackish  earth,  and  the
vessels  do  not  appear  to  have  been  burnt,  but  dried  in  the  sun.  Many
of  these  vessels  are  double,  others  quadrujile,  and  even  octuple,  the
principal  vessel  being  surrounded  by  smaller  appendages,  which  com-
municate with  each  other  and  with  the  principal  vessel.  When  the
double  ones  were  filled  with  water,  the  air  escaped  through  the  opening
left  for  that  purpose,  and  produced  sounds,  which  imitated  the  voice
of  the  animal  represented  by  the  principal  vessel.  Thus,  in  a  vessel
representing  a  cat,  when  water  is  poured  in,  a  sound  like  mewing  is  pro-
duced, and  another  gives  out  a  sound  like  the  whisthng  of  a  bird,  the
form  of  which  is  moulded  on  the  handle.  See  some  very  interesting
remarks  on  ancient  Peruvian  pottery,  in  Professor  Wilson's  work.  Pre-
historic Man^  i,  p.  110.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DR    LEON.  405

time  of  the  Yncas.  Thoy,  however,  make  the  charpiiras,^  so
small  and  accurately  worked,  by  which  they  show  them-
selves still  to  be  eminent  workers  in  silver.  Many  of  these
silversmiths  were  stationed  by  the  Yncas  in  the  principal
parts  of  the  kingdom.

These  Indians  also  built  strong  foundations  and  grand
edifices  with  great  skill ;  and  now  they  build  the  houses  of
the  Spaniards,  make  bricks  and  tiles,  and  put  large  stones
one  on  the  top  of  the  other  with  such  exactness  that  the
point  of  junction  is  scarcely  visible.  In  many  parts  they  do
these  things  with  no  other  tools  than  stones,  and  their  own
wonderful  skill.  I  do  not  believe  that  there  is  any  people
or  nation  in  the  world  who  could  lead  irrigation  channels
over  such  rugged  and  difficult  places  as  do  these  Indians.
They  have  small  looms  for  weaving  their  cloth  ;  and  in
ancient  times,  when  the  Kings  Yncas  ruled  in  this  kingdom,
the  Mama-cunas,  who  were  held  to  be  sacred,  and  were
dedicated  to  the  service  of  the  temples  of  the  sun,  had  no
other  employment  than  to  weave  very  fine  cloth  of  vicuna
wool,  for  the  lords  Yncas.  This  cloth  was  as  fine  as  any
they  have  in  Spain.  The  dresses  of  the  Yncas  consisted  of
shirts  of  this  cloth,  some  embroidered  with  gold  and  silver
work,  some  with  emeralds  and  other  precious  stones,  some
with  feathers  of  birds,  and  some  merely  with  the  cloth.  To
make  these  clothes  they  had  such  perfect  colours — crimson,
blue,  yellow,  and  black — that  in  this  respect  they  have  the
advantage  of  Spain."

In  the  government  of  Popayan  there  is  an  earth  with
which,  and  with  the  leaves  of  a  tree,  they  make  a  perfect
black  dye  ;  but  it  would  be  wearisome  to  repeat  all  the
details  connected  with  the  way  they  make  these  dyes,  and
it  seems  sufficient,  therefore,  to  mention  the  principal  one.

•  Small  beads.     See  note  at  page  176.

-  The  Peruvians  wove  cotton  and  woollen  cloths  with  great  skill,  and
there   are  a  great   number   of   woi\ls  connected  with  weaving   in   the


406  THE    TRAVELS    OF

CHAPTER    CXV.

How  there  are  great  mines  in  most  parts  of  this  kingdom.

The  long  cliain  of  mountains,  wliicli  we  call  Andes,  com-
mences at  the  strait  of  Magallanes,  and  traverses  many
regions  and  great  provinces,  and  we  know  tliat  on  tlie  side
towards  the  South  Sea  (which  is  the  west)  great  riches  are
found  in  the  hills  and  rivers,  while  the  provinces  to  the
eastward  are  considered  to  be  poor  in  metals,  according  to
the  account  of  those  who  extended  their  conquests  to  the
river  of  La  Plata,  and  came  thence  to  Peru  by  way  of  Potosi,
They  said  that  they  heard  of  a  country  no  less  fertile  than
populous,  which  was  a  few  days'  journey  beyond  Charcas,
and  this  proved  to  be  no  other  than  Peru.  They  saw  little
silver,  and  even  that  came  from  the  district  round  the  town
of  Plata ;  neither  did  those  who  went  on  an  exj)edition  of
discovery  with  Diego  de  Rojas,  Felipe  Gutierrez,  and  Nicolas
de  Heredia  find  any  riches.  The  Adelantado  Don  Francisco
de  Orellana,  too,  who  went  down  the  Maranon  in  a  boat,  at
the  time  when  the  captain  Gonzalo  Pizarro  was  in  search  of
the  cinnamon  country,  although  he  passed  many  large  vil-
lages, saw  little  or  no  gold  or  silver.  Indeed,  except  in  the
province  of  Bogota,  there  is  no  wealth  in  these  parts  of  the
Cordillera  of  the  Andes.  But  it  is  very  difierent  in  the
southern  parts,  where  greater  treasure  has  been  found  than
had  been  seen  before  in  the  world  during  many  ages.  Yet
if  the  gold  in  the  provinces  near  the  great  river  of  Santa
Martha,  from  the  city  of  Popayan  to  the  town  of  Mompox,

Quichua  language,  such  as  ahuana  (loom),  ahuay  (woof),  comana  (a
wooden  batten  used  in  weaving),  etc.  They  also  knew  the  secret  of  fixing
the  dyes  of  all  colours — flesh  colour,  yellow,  gray,  blue,  green,  black — so
firmly  that  they  never  fade  after  the  lapse  of  ages,  and  all  their  dyes
were  extracted  from  vegetables.  Tliey  ornamented  their  textures  by
sewing  leaves  of  gold  or  silver,  mother-of-pearl,  and  feathers  on  them  ;
and  they  also  made  fringes,  laces,  and  tassels  of  wool  and  cotton,  to  adorn
carpets  and  taj^estries.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  407

had  been  in  the  power  of  a  single  lord,  as  it  was  in  Peru,
the  wealth  would  have  been  greater  than  that  of  Cuzco.  In
tjie  skirts  of  these  cordilleras  they  have  found  great  mines
of  gold  and  silver,  both  near  Antiochia,  at  Cartage,  in  the
government  of  Popayan,  and  throughout  the  whole  king-
dom of  Peru.

If  there  were  people  to  extract  it,  there  would  bo  gold
and  silver  enough  to  last  for  ever;  for  in  the  mountains
and  plains,  in  the  valleys  and  in  all  parts,  they  have  found
g-old  and  silver.  There  is  also  a  great  quantity  of  copper,
and  some  iron  in  the  mountains  which  descend  towards  the
plains.  In  fine,  there  is  lead  in  this  kingdom,  and  all
the  metals  which  God  has  created ;  and  it  seems  to  me  that
if  there  were  men  to  work,  there  would  not  fail  to  be  great
riches  in  Peru.  Already  so  much  treasure  has  been  ex-
tracted and  sent  to  Spain,  that  men  never  thought  there
could  be  so  much.


CHAPTER    CXVI.


How  many  nations  of  these  Indians  make  war  one  upon  the  other,  and
how  the  lords  and  chiefs  oppress  the  poorer  people.

I  VERILY  believe  that  the  people  in  these  Indies  have  been
there  for  many  ages,  as  is  shown  by  the  ancient  buildings
and  the  extensive  regions  they  have  peopled ;  and,  although
they  are  all  brown  and  beardless,  and  are  so  much  alike,
they  have  such  a  multitude  of  languages  that  there  is
almost  a  new  language  at  every  league  in  all  parts  of  the
country.^     As  so  many  ages  have  passed  away  since  these

^  The  people  included  within  the  empire  of  Yncas  are  comprised  by
D'Orbigny  in  his  Ando-Peruvian  race,  which  he  divides  into  three
branches,  namely  the  Peruvian,  Antisian,  and  Araucanian.  The  Peru-
vian branch  is  subdivided  by  him  into  four  nations,  namely  the  Quiclma,


408  THE    TRAVELS    OF

people  came  here,  tliey  have  waged  great  wars  and  battles,
retaining   the   provinces    they    conqnered.       Thus,    in    the

Aymara,  Atacama,  and  Change.  This  Peruvian  branch  is  characterised
by  a  rich  brown  olive  colour,  middling  height  (1  metre  597  millimetres),
massive  form,  trunk  very  long  in  comparison  with  the  whole  height,  fore-
head receding,  face  large  and  oval,  nose  long,  very  aquiline,  and  full  at
the  base,  mouth  large,  eyes  horizontal,  cornea  yellowish,  ball  not  jutting
out :  character  serious,  thoughtful,  and  sad.  The  height  of  the  i)ure
Quichua  Indians  varies  from  4  feet  9  inches  to  5  feet  3  inches.  Their
shoulders  are  very  broad,  and  square  ;  breast  excessively  voluminous,  and
longer  than  ordinary,  so  as  to  increase  the  length  of  the  trunk.  The
arms  and  feet  are  always  small.  The  head  is  oblong,  forehead  slightly
receding,  but  the  cranium  is  nevertheless  voluminous,  and.indicatesa  well
developed  brain.  The  face  is  generally  large,  and  nearer  a  circle  than
an  oval.  The'  nose  is  long  and  very  aquiline,  nostrils  large  and  open.
The  lips  are  thick  and  the  mouth  large,  but  the  teeth  are  always  good.
The  chin  is  short  but  not  receding.  The  cheeks  are  somewhat  high.  The
eyes  are  always  horizontal,  the  cornea  yellowish,  the  eyebrows  much
arched,  and  the  hair  black,  long,  and  very  straight.  They  have  no  beard
beyond  a  few  straggling  hairs,  appearing  late  in  life.

Such  were  the  main  characteristics  of  nearly  all  the  tribes  which  formed
the  emi^ire  of  the  Yncas.  These  tribes  were,  as  mentioned  by  Cieza  de
Leon,  the  Quichuas,  Collas  or  Aymaras,  Canas  and  Candies,  Chancas,
Huancas,  Yuncas,  Antis,  Chachapuyas,  and  Cauaris.  It  is  generally
found  that  a  vast  number  of  languages  exist  in  a  mountainous  country,
and  the  Caucasus  offers  a  striking  example  of  this  rule ;  to  which  the
Andes  was  no  exception,  for  Cieza  de  Leon  assures  us  that  nearly  every
village  originally  had  a  language  of  its  own.  But  the  dominant  tribe  of
the  Quichuas,  with  its  civilised  rule  and  astute  policy,  had  gradually
superseded  all  the  other  dialects  by  their  own  language — the  richest  and
most  copious  to  be  found  in  the  whole  American  group  of  tongues.  Thus
at  the  time  of  the  conquest  the  Quichua  was  alone  spoken  tlu-oughout  the
empire  of  the  Yncas,  and  we  now  have  but  few  scattered  remnants  of
any  other  language  on  the  plateaux  of  the  Andes,  excejDt  the  Aymara.
The  vocabulary  of  a  Chinchay-suyu  dialect,  spoken  in  the  north  of  Peru,
as  given  by  Torres  Rubio,  differs  little,  if  at  all,  from  the  Quichua,  and
the  same  remark  applies  to  the  Quito  dialect.  I  am  of  opinion  that  the
whole  of  the  ancient  tribes  mentioned  above,  were  essentially  members
of  one  and  the  same  race.

D'Orbigny  says  of  the  Quichua  or  Ynca  Indians  that  their  character
is  gentle,  hospitable,  and  obedient.  They  are  good  fathers,  good  hus-
bands, sociable  or  rather  gi-egarious,  always  living  together  in  villages,
tacitin-n,  patient,  and  industrious.     {VlJomme  Americain^  i,  p.  255).    I


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  109

district  of  the  town  of  Anna,  in  the  government  of  Popayaii,
there  is  a  great  province  called  Carrapa,  between  which  an<l
that  of  Quinbaya  (where  the  city  of  Cartage  is  founded)
there  are  many  people.  These  people,  having  for  their
leader  a  chief  named  Yrrua,  entered  Carrapa,  and,  in  spite
of  the  natives,  made  themselves  masters  of  the  greater  part
of  the  province.^  I  know  this,  because,  when  we  discovered
these  districts,  we  saw  the  villages  burnt  just  as  they  were
left  by  the  natives  of  the  province  of  Quinbaya.  It  is
notorious  that  they  were  all  killed,  in  former  times,  by
those  who  made  themselves  masters  of  the  land.

In  many  parts  of  the  provinces  of  the  government  of
Popayan  the  same  things  happened.  In  Peru  they  talk  of
nothing  else  but  how  some  came  from  one  part,  and  some
from  another,  and  made  themselves  masters  of  the  land  of
their  neighbours  by  wars  and  battles.  The  great  antiquity
of  these  people  is  also  shown  by  the  remains  of  cultivated
fields,  which  are  so  numerous.

The  Yncas,  it  is  well  known,  made  themselves  masters  of
this  kingdom  by  force  and  intrigues.  They  relate  that  Manco
Ccapac,  who  founded  the  city  of  Cuzco,  had  an  insignificant
origin,  and  the  sovereignty  remained  in  the  hands  of  his
descendants  until  the  time  of  the  dispute  between  the
sole  heir  Huascar,  and  Atahualpa,  concerning  the  govern-
ment of  the  empire,  after  which  the  Spaniards  arrived,  and
easily   got    possession   of  the   country.      From    all    this    it

have  myself  seen  much  of  these  interesting  people,  and  have  found  them
to  be  intelligent,  patient,  obedient,  loving  amongst  each  other,  and  parti-
cularly kind  to  animals.  They  are  brave  and  endui-ing.  I  was  in  the
dense  untrodden  forests  with  four  of  these  Indians  for  many  days,  and
they  proved  to  be  willing,  hard  working,  inteUigent,  good  humom-ed,
efficient,  and  companionable.  Of  the  higher  quaUties  of  this  race,  their
copious  language ;  plaintive  songs ;  superb  works  of  art  in  gold,  silver,
stone,  and  clay ;  beautiful  fabrics ;  stupendous  architectiu-e ;  enlightened
laws  ;  and  marvellous  civ-ilisation  in  the  days  of  the  Yncas  ;  are  sufficijnt
proof.

1  See  p.  S2.


410  THE    TRAVELS    OF

appears  that  tliere  were  wars  and  oppressions  among  tliese
Indians,  as  well  as  among  all  tlie  other  nations  of  the
world ;  for  do  we  not  read  that  tyrants  have  made  them-
selves rulers  of  great  kingdoms  and  lordships  ?

When  I  was  in  these  parts  I  heard  that  the  chiefs  oppressed
the  people,  and  that  some  of  them  treated  the  Indians  with
great  severity  ;  for  if  the  Encomenderos  asked  for  any  service,
or  desired  some  forced  service,  either  from  the  persons  or
goods  of  the  Indians,  they  obliged  the  chiefs  to  supply  it.
The  chiefs  then  went  to  the  houses  of  the  poorest  people,  and
ordered  them  to  comply  with  the  demand ;  and  if  they  made
any  excuse,  even  if  it  was  a  just  one,  not  only  were  they  not
listened  to,- but  they  were  also  ill-treated,  and  their  persons
or  goods  were  taken  by  force.  I  heard  the  poor  Indians  of
the  King,  and  others  in  the  Collao,  in  the  valley  of  Xauxa,
and  in  many  other  parts,  lamenting  over  this  oppression,
but  though  they  receive  an  injury  they  cannot  resent  it.
If  sheep  are  required,  they  are  not  taken  from  the  chiefs
but  from  the  unhappy  Indians.  Some  of  them  are  so  much
molested  that  they  hide  away  for  fear  of  these  exactions ;
and  in  the  coast  valleys  they  are  more  oppressed  by  the
chiefs  than  in  the  mountains.  It  is  true,  however,  that,  as
tliere  are  friars  preaching  in  most  of  the  provinces  of  this
kingdom,  and  as  some  of  them  understand  the  language,
they  hear  the  complaints  of  the  Indians,  and  remedy  many
of  their  wrongs.  Each  day  things  get  into  better  order,
and  the  Christians  and  Indian  chiefs  have  such  fear  of  the
strict  justice  enforced  in  these  parts  by  the  Audience  and
royal  Chancelleries,  that  they  dare  not  lay  their  hands  on
the  poor,  and  there  has  thus  been  a  great  reform  in  the
government.


I'EDKO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  411


CHAPTER    CXVII.

Ill  which  certain  things  are  declared  concerning  the  Inthaiis ;  and  what
fell  out  between  a  clergyman  and  one  of  them,  in  a  village  of  this
kingdom.

As  some  people  say  evil  things  of  tliese  Indians,  comparing
them  with  beasts,  saying  that  in  their  c.ustoms  and  ways  of
living  they  are  more  like  beasts  than  men,  and  that  they
not  only  eat  each  other,  but  commit  other  great  crimes ;
and  as  I  have  written  of  these  and  other  abuses  of  which
they  are  guilty  in  this  history,  I  wish  it  to  be  known  that
all  this  is  not  true  of  every  nation  in  these  Indies,  and  that,
if  in  some  provinces  they  eat  human  flesh,  and  commit
other  crimes,  in  others  they  abhor  these  things.  It  would,
therefore,  be  unjust  to  condemn  them  all,  and  even  those
Avho  practise  these  sins  will  be  freed  from  them  by  the
light  of  our  holy  faith,  without  which  they  were  ignorant  of
what  they  did,  like  many  other  nations,  such  as  the  gentiles,
who  knew  no  more  of  the  faith  than  these  Indians,  and
sacrificed  to  idols  as  much  or  more  than  they  did.  And
even,  if  we  look  round,  we  shaU  see  many  who  profess  our
law,  and  have  received  the  water  of  the  holy  baptism,  com-
mitting great  sins  every  day,  being  deceived  by  the  devil.
If,  therefore,  these  Indians  practised  the  customs  of  which
I  have  written,  it  was  because  formerly  they  had  no  one  to
direct  them  in  the  way  of  truth.  Now  those  who  hoar  the
doctrine  of  the  holy  gospel,  know  that  the  shades  of  per-
dition surround  those  who  are  separated  from  it ;  while  the
devil,  whose  envy  increases  at  the  fruits  of  our  holy  faith,
deceives  some  of  these  people  by  fears  and  terrors ;  but  his
\actims  are  few,  and  are  each  day  decreasing,  seeing  that
our  Lord  God  works  in  all  times  for  the  extension  of  his
holv  faith.


412  THE    TRAVELS    OF

happened  in  a  village  called  Lampa^  according  to  the  ac-
count which  was  given  me  of  it  in  the  village  of  Azangaro,
a  rejiartimiento  of  the  priest  Antonio  de  Quinones/  a  citizen
of  Cuzco.  It  relates  to  the  conversion  of  an  Indian,  and  I
asked  my  informant  to  give  me  the  statement  in  writing,
which,  without  adding  or  omitting  anything,  is  as  follows  : —
"  I,  Marcos  Otaso,  a  priest  and  native  of  Valladolid,  being
in  the  village  of  Jjampa,  teaching  the  Indians  our  holy
Christian  faith,  in  the  month  of  May  1547,  the  moon  being
full,  all  the  chiefs  and  principal  people  came  to  me  and
asked  very  eagerly  for  permission  to  do  what  was  their
custom  at  that  season.  I  replied  that  if  it  was  anything
that  was  unlawful  in  our  holy  Catholic  faith,  it  must  uot  be
done  from  that  time  forward.  They  received  my  decision,
and  returned  to  their  homes.  At  about  noon  they  began  to
sound  drums  in  several  directions  with  one  stick,  which  is
their  way  of  sounding  them  ;  and  presently  several  mantles
were  spread  in  the  lAaza  for  the  chiefs  to  sit  upon,  who
were  dressed  in  their  best  clothes,  with  their  hair  plaited
according  to  their  custom — a  plait,  twisted  four  times,  fall-
ing on  each  side.  Being  seated  in  their  places,  I  saw  a
boy  deity,  aged  about  twelve  years,  go  up  to  each  cacique.
These  boys  were  very  handsome,  and  richly  dressed.  From
the  knees  downwards  they  were  covered  with  red  fringe,
their  arms  were  clothed  in  the  same  way,  and  they  had
many  stamped  medals  of  gold  and  silver  on  different  parts
of  their  bodies.  In  their  right  hands  they  carried  a  kind
of  weapon  like  a  halberd,  and  in  the  left  a  large  bag  of  coca.
On  the  left  hand  of  each  boy  walked  girls  of  ten  years  old,
beautifully  dressed  in  the  same  way,  except  that  they  wore
a  long  train  behind,  which  is  not  the  custom  with  other
women.     This   train  was  held   by  an   older  girl,  who  was

1  The  family  of  Quifiones  is  still  the  principal  one  in  Azangaro ;  and
the  enlightened  and  liberal  Don  Luis  Quiuones,  late  a  member  of  Con-
gress, was  my  host  during  my  stay  in  that  interesting  town.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON,  413

'beautiful  and  stately.  Behind  came  many  women  as  at-
tendants. The  girls  carried  bags  of  very  fine  cloth  in  their
right  hands,  full  of  gold  and  silver  medals.  From  the
shoulders  a  lion  skin  hung  down  and  covered  everything.
Behind  the  attendants  came  six  Indian  labourers,  each  with
a  plough  on  his  shoulder,  and  beautiful  crowns  of  many-
coloured  feathers  on  his  head.  Then  followed  six  others,
as  their  pages,  with  bags  of  potatoes,  playing  on  drums.
Thus  they  advanced  towards  the  chiefs,  and,  as  they  passed
them,  the  boys  and  girls,  and  all  the  others,  made  deep
reverences  and  bowed  their  heads.  The  chiefs  returned
the  salute  by  bowing  also.  They  then  retired  without  turn-
ing their  heads,  for  about  twenty  paces,  in  the  same  order.
The  labourers  then  put  the  jDloughs  on  the  ground,  and
took  the  bags  of  the  large  and  choice  potatoes,  at  the  same
time  beating  drums,  and  performing  a  sort  of  dance,  raising
themselves  on  the  points  of  their  toes,  and  holding  up  the
bags  which  they  held  in  their  hands  from  time  to  time.
Only  those  I  have  mentioned  did  this ;  for  all  the  chiefs  and
the  rest  of  the  people  were  seated  on  the  ground  in  rows  in
perfect  silence,  watching  what  was  going  on.  Afterwards
those  in  the  procession  sat  down,  and  others  brought  a  one-
year  old  lamb  all  of  one  colour,  and  took  it  before  the  chief,
surrounded  by  other  Indians,  so  that  I  might  not  see  what
was  going  on.  They  then  threw  the  lamb  on  the  ground,
and,  having  torn  out  the  bowels,  they  gave  them  to  the
sorcerers,  called  Huaca-camayoc,  who  are  to  them  what
priests  are  with  us.  I  then  saw  certain  Indians  taking  up
as  much  of  the  lamb's  blood  as  they  could  hold  in  their
hands,  and  pouring  it  quickly  amongst  the  potatoes  in  the
bags.^  At  this  moment  a  chief  came  forward,  who  had
become  a  Christian  a  few  days  before,  calling  them  dogs
and  other  things,  in  their  own  language,  which  I  did  not

'  This  is  a  very  curious  account  of  the  ceremony  at  harvest  time,  in  use
among  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  CoUao.


414  THE    TRAVELS    OF

understand.  He  then  went  to  the  foot  of  a  high  cross*
which  stood  in  the  middle  of  the  i:>Jaza,  where,  with  a  loud
voice,  he  fearlessly  denounced  this  diabolical  rite.  They  all
went  away  in  great  affright,  without  finishing  the  sacrifice,
or  prognosticating  the  success  of  the  harvests  during  the
year,  as  was  their  wont.  Other  priests,  called  nmu,'^  also
predict  coming  events,  and  converse  with  the  devil,  carrying
about  with  them  a  figure  of  the  enemy,  made  of  a  hollow
bone,  with  a  lump  of  the  black  wax,  that  is  found  in  the
country,  on  the  top.

^' While  I  was  in  this  village  of  Lampa,  a  boy  of  mine
came  to  me  on  Maundy  Thursday,  who  had  slept  in  the
church.  He  was  very  much  frightened,  and  asked  me  to  get
up  and  go  to  baptise  a  cacique  who  was  in  the  church  on  his
knees  before  the  images,  in  a  state  of  great  terror.  On  the
Wednesday  night,  when  this  cacique  was  in  the  huaca  where
they  go  to  worship,  he  saw  a  man  dressed  in  white,  who  told
him  to  go  to  the  church  and  be  baptised  by  me.  As  soon  as
day  dawned  I  got  up  and  recited  my  prayers,  and  then,  not
believing  the  story,  went  to  say  mass,  and  found  the  man
still  on  his  knees.  Directly  he  saw  me,  he  threw  himself
at  my  feet,  and  begged  me  to  make  him  a  Christian.  I
consented,  and  having  said  mass  in  presence  of  several
Christians,  I  baptised  him.  He  then  went  out  with  great
joy,  crying  out  that  he  was  now  a  Christian,  and  not  a  bad
man  like  the  other  Indians.  Then,  without  saying  anything
to  anybody,  he  burnt  his  house,  divided  his  women  and
flocks  amongst  his  servants,  and  returned  to  the  church,
where  he  was  always  preaching  to  the  Indians  what  con-
cerned their  salvation,  and  urging  them  to  forsake  their
sins  and  vices.  He  did  this  with  great  fervour,  as  if  he
had  been  inspired  by  the  Holy  Spirit.     Many  Indians  be-

'  Umu  is  the  correct  word  for  priest  in  Quichua,  and  huillac-urmi  for
high  priest.  Huaca-camayoc  was  a  person  having  charge  of  the  huacas,
or  tombs  and  holy  places.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  415

camo  Christians,  owing  to  the  persuasions  of  the  newly-con-
verted chief;  and  the  chief  related  that  the  man  whom  he
saw  in  the  Jtuaca,  or  temple  of  the  devil,  was  white  and  very
beautiful,  and  that  his  clothes  were  resplendent."

The  priest  gave  me  this  account  in  wi'iting,  and  I  myself
see  great  signs  every  day  that  the  Lord  is  more  served  now
than  in  times  past.  The  Indians  are  converted,  and  little
by  little  they  are  forgetting  their  rites  and  evil  customs.
If  tliis  work  has  been  slow,  the  fault  lies  more  in  our  neglect
than  in  their  malice ;  for  the  best  way  to  convert  the  Indians
is  to  do  good  works,  that  the  newly  converted  may  take
example.


CHAPTER    CXVIII.


How,  when  a  chief  near  the  town  of  Anzerma  wished  to  become  a
Christian,  he  saw  the  devils  visibly,  who  wished  to  deter  him  from
his  good  intention  by  their  terrors.

In  the  last  chapter  I  related  how  an  Indian  of  the  village  of
Lampa  was  converted  to  Christianity.  I  will  here  tell
another  strange  story,  that  the  faithful  may  glorify  the
name  of  God  who  is  so  merciful  to  us,  and  that  the  wicked
and  incredulous  may  acknowledge  the  works  of  the  Lord.
When  the  Adelantado  Belalcazar  was  governor  of  the  pro-
vince of  Popayan,  and  when  Gomez  Hernandez  was  his
lieutenant  in  the  town  of  Anzerma,  there  was  a  chief  in
a  village  called  Pirsa,  almost  four  leagues  from  the  town,
whose  brother,  a  good-looking  youth,  named  Tamaraqunga,
inspired  by  God,  wished  to  go  to  the  town  of  the  Chris-
tians, to  receive  baptism.  But  the  devils  did  not  wish  that
he  should  attain  his  desire,  fearing  to  lose  what  seemed
secure,  so  they  frightened  this  Tamaraqunga  in  such  sort
that  he  was  unable  to  do  anything.     God  permitting  it,  the


416  THE    TRAVELS    OF

devils  stationed  themselves  in  a  place  where  tlie  cliief  alone
could  see  them^  in  the  shape  of  birds  called  Auras.^  Find-
ing himself  so  persecuted  by  the  devils^  he  sent  in  great
haste  to  a  Christian  living  near^  who  came  at  once,  and,
hearing  what  he  wanted,  signed  him  with  the  sign  of  the
cross.  But  the  devils  then  frightened  him  more  than  ever,
appearing  in  hideous  forms  which  were  only  visible  to  him.
The  Christian  only  saw  stones  falling  from  the  air,  and
heard  whistling.  A  brother  of  one  Juan  Pacheco,  citizen
of  the  same  town,  then  holding  office  in  the  place  of  Gomez
Hernandez,  who  had  gone  to  Caramanta,  came  from  Anzerma
with  another  man,  to  visit  the  Indian  chief.  They  say  that
Tamai^aqunga  was  much  frightened  and  ill-treated  by  the
devils,  who  carried  him  through  the  air  from  one  place  to
another,  in  presence  of  the  Christians,  he  complaining,  and
the  devils  whisthng  and  shouting.^  Sometimes,  when  the
chief  was  sitting  with  a  glass  of  liquor  before  him,  the  Chris-
tians saw  the  glass  raised  up  in  the  air  and  put  down  empty,
and  a  short  time  afterwards  the  wine  was  again  poured  into
the  cup  from  the  air.  The  chief  covered  his  face  with  his
cloak,  that  he  might  not  see  the  horrible  visions  before  him.
Then,  without  having  moved  the  cloak  from  his  face,  the
devils  forced  clay  into  his  mouth,  as  if  they  wished  to  choke
him.  At  last  the  Christians  resolved  to  take  the  chief  to
the  town,  that  he  might  be  baptised  at  once,  and  more  than
two  hundred  Indians  came  with  him,  but  they  were  so
frightened  by  the  devils,  that  they  would  not  come  near  the
chief.  Thus,  journeying  with  the  Christians,  they  came  to
a  bad  part  of  the  road,  where  the  devils  took  the  chief  into
the  air,  to  dash  him  against  the  rocks.  He  cried  out  to  the
Christians  for  help,  who  presently  took  hold  of  him,  but  the
Indians   did  not   dare   to   speak,  much  more  to   offer   any

•  This  is  the  Mexican  name  for  turkey  buzzards.

-  All  this  sounds  very  like  a  spirit-rapping  and  table-turning  piece  of
business.


PEDEO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  417

assistance.  So  cruelly  was  lie  persecuted  by  the  devils,  all
for  the  good  of  his  soul,  and  for  the  greater  confusion  of  this
our  cruel  enemy.

The  two  Chnstians  saw  that  God  would  not  be  served  if
the  Indian  was  left  to  these  devils,  so  they  fastened  some
cords  round  his  waist,  and,  calling  upon  God  for  help,  they
went  on  with  the  Indian  between  them,  and  with  crosses  in
their  hands,  and  reached  a  hill;  but  still  with  great  diflSculty.
As  they  were  now  near  the  town,  they  sent  a  messenger  to
Juan  Pacheco  for  assistance.  Presently  the  devils  began  to
throw  stones  about  in  the  air,  and  in  this  way  they  reached
the  town,  and  went  straight  to  the  house  of  this  Juan  Pacheco,
where  all  the  Christians  in  the  village  assembled.  The  devils
then  began  throwing  small  stones  on  the  top  of  the  house,
and  whistling ;  and  as  the  Indians,  when  they  go  to  war,  cry
out  Hu  !  Hu  !  Hu  !  so  the  devils  also  made  these  noises  in
very  loud  voices.  Every  body  then  began  to  pray  to  our
Lord  that,  for  his  glory  and  for  the  salvation  of  the  Indian^s
soul,  the  devils  might  not  be  allowed  to  have  their  own  way ;
for  these  devils,  according  to  the  words  heard  by  the  chief,
cried  out  that  he  must  not  become  a  Christian.  While
many  stones  were  flying  about,  the  people  came  out  to  go  to
church,  and  some  Christians  heard  noises  ■within,  before
the  doors  were  opened.  The  Indian  Tamaraqunga,  on  going
into  the  church,  saw  the  devils  looking  very  fierce,  with
their  heads  beneath,  and  feet  in  the  air.  A  friar  named  Fray
Juan  de  Santa  Maria,  of  the  order  of  our  lady  of  mercy,
then  came  in  to  baptise  the  chief,  upon  which  the  devils,  in
presence  of  all  the  Christians,  but  without  being  seen  by
any  one  but  the  chief,  took  him  up  in  the  air;  putting  his
head  below  and  his  feet  above,  as  they  were  themselves.
The  Christians  cried  out  in  a  loud  voice,  ''Jesus  Christ !
Jesus  Christ,  be  with  us  \"  made  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and
taking  hold  of  him,  wetted  him  with  holy  water ;  but  still
the  whistling  and  other  noises  continued  inside  the  church.

EE


418  THE    TRAVELS    OF

Tamaraqunga  saw  the  devils  visibly,  and  they  gave  him
such  buffets,  that  a  hat,  which  he  held  before  his  eyes  so  as
not  to  see  them,  was  hurled  to  a  distance.  They  also  spat
in  his  face.  All  this  happened  during  the  night,  and  in
the  morning  the  friar  dressed,  to  say  mass.  As  soon  as  he
began,  the  noises  ceased,  and  the  chief  received  no  more
evil  treatment  from  the  devils.  When  the  most  holy  mass
was  concluded,  Tamaraqunga  asked  for  the  water  of  bap-
tism, together  with  his  wife  and  son.  After  he  was  baptised
he  said  that  he  was  now  a  Christian  and  might  be  left  to
walk  alone,  to  see  if  the  devils  stiU  had  any  power  over  him.
So  the  Christians  let  him  go,  while  they  all  prayed  to  our
Lord  that,  for  the  exaltation  of  his  holy  faith,  and  that  the
Indians  might  be  converted,  he  would  not  permit  the  devils
to  have  any  further  power  over  the  chief,  now  that  he  was  a
Christian.  Then  Tamaraqunga  went  out  with  great  joy,
saying  "I  am  a  Christian,"  and  praising  God  in  his  own
language.  He  went  round  the  church  two  or  three  times,
and  neither  felt  nor  heard  anything  from  the  devils,  so  he
went  to  his  house  full  of  joy  and  contentment.  This  event
was  so  famous  among  the  Indians,  that  many  became
Christians.     It  happened  in  the  year  1549.


CHAPTER     CXIX.


How  mighty  wonders  have  been  clearly  seen  in  the  discoveiy  of  these
Indies,  how  our  Sovereign  Lord  God  desires  to  watch  over  the
Spaniards,  and  how  He  also  chastises  those  who  are  cruel  to  the
Indians.

Before  finishing  this  first  part,  it  seems  good  that  I  should
here  mention  some  of  the  marvellous  works  which  our  Lord
God  has  seen  fit  to  display  in  the  discovery  which  the
Christian   Spaniards  have  made  in  these  kingdoms,  as  well


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  419

as  the  punishments  he  has  inflicted  on  certain  notable  per-
sons. For  they  will  teach  us  how  we  must  love  Him  as  a
father,  and  fear  Him  as  a  just  Judge  and  Lord.

Passing  over  the  first  discovery  made  by  the  admiral  Don
Christoval  Colon,  and  the  successes  of  the  Marquis  Don
Fernando  Cortez,  and  of  other  captains  and  governors  who
discovered  Tierra  Firme,  because  I  only  wish  to  mention
the  events  of  the  present  time,  I  come  to  the  marquis  Don
Francisco  Pizarro.  How  many  hardships  did  he  and  his
companions  svifFer,  without  discovering  anything  beyond  the
land  north  of  the  river  San  Juan,  and  the  succours  brought
by  the  adelantado  Don  Diego  de  Almagro  did  not  suffice  to
enable  him  to  press  forward.  Then  it  was  that  the  governor
Pedro  de  los  Rios,  learning  from  the  couplet  which  was
written  to  him  : —

"  Look  out,  Seiior  Governor,

For  the  drover  while  he  is  near,
For  he  goes  home  to  get  the  sheep

For  the  butcher  who  is  there.*' '
that  Almagro  came  to  bring  people  to  the  shambles  of  these
hardships,  where  Pizarro  would  butcher  them,  sent  Juan
Tafur  of  Panama  to  bring  them  back.     They  all  returned
with  him   except  thirteen  Christians^  who  remained  with

»  "  Pues  Seuor  Gobernador
INIirelo  bien  por  entero
Que  alia  va  el  Recogedor
Y  acii  queda  el  Carnicero."
The  above  is  Mr.  Prescott'a  version  of  these  famous  lines.     Mr.  Helps
translates  them  thus  : —

' '  My  good  lord  Governor,
Have  pity  on  our  woes ;
For  here  remains  the  butcher,
To  Panama  the  salesman  goes."
^  Of  the  famous  tliirteen  only  four  ever  appear  again  in  the  history  of
the  times.     These  are  Pedro  de  Candia  (see  note,  p.  193)  ;  Juan  de  la
Torre  (see  note,  p.   221)  ;    Nicholas  de  Ribera,  who  is  mentioned  as
having  deserted  from  Gonzalo  Pizarro  to  Gasca,  as  having  been  after-
wards appointed  captain  of  the  guard  of  the  royal  seal  liy  the  Royal


420  THE    TRAVELS    OF

Don  Francisco  Pizarro  in  tlie  island  of  Gorgona^  until  Don
Diego  Almagro  sent  them  a  ship  with  which  to  continue  the

Audience  of  Lima  in  1554,  and  as  having  lived  quietly  on  a  repartiviiento
granted  to  him  near  Cuzco,  and  left  children  to  inherit  it ;  and  Alonzo
de  Mohna.  When  Pizarro  finally  left  the  desert  island,  and  continued
his  voyage  of  discovery,  he  first  touched  at  Tmnbez,  on  the  northern
boimdary  of  Peru,  and  then  sailed  some  distance  down  the  coast.  Alonzo
de  Molma  was  sent  on  shore  at  one  place,  and,  the  sea  running  high,  he
was  left  there  untU  the  return  of  the  ship.  The  natives  treated  him  with
gTeat  kindness,  and  when  Pizarro's  ship  came  back,  three  more  of  the
thirteen,  Nicolas  de  Ribera,  Francisco  de  CueUar,  and  Pedro  Alcon  were
sent  ashore,  the  latter  being  very  gaily  di-essed.  This  Alcon  fell  madly
in  love  -ndth  an  Indian  lady  at  first  sight,  and  was  so  fm-ious  at  not  being
allowed  to  stay  beliind,  that  he  drew  his  sword  on  his  own  sliipmates,
and  the  pilot  Ruiz  was  obhged  to  knock  lum  down  with  an  oar.  He  was
afterwai-ds  kept  chained  on  the  lower  deck.  ^\Tien  Pizarro  finally  sailed
for  Panama  again,  on  his  way  to  Spain,  Alonzo  de  INIolina  was  allowed
to  remain  behind  at  Tumbez  untU  the  Sj)aniards  should  come  back,  the
Indians  promising  to  use  him  well.  But  he  died  before  Pizarro  returned,
and  the  Indians  gave  various  conflicting  accounts  of  the  manner  of  his
death.     Herrera^  dec.  iii,  hb.  iii,  cap.  3,  and  Ub.  iv,  cap.  1.

The  most  authentic  and  only  complete  hst  of  the  thirteen  is  given  by
Prescott,  from  a  manuscript  copy  of  ' '  the  Capitulation  made  by  Pizarro
with  Queen  Juana  on  July  26th,  1529,"  wluch  he  obtained  from  Navar-
rete.  The  original  is  at  Seville.  In  this  document  all  those,  among  the
thirteen,  who  were  not  already  hidalgos,  were  created  so.

Gomara  gives  the  names  of  two,  the  pilot  Ruiz,  and  Pedro  de  Candia.
Zarate  adds  seven  more,  one  of  whom  is  not  in  the  "  Capitulation."
Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  copies  from  Zarate,  but  adds  that  there  were  two
whose  names  were  Ribera,  and  that  he  knew  them  both  afterwards.
There  is  only  one  in  the  "  Capitulation."

The  list  in  the  "  Capitulation,"  supplied  by  Pizarro  liimself,  must  of
course  have  been  the  coiTect  one :  it  is  as  follows : —

Bartolome  Ruiz  (the  pilot).  Alonzo  de  Molina.

Cristoval  de  Peralta.  Pedro  Alcon.

Pedro  de  Candia.  Garcia  de  Jerez.

Domingo  de  Soria  Luce.  Anton  de  Carrion.

Nicolas  de  Ribera.  Alonzo  Briceiio.

Francisco  de  CueUar.  Martin  de  Paz.

Juan  de  la  Torre.
The  name  added   by  Zarate  is   that  of  Alonzo  de  Truxillo;    but  he
may  have  been  one  of  the  two  Alonzos  of  the  "  Capitulation ;"  Zarate
giving  his  birth  place  of  Truxillo,  instead  of  his  surname.     Garcia  de


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  421

voyage.  It  pleased  God  that,  though  they  had  made  no  dis-
covery during  the  three  or  four  previous  yearSj  they  disco-
vered all  in  ten  or  twelve  days.  Thus  these  thirteen  Chris-
tians, with  their  leader,  discovered  Peru.  Afterwards,  at
the  end  of  some  years,  when  the  same  marquis  with  160
Spaniards  invaded  the  country,  he  could  not  have  prevailed
against  the  multitude  of  Indians,  if  God  had  not  permitted
that  there  should  be  a  very  cruel  war  between  the  two
brothers  Huascar  and  Atahualpa,  at  the  time.  When  the
Indians  rose  against  the  Christians  at  Cuzco,  there  were  not
more  than  180  Spaniards  mounted  and  on  foot,  to  resist  the
attacks  of  Manco  Ynca  at  the  head  of  more  than  200,000
Indians.  It  was  a  miracle  how  they  escaped  from  the  hands
of  the  Indians  during  a  whole  year,  and  some  of  the  Indians
themselves  affirm  that  sometimes,  when  they  were  fighting
with  the  Spaniards,  they  saw  a  celestial  figure  which  did
them  great  mischief.  When  the  Indians  set  fire  to  the  city,
and  the  flames  began  to  approach  the  church,  it  was  seen  to
reach  it  three  times,  and  to  be  put  out  as  often,  the  place
where  the  flames  touched  it  being  covered  with  dry  straw.

Jerez  (or  de  Jaren),  another  of  the  thirteen,  seems  to  have  given  evidence
before  a  judge  respecting  tliis  transaction  in  1529,  which  has  been  pre-
served {Doc.  Ined.^  torn.  26,  p.  260),  and  is  quoted  by  INIi-.  Helps  (iii,  p.
446,  note).  He  says : — "  Pizarro  being  in  the  island  of  Gallo,  the  gover-
nor Rios  sent  for  the  men  who  were  with  the  said  captain,  allowing  any
one  who  should  wish  to  prosecute  the  enterprise  to  remain  with  liim."

This  story  respecting  Pizarro,  who,  when  his  people  were  suffering  from
the  extremities  of  famine  and  hardship,  and  when  a  sliip  had  arrived  to
take  them  back  to  Panama,  cb-ew  a  line,  and  called  upon  those  who  preferred
toU  and  hunger  to  ease  and  pleasure,  to  cross  it  and  remain  with  liim,  is
certainly  one  of  the  most  heart-stirring  in  the  history  of  Spanish  conquest
in  America.  Robertson  gives  the  story  on  the  authority  of  Herrera,
Zarate,  Xerez,  and  Gomara.  Prescott  adds  the  speech  imputed  to  Pizarro,
from  Montesinos,  a  very  unreUable  soui-ce  ;  and  Helps  gives  the  accoimt
according  to  Herrera's  version,  which  no  doubt  is  very  near  the  truth.
The  conduct  of  these  thu-teen  brave  men  shows  the  spirit  which  auunated
the  Spaniards  of  that  age,  and  the  dauntless  act  itself,  in  its  simple
grandeur,  certainly  derives  no  additional  glory  from  the  melodramatic
speeches  which  have  been  put  into  Pizarro's  mouth  by  later  chroniclers.


422  THE    TRAVELS    OP

The  captain  Francisco  Cesai%  wlio  set  out  from  Cartlia-
gena  in  the  year  1536^  and  traversed  great  mountains  and
deep  rivers^  with  only  sixty  Spaniards^  reached  the  province
of  Guaca,  where  there  was  a  principal  house  dedicated  to
the  devil,  and  he  collected  thirty  thousand  j^csos  of  gold  from
a  tomb  near  it.^  When  the  Indians  saw  how  few  Spaniards
there  were,  more  than  twenty  thousand  assembled  and  sur-
rounded them.  As  the  Spaniards  were  so  few  and  weak,
having  eaten  nothing  but  roots,  God  still  favoured  them  so
that  they  killed  and  wounded  many  Indians,  without  losing
a  man.  Not  only  did  God  work  this  miracle  for  the  Chris-
tians, but  he  was  also  served  by  guiding  them  to  a  road
which  took  them  to  Uraba  in  eighteen  days,  when  they  had
wandered  on  the  other  for  a  whole  year.

We  have  seen  many  more  of  these  miracles,  but  it  must
suffice  to  say  that  a  province  containing  thirty  or  forty  thou-
sand Indians  is  held  by  forty  or  fifty  Christians.  And  in
lands  where  there  are  heavy  rains  or  continual  earthquakes,
we  see  clearly  the  favour  of  God,  as  soon  as  Christians  enter
them.  For  the  rains  abate,  the  lands  become  profitable,
and  there  are  fewer  storms  than  in  the  times  before  the
Christians  arrived.

Ajiother  thing  must  also  be  noted,  which  is,  that  those
who  carry  the  standard  of  the  cross  as  their  guide  must  not
make  their  discoveries  as  tyrants,  for  those  who  do  so  re-
ceive heavy  chastisement.  Of  those  who  have  been  tyrants,
few  have  died  natural  deaths,  such  for  instance  as  those  who
compassed  the  death  of  Atahualpa.  All  these  have  pei-ished
miserably.  It  would  even  appear  that  the  great  wars  in
Peru  have  been  permitted  by  God,  to  punish  the  conquerors,
and  thus  Carbajal  may  be  looked  upon  as  the  executioner  of
His  justice.  He  lived  until  God^s  chastisement  was  com-
plete, and  then  paid  with  his  life  for  the  grave  crimes  he
had  committed.  The  marshal  Don  Jorge  Robledo  consented
'  See  note  at  page  47.


PEDRO    DE    CIEZA    PE    LEON.  423

to  allow  great  harm  to  be  done  to  the  Indians  in  the  pro-
vince of  Pozo,  and  many  to  be  killed  with  crossbows  and
dogs.  And  God  permitted  that  he  should  be  sentenced  to
death  in  the  same  place,  and  have  for  his  tomb  the  bellies  of
the  Indians.^  The  comeudador  Hernan  Rodriquez  de  Sosa
and  Baltasar  de  Ledesma  died  in  the  same  way,  and  were
also  eaten  by  the  Indians ;  they  having  themselves  been
previously  very  cruel  to  them.  The  Adelantado  Belalcazar
killed  many  Indians  in  Quito  ;  and  God  permitted  that  he
should  be  driven  from  his  government  by  the  judge  who
came  to  try  him,  and  that  he  should  die  at  Carthagena  on
his  way  to  Spain,  poor,  and  full  of  sorrow.^  Francisco
Garcia  de  Tobar,  who  was  so  much  feared  by  the  Indians
by  reason  of  the  number  he  had  killed,  was  himself  killed
and  eaten  by  them.

Let  no  one  deceive  himself  with  the  belief  that  God  has
not  punished  those  who  were  ci'uel  to  these  Indians  ;  for
not  one  of  them  failed  to  receive  chastisement  in  proportion
to  the  offence.  I  knew  one  Roque  Martin,  an  inhabitant  of
the  city  of  Cali,  who  gave  the  dead  bodies  of  the  Indians  to
the  dogs,  and  afteiT\"ards  the  Indians  killed,  and,  I  even
believe,  ate  him.  I  could  enumerate  many  other  examples,
but  I  shall  conclude  by  saying  that  our  Lord  favours  us
in  these  conquests  and  discoveries  ;  but  if  the  discoverers
afterwards  become  tyrants.  He  chastises  them  severely,  as
I  have  myself  seen,  some  of  them  dying  suddenly,  which  is
a  thing  most  to  be  feared.

^  See  page  79  and  note.  ^  gge  page  110,  note.


424  THE    TEAVELS    OF


CHAPTER    CXX.


Of  the  dioceses  in  tliis  kingxlom  of  Peru,  who  are  the  bishops  of  them,
and  of  the  Royal  Chancellery  in  the  City  of  liings.

In  many  parts  of  tMs  work  I  have  treated  of  tlie  rites  and
customs  of  the  Indians^  and  of  the  many  temples  and  places
of  worship  they  had^  where  the  devil  was  seen  and  adored
by  them.  It  will  now  be  well  to  mention  the  dioceses,  and
who  those  are  who  rule  the  churches  and  have  charge  of  so
many  souls.

After  the  discovery  of  this  kingdom,  as  the  very  reverend
father  Don  Fray  Vincente  Valverde^  was  in  the  conquest,
he  received  Bulls  from  the  Supreme  Pontiff,  and  was  nomi-
nated as  bishop  by  his  Majesty.  He  held  the  post  until  the
Indians  killed  him  in  the  island  of  Puna.  Afterwards,  as
the  Spaniards  founded  new  cities,  the  number  of  bishops
was  increased.  The  very  reverend  father  Don  Juan  Solano,"
of  the  order  of  San  Domingo,  was  made  Bishop  of  Cuzco,
and  is  so  still  in  1550,  the  diocese  extending  to  Guamanga,^
Arequipa,  and  the  new  city  of  La  Paz.  The  most  reverend
father  Don  Jeronymo  de  Loaysa,*  a  friar  of  the  same  order,
has  been  nominated  archbishop  of  the  City  of  the  Kings,
with  a  diocese  reaching  to  Plata,  Truxillo,  Huanuco,  and
Chachapoyas.^     Don  Garcia  Diaz  Arias  is  bishop  of  the  city

^  See  note  at  page  300.

2  This  warlike  prelate  was  in  the  battle  of  Iluarina,  fighting  on  the
side  of  Centeno,  and  narrowly  escaped  with  his  life  ;  for  if  grim  old
Carbajal  had  caught  him,  he  would  assuredly  have  been  hanged.  Solano
succeeded  Valverde  in  the  bishopric  of  Cuzco  in  1545,  and  died  in  1562.

^  Guamanga  was  detached  from  Cuzco,  and  erected  into  a  separate
bishopric  by  a  Bull  of  Pope  Paul  V,  dated  July  20th,  1609.  The  first
bishop  was  installed  in  1615  ;  since  which  time  there  have  been  twenty-
five  bishops  of  Guamanga.  ^  See  note  at  page  227.

^  Plata  (Chuquisaca),  Truxillo,  and  Chachapoyas  afterwards  became
the  seats  of  distinct  Inshoprics.


PEDKO    DE    CIEZA    DE    LEON.  425

of  San  Francisco  del  Quito,  including  San  Miguel,  Puerto
Viejo,  and  Guayaquil.  He  has  his  seat  in  Quito,  which  is
the  chief  place  in  the  diocese.  The  bishop  of  the  govern-
ment of  Popayan  is  Don  Juan  Valle.  These  fathers  were
the  bishops  of  this  kingdom  when  I  left  it,  and  they  have
the  duty  to  perform  of  placing  clergymen  to  celebrate  mass
in  the  towns  and  villages.  The  government  of  this  king-
dom is  so  good,  in  these  times,  that  the  Indians  are  com-
plete masters  of  their  goods  and  persons.  By  the  will  of
God  the  former  tyranny  and  ill-treatment  of  Indians  have
ceased,  for  He  cures  all  things  by  his  grace.  Royal  audi-
ences and  chancelleries  have  been  established,  composed  of
learned  men,  who  give  an  example  to  others  by  their  in-
corruptible justice,  and  who  have  established  the  rules  for
the  payment  of  tribute.  The  excellent  lord  Don  Antonio
de  Mendoza,^  a  knight  as  full  of  valour  and  other  virtues  as
he  is  wanting  in  bad  qualities,  is  the  viceroy ;  and  the
licentiate  Andres  de  Cianca,  the  doctor  Bravo  de  Saravia,
and  the  licentiate  Hernando  de  Santillan  are  the  judges.
The  court  and  royal  chancellery  are  established  in  the  City
of  the  Kings.

I  will  conclude  this  chapter  by  saying  that,  when  the
lords  of  his  Majesty^s  council  of  the  Indies  yyeve  examining
my  work,  the  very  reverend  father  Fray  Don  Tomas  de  San
Martin  was  appointed  bishop  of  Charcas.  His  diocese
commences  at  the  limit  of  that  of  Cuzco,  and  extends  to
Chile  and  Tucuman,  including  the  city  of  La  Paz  and  the
town  of  Plata,  which  is  the  seat  of  this  new  bishopric.

>  Previously  viceroy  of  Mexico.  He  died  at  Lima  in  1555.  He  was  a
son  of  Inigo  Lopez  de  ^lendoza,  second  Count  of  Tendilla  and  ]Marquis  of
Mondejar,  who  was  ambassador  to  Rome  in  the  time  of  Innocent  YIII.


426  THE    TRAVELS    OF

CHAPTER    CXXl/

Of  the  monasteries  which  have  been  founded  in  Peru,  from  the  date  of
its  discovery  down  to  the  present  year  1550.

In  the  previous  chapter  I  have  briefly  stated  what  bishops
there  are  in  this  kingdom^  and  it  will  now  be  well  to  men-
tion the  monasteries  which  have  been  founded  in  it,  and
who  were  the  founders,  for  in  these  things  grave  worthies
and  some  very  learned  doctors  have  assisted.

In  the  city  of  Cuzco  there  is  a  house  of  the  order  of  San
Domingo,  on  the  site  where  the  Indians  had  their  principal
temple.  It  was  founded  by  the  reverend  father  Fray  Juan
'de  Olias.  There  is  another  house  of  the  order  of  San
Francisco,  founded  by  the  reverend  father  Fray  Pedro
Portugues.  Another  house  exists  of  the  order  of  our  Lady
of  Mercy,^  founded  by  the  reverend  father  Fray  Sebastian.
In  the  city  of  La  Paz  there  is  another  monastery  of  San
Francisco,  founded  by  the  reverend  father  Fray  Francisco
de  los  Angeles.  In  the  village  of  Chucuito  there  is  a  house
of  Dominicans  founded  by  the  reverend  father  Fray  Tomas
de  San  Martin.  In  the  town  of  Plata  there  is  another  of
Franciscans,  founded  by  the  reverend  father  Fray  Jeronimo.
In  Guamanga  there  is  another  of  Dominicans  founded  by
the  reverend  father  Fray  Martin  de  Esquivel ;  and  a  monas-
tery of  our  Lady  of  Mercy  founded  by  the  reverend  father
Fray  Sebastian.-  In  the  City  of  the  Kings  there  is  another
of  Franciscans  founded  by  the  reverend  father  Fray  Fran-
cisco de  Santa  Ana;^  another  of  Dominicans,  founded  by
the  reverend  father  Fray  Juan  de  Olias  f   and  another  of

^  The  church  of  La  INIerced  in  Cuzco  has  a  cloister,  which  is  the
finest  specimen  of  architecture  in  Peru  dating  from  Spanish  times,  and,
I  should  think,  in  all  South  America.  Here  the  Almagros,  father  and
son,  and  Gonzalo  Pizarro  were  buried.

2  All  the  monasteries  in  Guamanga  have  been  suppressed.

^  This  is  by  far  the  largest  monastery  in  Lima.

**  The  tower  of  San  Domingo  is  the  loftiest  in  Lima,  being  180  feet


PEDKO    DE    CTEZA    IJE    LEON.  427

our  Lady  of  Mercy,  founded  by  tlie  reverend  father  Fray
Miguel  do  Orenes.  In  the  village  of  Chincha  there  is  a
house  of  Dominicans,  founded  by  the  reverend  father  Fray
Domingo  do  San  Tomas.  In  the  city  of  Arequipa  there  is
another  house  of  this  order,  founded  by  the  reverend  father
Fray  Pedro  de  Ulloa ;  and  in  the  city  of  Leon  de  Huanuco
there  is  another,  founded  by  the  same  father  Fray  Pedro  de
Ulloa.  In  the  town  of  Cliicama  there  is  also  a  house  of
Dominicans,  founded  by  the  reverend  father  Fray  Domingo
de  San  Tomas.  In  the  city  of  Truxillo  there  is  a  monastery
of  Franciscans,  founded  by  the  reverend  father  Fray  Fran-
cisco de  la  Cruz,  and  another  of  Mercy,  In  Quito  there  is
a  house  of  Dominicans,  founded  by  the  reverend  father
Alonzo  de  Monte-negro,  another  of  Mercy,  and  another  of
Franciscans,  founded  by  the  reverend  father  Fray  Jodoco
Eique  Flamenco.  There  are  some  other  houses,  besides
the  above,  which  have  been  founded  by  the  numerous  friars
who  are  constantly  sent  by  his  Majesty's  council  of  the
Indies,  to  engage  in  the  conversion  of  the  Indians,  for  so
his  Majesty  has  ordered,  and  they  occupy  themselves  in
teaching  the  natives  with  great  diligence.  Touching  the
rules  and  other  things  of  which  I  should  treat,  it  wiU  be
more  convenient  to  do  so  in  another  place.

With  this  I  make  an  end  of  my  first  part,  with  glory  to
God,  our  Almighty  Lord,  and  to  his  blessed  and  glorious
Mother  our  Lady.  I  commenced  writing  in  the  city  of
Cartage,  in  the  government  of  Popayan  in  the  year  of  1541,
and  I  finished  writing  originally  in  the  City  of  the  Kings,
in  the  kingdom  of  Peru,  on  the  8th  day  of  the  month  of
September  1550,  the  author  being  thirty-two  yeai's  of  age,
and  having  passed  seventeen  of  them  in  these  Indies.

high.  The  church  contains  a  rich  silver-cased  altar  to  Santa  Rosa,  the
l^atron  saint  of  Lima.

THE    END.


INDEX

TO   THE

FIRST   PART   OF   THE   CIIROXICLE   OF   PERU,
PEDRO  DE  CIEZA  DE  LEOX.


Abancay,  318

Abibe  mountains,  43  ;  certain   hairy

worms  met  with  on  the,  38
Aburra  valley,  07-114
Acari,  28,  265
Acos,  301,  373
Adobes,  1£9,  219,  251
Aguales  Indians,  108
Aguacate,  a  fruit  (see  Palta).
Aguja,  point  of,  25
Agaz,  Juan,  eats  a  dozen  apples,  39
Aji,  142  note,  232
Alaya,  chief  of  Xauxa,  524,  301
Alcobasa    (Diego    de),   his    account

of   the  ruins  of  Tiahuanaco,  378

note
Alcon   (Pedro),  one   of  the   thirteen

companions  of  Pizarro,  420  note
Aldana  (Lorenzo  de),  123
Algoroba  trees,  129,  235,  239  note
Alligators,  16

Alligator  pears  (see  Paltas).
Alonzo  (Rodrigo),  in  company  with

Cieza  de   Leon,  sees  a  pretty  girl

killed  and  eaten,  79
Almagro  (Diego  de),  7,  159, 186,  256,

318,419
Almagro  the  Younger,  306  note,  312,

335
i\lpacas,  394

Alvarado  (Alonzo  de),  157,  279,  282
(Pedro  de),  148,  155,  156,

157,  185,  186,  248

(Gomez  de),  157,  281,  283

(Diego  de),  157

Amaru-raayu  river,  337  note

Ambato,  154

Ancocahua,  temple  of,  357

Ancasmayu  river,  122

Anco-allo,  chief  of  the  Chancas,  280

Andagoya  (Pascual  de),  105  note

Andahuaylas,  315,  317

Angoyaco  pass,  302


Animals,  42  ;  guinea  pigs,  63  note ;
cJntcha,  91  ;  guadwjuinajes,  ib,  ;
tigers,  104  ;  tapirs,  164;  of  Puerto
Viejo,  175 ;  dogs,  235  ;  llama  tribe,
392  ;  of  Peru,  402  ;  foxes,  237-402

Auaquito,  plains  of,  139

Andeneria,  321

Andes,  description  of,  129 ;  forests
of,  323,  337  ;  animals  and  snakes
of,  338  ;  nations  of,  339 ;  riches  of,
406

Antioquia,  4,  52  ;  customs  of  natives
of,  59  ;  road  from,  to  Arma,  66,
114

Antl-suyu,  province,  323-337

Anunaybe,  father  of  the  cacique
Nutibara,  46

Anzerma,  Indians  of,  63  ;  founding  of,
65  ;  supply  of  salt  at,  126

Apurimac,  river  and  bridge,  319

Aqueducts  (see  Irrigation,  works  of).

Arbi,  valley  of,  81

Arequipa,  287,  392

Arias  (Garcia  Diaz),  bishop  of  Quito,
424

Arica,  29

Arma,  69-70  ;  Indians  of,  70-72

Armondariz  (Miguel  Diaz),  96

Arrows,  poisoned,  used  by  the  In-
dians of  Uraba,  39

Art,  Peruvian  works  of,  403-4

Asillo,  369

Astete  (Miguel  de),  272  note

Astopilco,  cacique  at  Caxaraarca,
descended  from  Atahualpa,  272  note

Atacama  desert,  267

Atahualpa,  his  cruelty  to  the  Cauaris,
167  ;  his  residence  at  Caxamarca,
271  ;  war  with  Huascar,  273  note,
275,  409,  421  ;  meaning  of  the
word,  231

Atienza,  (Bias  de),  protests  against
the  murder  of  Atahualpa,  292  note


430


Atoco,  Indian    general    takes    Ata-

hualpa  prisoner,  167,  273
Atongayo  bay,  30
Atrato  river,  49  note
Atris,  valley  of,  123
Aura,  bird  so  called,  175,  403,  416
Ausancata  temple,  354
Avila  (Alonzo  de),  protests  against

the  murder  of  Atahualpa,  292  note
Avogada  pears  (see  Paltas).
Ayala  (Christoval  de),  killed,  94  ;  his

pigs,  ib.
(Pedro  de),  protests  against  the

murder  of  Atahualpa,  292  note
Ayavire,  358,  369
Ayllos,  weapon  so  called,  355
Aymara    Indians    (same    as    Collas,

which  see).
Ayniledos  river,  31
Azangaro,  369

Bachicao  (Hernando),  373  and  note

Balsas,  265

Barranca  (La),  248  note

Barley,  144,  400

Baths  of  the  Yncas,  271,  285  note,
313  note;  400  note

Bees,  90

Belalcazar  (Sebastian  de),  kills  Rob-
ledo,  79  ;  founds  Cali,  93,  105  ;
notice  of,  110  note,  113,  145,  201,
423;  marches  to  assist  the  president
Gasca,  151,  186

Bio-bio  river,  31

Birds  of  Puerto  Viejo — the  xuta  and
maca,  175;  on  the  Peruvian  coast,
237  (see  Aura).

Blanco,  cape,  25

Blasco  Nunez  Vela,  the  viceroy,  87,
139,  187  note,  221  note,  275  note

Bobadilla  (Fray  Francisco  de),  um-
pire between  Pizarro  and  Almagro,
256

Bomba,  province  of,  117

Bombon,  286  ;  lake  of,  294

Bracamoros,  province  and  Indians,
204-209

Briceuo  (Alonzo),  one  of  the  thii'teen
companions  of  Pizarro,  420

Bridge  of  rope  across  the  Vilcas,  314
note;  across  the  Apurimac,  319  note

of  Desaguadero,  toll  for  cross-
ing, 373

Buenaventura,  20,  104,  105  note,  106

Buga,  province  of,  94


Building,  Peruvians  skilled  in,  405
Burial  of  the  dead,  customs  of  the
Indians,  40,  51,  64,  77,  81,  83,  102,
120,  151,  168,  180,  188,  199.  203,
206,  221,  222,  226  note,  252^  262,
279,  285,  358,  364
Buritica  hill,  56

Cabaya,  a  kind  of  aloe,  146

Cacha  village,  356

Calamar,  33

Caldera,  Licentiate,  159

Callao,  27

Cali,  city  of,  93;  Indians  of,  96;
river  and  situation,  99  ;  villages,
etc.,  100-3,  105  ;  road  from,  to
Popayan,  107;  to  Buenaventura,
106

Camana,  29,  265

Campo  Redondo  (Gaspar  Rodriguez
de),  303  note

Canaris,  162,  167,  169

Cauari-bamba,  204

Canas,  Indians,  356  note,  358

Canches,  Indians,  355,  358  note,  358

Candia  (Pedro  de),  one  of  the  thirteen
companions  of  Pizarro,  193  note,
419

Cane  brake,  near  Cartago,  90

Cailete  valley,  257  note,  259

Cangas,  Suer  de,  185

Cannibalism,  50,  52,  60,  71,  79,  84,
96,  97,  101,  115,  118

Capitulation  (between  Pizarro  and
Queen  Juana),  420  note

Carachine  Point,  20

Caracollo  village,  381

Caraques,  185

Caramanta  province,  126

Carangues,  133,  138

Caraquen  bay,  22

Caravaya  river  and  gold  of,  369

Carbajal  (Francisco  de),  276  note,
303  note;  feeds  on  honey,  362,  373
note,  384,  422,  424  note

(Yllan  Suarez  de),  305  note

Cari,  a  chief  of  the  Collas,  363

Cariapasa,  Chief  of  Chucuito,  373

Carmenca  hill  at  Cuzco,  325

Carrapa,  82,  84

Carrion  (Anton  de),  one  of  the  thir-
teen companions  of  Pizarro,  420

Cartago,  67,  85,  92

Cartama,  60

Carthagena,  33,  35


431


Casraa,  port  of,  26

Cauca  river,  .OS  note,  80  note,  114

Castellano,  value  of,  159,  272,  387

Castro,  Vaca  de,  283,  30(j  note,  312

Carinas  Indians,  354

Caxamarca,  26i)  note,  271

Cayambes  Indians,  137,  IGl

Caymito  fruit,  16,  234

Ccapac  Yupanqui,  a  victorious  Ynca
general,  269  note

Ccuri-cancha,  328,  385

Cegue  river,  of  Quiubaya,  86

Cenasura,  67

Ceuteno  (Diego  de),  380,  384

Cenu,  228  ;  burial  places  at,  221

river,  alligators  in,  16-35

Cenusara,  126

Cesar  (Francisco),  46,  47  note,  48,
422

Cespedes  (Juan  de),  a  negro  belong-
ing to,  mistakes  dried  bowels  for
sausages,  97

Chacama  valley,  241

Chachapoyas,  277,  278

Chacu  or  hunting  of  the  Yucas,  288
note

Chagres  river,  17

Challouchima,  General  of  Atahualpa,
burnt  by  order  of  Pizarro,  320

Chanca  Indians,  280,  316,  316

Chanchan  buildings,  162

Chancos  flatten  the  skulls  of  their
children,  96

Chapauchita  provinces,  117

Chaqui,  383

Ckaquira  beads,  176,  405'

Charcas  province,  381 ;  mines,  385

Chaves  (Diego  de),  wife  of,  see  Esco-
bar.

(Francisco  de),  292  and  note

Chayanta,  383

Chicha  liquor,  152,  220

Chichas  village,  383

Chilane  village,  373

Chilca,  255

Children,  naming  of,  231

Chile,  30-384

Chimu,  valley  and  ruins,  242  and
note

Chincha  valley,  228,  260 ;  islands,  28
note

Chinchay-cocha  lake,  294,  296

Chinchona  plants  at  Loxa,  206  7iote

Chiquana,  356

Chirimoya  fruit,  234  note


Choape,  31

Chono,  dog  so  called,  235

C7iMc/ia,  animal  so  called,  91

a  shell  fish,  16

Chucuito,  373

Chumbivilica,  335

Chumpi  (belt),  146

Chunchos,  337  note

Chupas,  field  of,  306  note

Chufius,  361

Chuqui-apu,  380

Cianca  (Andres),  a  judge  of  the  audi-
ence, 425

Cieza  de  Leon,  dedication  of  his
work,  1  ;  his  habit  of  writing  on
the  march,  3  ;  plan  of  his  work,  6;
collects  information  concerning  the
coast,  27 ;  loses  his  journals  after
the  battle  of  Xaquixaguana,  32 ;
joins  Vadillo,  41 ;  finds  a  quantity  of
gold,  77  ;  joins  Belalcazar,  IK)  note  ;
method  of  collecting  information,
177  ;  marching  to  join  the  royal
army,  151,  167,  241  :  crosses  the
bridge  over  the  Apurimac,  319;
goes  to  Charcas,  339  ;  at  Pucara,
368  ;  continues  to  take  notes  in  the
Collao,  364  ;  and  at  Tiahuanaco,
376  ;  proposes  to  form  plantations
of  trees,  401  ;  sees  God's  hand  visi-
bly in  the  conquest  of  the  Indies,
418;  finishes  his  work,  427

Cinnamon,  137,  142

Cinto,  valley  of,  240

Climate  of  Peru,  130;  of  Quito,  140  ;
of  the  Peruvian  coast,  214  ;  of  the
Collao,  360

Cloth  weaving,  405

Coast  valleys,  129,  214-216  to  268  ;
fertility  of,  233

Coca,  352

Coconucos  Indians,  112,  116

Cochabamba,  383

Cochesqui,  139

CoUaguaso  village,  137

Collahuayos,  398  note

Collao  province,  324, 359, 360, 362, 370

Indians  (see  Collas),  367

Collique,  240

Colmenares  (Diego  de),  34  note

Colonists  (see  Mitimaes).

Conchucos,  286-291

Consota,  salt  from,  126

Conversion  of  an  Indian,  in  spite  of
the  Devil,  415


432


Copayapo,  30

Coquimbo,  30

Cori,  salt  from,  125

Corrientes  cape,  20

Cosa  (Juan  de  la),  33

Cotton,  143,  393

Cuellar  (Francisco  de)  one  of  Pizarro's
thirteen  companions,  420

Cui,  or  guinea  pigs,  63  note

Cunti-suyu,  324,  335

Cuzco,  dress  of  ladies  of,  146  ;  situa-
tion, 322  ;  divisions,  325  ;  streets
and  wards,  327  note  ;  temple  of  the
sun,  328;  founded  by  Manco  Ccapac,
329  ;  description,  330  ;  Indians
from  all  parts  living  in,  330  ;
Bishop  of,  424

Dabaybe  (or  Dobaybe,  which  see).

Dantas,  or  tapirs,  164

Darien  river,  95

Desaguadero  river,  373

Deserts  on  the  coast,  described,  128,
238,  240

Devil,  in  nearly  every  page  ;  his
wiles,  225  ;  devil  of  Peru  (see
Supay,  see  Xixarama)  ;  devils  in-
terfering to  prevent  conversion  of
an  Indian,  416

Dioceses  in  Peru,  424

Dobaybe,  country  of,  36,  47  note,  49
note

Dogs  in  Peru,  235

Doorways  (monolithic)  at  Tiahuanaco,
376

Dress  of  ladies  of  Cuzco,  146

Ducks,  Indians  breed  many,  235

Dyes  used  by  the  Indians,  405,  406
note

Earthquakes  at  Arequipa,  268

Enciso,  the  Bachiller,  34  note

Equinoctial  line,  173

Emeralds,  183;  broken  by  the  Span-
iards, 185

Encomiendas,  72  note

Escobar  (Maria  de)  introduces  wheat
into  Peru,  400

Fair  at  Potosi,  391
Female  succession,  64,  73,  83
Ferrol,  port  of,  26
Fertility  of  coast  valleys,  233
Fish,  Manatee,    114;    bonitos,    175;
sardines  used  as  manure,  255


Flowers  used  for  sacrifices,  71

Fossil 'bones,  194  note

Fountain  (hot)  near  Quito,  132

Foxes,  237,  402

Fruits  of  Panama,  16 ;  in  the  Cauca
valley,  73  ;  of  Pasto,  122  ;  called
mortuho,  132  ;  of  Puerto  Viejo,
175  ;  of  the  Peruvian  coast  valleys,
234,  235  ;  of  Huanuco,  283

Funes,  a  village  of  the  Pastos,  131

Gallo,  island  of,  21 ;  Pizarro  and  his

thirteen  companions  on,  419  note
Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  157  note,  185

Gasca  (Pedro  de  la),  208;  Cieza  de
Leon  marches  to  join  the  army  of,
241  ;  at  Andahuaylas,  318  ;  exe-
cutes Gonzalo  Pizarro,  320 ;  gives
letters  of  introduction  to  Cieza  de
Leon,  339

Gaspar,  an  Indian  Governor  at  Chu-
cuito,  373

Gavilan  (Diego),  303  note

Giants  at  Point  Santa  Elena,  189

Giron  (Francisco  Hernandez  de),  79
note

Gold,  57,70,  77,  79,  86;  Quichua  word
for,  281  note;  of  Cunti-suyu,  336;
of  Caravaya,  369  ;  of  Chuquiapu,
381,  386  note

Gorgona  island,  21,  420

Gorrones  Indians,  round  Cali,  97,  98

Government  of  the  Yncas,  164

Guaca,  province  of,  132,  422

Guacamayos  (macaws),  199

Guadaquinages,  animals  the  size  of  a
hare,  91,  98

Guallabamba,  139

Guamanga,  founded,  307,  308  ;  In-
dians of,  310  ;  bishops  of,  424  note

Guamaraconas  {Huayna-cuna),  na-
tives of  Otabalo  and  Carangue  so-
called,  138

Guambia,  province  of,  109

Guanaco  (see  Huanacu).

Guanape,  26,  245

Guancavilcas,  168,  181,  192

Guano  islands,  265,  266  note

Guarco  valley,  257  ;  fortress,  258

Guarmay,  26,  247

Guanavanas  (fruit),  99,  234

Guasco,chiefof  Andahuaylas,  31 5, 318

Guavas  (fruit),  16,  99,  234

Guayaquil,  197,  201,  203

Guayavas  (fruit),  73,  99,  234


433


Guevara  (Juan  Perez  dc),  280,  28J
Guinea  pigs,  (i3  note
Gutierrez  (Felipe),  383,  406

Ilaro  (Hernando  de)  protests  against
the  murder  of  Atahualpa,  292  note

Harvest,  Indian  ceremony  at,  412

Ilatun-cana  village,  35(5

Hatun-caiiari  buildings,  162

Hatun-colla,  369  note

Ilayo-hayo,  381

Heads  (see  Skulls).

Head-dresses  of  Indian  tribes,  145
note;  of  the  Cauaris,  167;  Indians
known  by  them,  171-2  ;  of  chiefs
on  the  coast,  225  ;  different  tribes
collected  together  at  Cuzco  known
by  their  head-dresses,  330  ;  head-
dress of  the  Cavinas,  354  ;  of  the
Collas,  363

Herrada  (Juan  de)  protests  against
the  murder  of  Atahualpa,  292  note

Herbs  (medicinal),  398

Ileredia  (Pedro  de),  35  note,  47  note,
113

■ (Alonzo  de),  35

(Nicolas  de),  383,  406

Hernandez  (Gomez),  415

Hervay,  Ynca  fortress  of,  259  note

Ilinojoso  (Pedro  de),  383  note

(Ruy  Sanchez  de),  384

Honey  (see  Oarbajal,  Francisco  de).

Horuro  village,  356

Huacas,  77,  228  note

Huaca-camayoc  or  sorcerers,  413,  414
note

Huaqui  village,  374

Iluamachuco,  287

Huambacho,  247

Huanacus,  394

Huancas,  Indians,  279,  298

Huancabamba,  210,  269

Iluanuco,  282,  283,  284  note,  285

Iluara,  26,  248

Huaray,  293

Huarina,  battle  of,  9,  380  and  note  ;
village  and  battle,  380

Huarivilca,  god  of  the  Huancas,  300

Huascar  Ynca,  272,  273  note,  421

Huayna  Ccapac,  Ynca,  133  note,  140,
169,  179,  193

Huaylos,  province  of,  286

IJuai/ras  used  in  the  mines  at  Potosi,
389

Iluillac  Umu,  chief  priest,  329


Huira-ccocha,  Creator,  162 ;  Ynca,
226  note,  308  note,  332,  338,  355,
363  ;  God,  162,  357,  367

Iluis-cacha  (rabbit),  402

Hunting  of  the  Yncas,  2b8  and  note

Inca  (see  Ynca).

Indies,  discovery  of,  11

Indians,  attempts  at  converting,  12  ;
of  Uraba,  36-9  ;  arms  of,  71  ;  of
Arma,  70;  of  Antioquia,  63;  sacri-
fices, 71  ;  granted  in  Encomienda,
72  note ;  eat  human  flesh,  73  ;  of
Paucura,  75 ;  of  Pozo,  76 ;  great
warriors,  78  ;  of  Pioara,  80  ;  of
Carrapa,  82  ;  of  Call,  96-100  ;  cus-
toms of,  101,  112,  116;  of  Paste,
120;  of  Carangue,  138;  of  Otabalo,
138;  Puruaes,  161;  Cauaris,  162-7;
of  Puerto  Viejo,  172-6  ;  Guanca-
vilcas,  181,  192  ;  Mantas,  182  ;  of
Puna,  199  ;  of  Guayaquil,  203  ;  of
the  coast  (see  Yuncas)  ;  of  Chacha-
poyas,  278  ;  Huancas,  279,  298  ;
Charcas,  28i),  315  ;  of  Huanuco,
285;  of  Guamanga,  310;  of  Cunti-
suyu,  335  ;  in  the  eastern  forests,
339  ;  Cavinas,  354  ;  Cauches,  355  ;
Canas,  356  ;  Collas,  359,  363  ;  op-
pression of  by  the  chiefs,  410

Ipiales,  village  of,  131

Irrigation,  works  of,  236  and  note;  at
Yea,  263 ;  near  Cuzco,  354

Jerez   (Garcia  de),  one  of  Pizarro's

thirteen  companions,  420  note
Juli  village,  373
Juliaca  village,  369

Ladrillo  (Juan  de)  founds  Buenaven-
tura, 104

Ladrillero  (Juan)  navigates  Lake
Titicaca,  370

Lakes,  salt,  399  (see  Bombon,  Titi-
caca).

Lampa,  village,  harvest  ceremony  at,
412

La  Merced  church  in  Cuzco,  426  note

Laugazi,  valley  and  inhabitants,  147

Language  of  Indians,  70  ;  of  Indians
of  Paucura,  74;  Quichua  grammar,
163  ;  Quichua  to  be  used  through-
out the  empire  of  the  Yncas,  146  ;
Great  variety  of,  407

La  Paz,  380,  381


434


La  Plata  river,  supposed  source,  295,

(see  Plata)
Ledesma  (Baltazar  de),  423
Legends  of  the  Iluancas,  299  ;  of  the

Chancas,   316;    of  the   temple   at

Cacha,  357  note
Lejesama  (Marcio  Serra  de),  curious

will  of,  124
Lile,  valley  of,  101,  104
Lima,  248
Limara  river,  31
Limatambo,  320  and  note
Llacta-cunga,  ruins,  143,  -150
Llamas,  393
Lliclla  (or  mantle),  146
Loaysa,  Archbishop  of  Lima,  227,  424
Lobos,  island  of,  25
Loxa,  205;  Chinchona  plant  of,  206
Luchengo  island,  31
Lunahuana    river,    260 ;    (or    Runa-

huanac),  228

Maca,  bird  so-called,  175

Macana,  a  weapon,  49,  203

Magdalena  river,  111  note

Magellan's  strait,  31,  384

Maize,  233 ,  etc.

Mala,  valley  of,  256  and  note

Maldonado  (Diego  de),  317  and  note

Mama-cunas,  25,  149,  164,  369  ;  em-
ployed in  weaving,  405

Manatee,  114

Manco  Ccapac,  136,  194,  329,  354,
409

Manco  Ynca,  304,  306  note

Mansanillo  tree,  38;  Juan  Agraz  eats
a  dozen  apples  off  the  mansanillo
trees,  39

Mantas,  182,  184

Market  at  Potosi,  391

Martin  (Roque),  Retribution  for  cru-
elty to  the  Indians,  423

Maule  river,  31

Mendoza  (Antonio  de),  viceroy  of
Peru,  425

(Alonzo  de),  founds  La  Paz,

381

(Francisco  de),  383

(Lope  de),  384

(Pedro    de)    protests   against

the  murder  of  Atahualpa,  292  note

Mercadillo  (Alonzo  de)  founds  Loxa,
206,  208

Metals,  precious,  knowledge  of,  by
the  Peruvians,  385


Miller,  General,  265  note

Mines  in  Caiiaris,  169;  of  emeralds

at  Manta,  183  ;  of  Tarapaca,  266  ;

of  Conchucos,  293;  of  Potosi,  382-6;

of  silver  in  Charcas,  385;  of  Porco,

385  ;  of  gold  in  Tipuani,  386  note  ;

in  the  Andes,  406  (see  Gold,  Silver).
.Mira  river,  133
Miracles  in  favour  of  the  Spaniards,

422
Misti  volcano,  268  note
Mitimaes  (colonists),  149,  150,  2()9  ;

at  Caxamarca,  271,  328,  362
Mocha,  buildings  at,  154
Mohina,  treasure  found  at,  353
iMolle  trees,  299,  397
Molina  (Alonzo  de),  one  of  the  thir-
teen companions  of   Pizarro,    420

note
Mompox,  city  of,  114
Monasteries  in  Peru,  426
Mora  (Diego  de)  protests  against  the

murder  of  Atahualpa,  292  7wte
Morgan  the  buccaneer,  17  note
Mortunas,  a  fruit  near  Quito,  132
Moscoso  (Francisco)  protests  against

the  murder  of  Atahualpa,  292  note
Motupe,  valley,  239
Moyobamba,  280
Mulahalo,  147,  148
Muliambato,  buildings  of,  153
Mummies  of  the  Yncas,  226  note;

carried  about  at  Xauxa,  227
Mungia,  supply  of  salt  from,  126
Muuoz  (Miguel),  founder  of  Cali,  87,

100
Mussels,  used  as  food  at  Panama,  16

Nabonuco,  a  cannibal  chief,  51

Names  given  to  children,  230  ;  signi-
fication of,  231  note  ;  of  the  Yncas,
231  note;  329  note

Nasca,  promontory,  28  ;  works  of  ir-
rigation at.  236  note  ;  valley,  264

Navigation,  of  the  west  coast,  19

Neyva,  valley  of,  94

Nicasio  village,  365,  369

Nicuesa  (Diego  de),  33,  34  note

Nombre  de  Dios,  16,  17

Nutibara  Cacique,  46

Oca,  361  and  note
Ocoiia  valley,  29,  265
Ojeda  (Alonzo  de),  33,  34  note
Olive  trees  in  Peru,  401  note


435


Ollantay-tarabo,  ruins  at,  333

Omasuyo,  369

Ondegordo  (Polo  de),  387  and  note

Opossum  (see  CInichu).

Ore/ones,  nobles  of  Cuzco,  193,  196,
261,  337

Orellana  (Francisco  de),  112, 202, 406

Orgofiez,  Rodrigo,  254,  304

Otabalo,  robbery  by  natives  of,  138

Otaso  (Marcos),  a  priest,  who  gives  an
account  of  a  harvest  ceremony  of
the  Indians  at  Lampa,  412

Ovejas  river,  108

Oviedo,  the  historian,  35  note


Pacasmayu  valley,  240

Paccari-tampu,  320  note,  335

Paccay  fruit,  16

Pachacamac,  251,  253,  254

Pachacutec  Ynca,  269  7io(e

Pacheco  (Francisco),  founds  Puerto
Viejo,  187  I

,  Juan,  417  !

Pachachaca  river,  317  7io(e

Pallas,  ladies  of  Cuzco,  their  dress,
146,  147,  277

Palms  and  palmitos,  36,  called  Pixiu-
ares,  44,  68,  73,  100

Palta  fruit,  16,  73,  99,  234

Paltas,  town  of,  205

Pampas  river,  314  note

Panama,  14,  15,  16,  17

Pancorbo,  Juan  de,  359

Pansaleo,  145,  147

Paria  province,  381

Pariiia,  point  of,  25

Parcos,  302

Passaos,  22 ;  the  first  port  in  Peru,  172

Pasto,  54,  55,  120,  121,  123

Parmonga  ruined  fortress,  247

Patia  valley,  118

Paucar-tampu,  320  note,  337  note

Paucura,  74,  75

PauUu,  son  of  Huayna  Ccapac  Ynca,
77,  224  note

Payta,  port  of,  25

Paz,  JMartin  de,  one  of  the  thirteen
companions  of  Pizarro,  420

Pearl  Islands,  20

Peccary,  37

Pedrarias,  governor  of  Panama,  34

Fepino  fruit,  234,  262

Peralta,  Cristoval  de,  one  of  the  thir-
teen companions  of  Pizarro,  420


Pericos-ligeros,  36

Petecuy,  chief,  lOl

Peru,  description,  128  ;  climate,  130  ;
natives,  135  ;  products,  400  ;  races
in,  407  note

Philip  II,  dedication  to,  I

Piandomo  river,  109

Picara,  province  of,  80,  81

Picoy  valley,  302

Pigs,  value  of,  95

Pillaros  Indians,  155

Piuas,  puerto  de,  2o

Pincos,  294    •

Pine  apples,  99

Pinto  Simon,  Corregidor  of  Chucuito,
373

Pirsa  village,  chief  of  tormented  by
devils,  415

Pisacoma  village,  149  note

Pisagua  river,  30

Piscobamba,  293

Pitahaya  fruit,  69

Piura  valley,  213

Pixiuares  palms  (see  Palms).

Pizarro,  Francisco  de,  at  Darien,  34
note;  at  Gorgone,  'i\  ;  hears  of  the
arrival  of  Alvarado,  156  ;  founds
San  Miguel,  214  ;  Truxillo,  244  ;
Lima,  250  ;  interview  with  Alma-
gro  at  Mala,  256;  founds  Arequipa,
268  ;  at  Caxamarca,  272  ;  assassi-
nation of,  292  note,  353  ;  refouuds
Cuzco,  329  ;  founds  Guamanga,
310  ;  account  of  his  thirteen  com-
panions on  the  island  of  Gallo,
4)9  note

(Gonzalo),  32,   137,   187  note,

221  note,  255  note,  3u3,  3u6  note,
311,  320,  280

(Hernando),  253,  254,  335

Plata,  island  of,  24,  199

Plata,  town,  382

Pocheos,  river,  on  the  coast,  213  ;
city  of,  32,  381,  382,  384

Pocona  village,  384

Pocras  Indians,  308  note

Poison  of  Indians  of  Carthagena,  38

Pomata,  473

Popayan,  32,  54,  55,  109,  115,  124

Porco,  285

Ports  between  Panama  and  Chile,  19,
27

Pozo,  75,  76,  79

Potatoe,  3()0  and  note  ;  sweet  potatoe,
234


436


Potosi  mines,  384,  390,  391
Pottery,  Peruvian,  404  note
Pucara,  302,  368
Puelles,  Pedro  de,  187,  283
Puerto  Viejo,  22,  174,  180,  187
Pultamarca    medicinal    springs,    271

note
Puna,  island  of,  24,  198
Puruaes  Indians,  154,  161
Purus  river,  note  ou  by  Mr.  Spruce,

339

Qualmatan  village,  near-Quito,  131

Quepaypa,  battle  of,  274  note

Quichua  language,  146,  163  ;  mean-
ing of  the  word,  316  note

Quijos,  137,  147

Quilca  river  and  port,  29,  265

Quillacingas  Indians,  131

Quinua,  143  note^  361

Quinbaya  province,  85,  88

Quinuchu,  brother  of  the  Cacique
Nutibara,  46

Quipus,  290

Quiquixana,  354

Quito,  131,  140,  141,  144,  145

Quiximies  rivers,  22

Quizquiz,  general  of  Atahualpa,  292
7iote

Rain,  absence  of,  on  the  coast,  214

Ransom  of  Atahualpa,  amount,  272
note

Repartimiento  of  Indians,  68,  208

Ribera,  Nicolas,  one  of  Pizarro's  thir-
teen companions,  419,  420

(Antonio  de),  introduces  olives

into  Peru,  401  note

Religion  of  Caiiaris,  162  ;  Guancavil-
cas,  181  ;  of  Mantas,  183  ;  of  In-
dians of  Huamachuco,  289  ;  of
Canas,  357  ;  of  the  Indians  of  the
Collao,  366  ;  of  Iluanuco,  285  ;  of
the  coast,  221  ;  of  Huancas,  299

Retribution  on  Spaniards  for  cruelty
to  Indians,  422-3

Riraac  river,  250

Riobamba,  buildings  at,  155  ;  people,
160

Rio  frio,  99

Rios  (Pedro  de  los),  419

Roads  of  the  Yncas,  158  and  note;
on  the  coast,  217,  218  note,  287,
290  ;  in  Iluaraz,  293  ;  from  Xauxa
to  Guamanga,  302  ;  along  a  cause-


way, 320  ;  roads  leading  from
Cuzco,  326  ;    from   Cuzco   to    the

Collao,  253

Robledo  (Jorge  de),  founds  Antio-
quia,  53,  58  ;  founds  Auzerraa,  65,
67,  70,  76,  77  ;  account  of  death  of,
79,  79  note,  81,  86  ;  founds  Cartago,
92,  94,  102  ;  retribution  for  cruelty
to  Indians,  422

Rojas  (Gabriel  de),  156

(Diego  de),  383,  406

Romero  (Pedro),  94

(Payo),  killed  by  Indians,  107

Ruins   at    Mulahalo,   147 ;  at   Callo,

148:  Riobamba,  155;  Hatuu  Ca-
iiari,  162;  Tumebamba,  165;  at
Parmonga,  247  ;  of  fortress  of
Guarco,  259  note;  Nasca,  264:  note;
Pachacamac,  284  ;  Chimu,  242  ;
Huanuco,  284  7iote  ;  lluarivilca  in
Xuaxa  valley,  299  ;  Vinaque,  near
Guamanga,309;  Vilcas,313;  Lima-
tambo,  320  ;  fortress  of  Cuzco,  323
note;  Ollantaytambo,  333  7iote;  Sil-
lustani,  364  note;  Hatun-coUa,
369  ;  Tiahuanaco,  375

Ruiz  (Bartolomc),  the  pilot,  one  of
the  thirteen  companions  of  Pizarro,
420  note

Rumichaca,  natural  bridge  near
Quito,  132

Runa-huanac  (see  Lunahuana).

Saavedra  (Juan  de),  157, 159  note,  185

Sacsahuana  (see  Xaquixaguana).

Salt,  supply  of,  124-27

San  Cristoval  hill,  250  note

Sana  valley,  240

San  Domingo,  tower  of,  at  Lima,  426

7iote
San  Francisco,  cape  of,  22
San  Gallan,  27
San  Lorenzo,  cape  of,  23
San  Juan  river,  55,  106
San  Juan  de  la  Frontera,  306
San   Martin  (Fray  Tomas  de),  373  ;

bishop  of  Charcas,  425
San  Miguel  founded,  213-14
San  Nicolas  point,  28
San  Sebastian  de  Uraba,  32,  40,  41
Santa,  village,  245,  246
Santa  Clara  island,  24
Santa  Elena  point,  23,  189
Santa  Fe  mining  establishment,  58
Santa  Maria,  Cape.  31


437


Santa  Maria  (Fray  Juan  dc),  417

t-anta  Martha  river,  54,  (iC,  108,  111

Santiago  bay  and  river,  31,  172,  2G0

city,  31

Santo  Tomas  (Fray  Domingo  de),
author  of  a  Quichua  grammar,
163;  his  great  knowledge  of  the
Indians,  219;  a  notable  searcher
into  Indian  secrets,  224;  founds  a
monastery,  242,  427

Santillan  (Hernando  de),  judge  of  the
Audience,  425

Sapana,  a  chief  of  the  Collao,  363,  369

Saravia  (Dr.  Bravo  de),  a  judge  of
the  Audience,  2U5,  425

Sardinas,  anchorage  of,  21

Sarsaparilla,  2W,  395

Sayri  Tupac,  272  note

Sc/imtis  Molle,  299

Seal  Island,  27-28

Seravia  (see  Saravia)

Sermnos,  184,  218

Sicasica  village,  381

Siehos  Indians,  155

Silver  veins  at  Potosi,  388 ;  of  Char-
cas,  385 ;  of  Potosi,  386 ;  mode  of
extracting,  388,  389

Silversmiths,  Peruvian,  404  note

Sij)isipe  village,  383

Sheep,  Peruvian,  392,  394  note

Skulls.  Chances  Indians  flatten  the
skulls  of  their  infants,  96;  at  Paoha-
camac,  252  note  ;  skulls  flattened
in  the  Collao,  363

Sloth,  36

Snakes,  42,  338

Solana,  on  the  coast,  213

Solano  (Juan),  Bishop  of  Cuzco,  424

Soria  Luce  (Domingo  de),  one  of  the
thirteen  companions  of  Pizarro,  420

Sosa  (Herman  Rodriguez  de),  retri-
bution for  cruelty  to  Indians,  423

Springs,  medicinal,  271  note,  400  noti

StorehoAises  of  the  Yncas,  290

Supay,  the  Peruvian  Devil,  224

Surite,  321  note

Tacama  point,  30

Tacurumbi  river,  86

Cacique    gives   Robledo    a

cup  of  gold,  86
Tafur    (Juan)    sent    to    bring    back

Pizarro's  party,  419
Tamara  (Tar ma),  286
Tamaraqunga,  Cacique,  sorely  vexed


by  devils,  who  sought  to  hinder  his
conversion,  415-18

Tambo  (see  Ollantay-tambo).

Tamboblanco,  205

Tambopalla,  29

Tampus  (inns  and  storehouses),  161,
290

Tangarara,  original  site  of  Piura,  214

Tapacari  village,  383

Tar  at  point  Santa  Elena,  191

Tarapaca,  30,  128,  205,  266

Tarma  (Tamara),  286-296

Temple  of  the  Sun  at  Tumebamba,
165  ;  Pachacamac,  251-4  ;  at  Caxa-
marca,  271;  at  Iluanuco,  284;  at
Cuzco,  328;  at  Vilcas,  313;  at  An-
cocahua,  357  ;  at  Hatun  Colla,  369 ;
on  the  island  of  Titicaca,  372  note

Teocaxas,  great  battle  at,  161

Texelo  (Jeronimo  Luis),  price  he
gave  for  a  shoemaker's  knife,  94

Tiahuanaco,  374  to  379  'I  j  u    ^^  >

limbas  province,  103  '

Ticeviracocha,  299

Tiquisambi,  buildings  of,  162

Titicaca,  lake  of,  370,  371 ;  island  of,
372

Tobar  (Francisco,  Garcia  de),  retribu-
tion for  cruelty  to  the  Indians,  422

Toledo  (Garcia  Gutierrez  do),  dis-
covery of  treasure  by,  243  note

Tombs  (see  burial  of  the  dead)  of  the
Collao,  364  note

Topocalma,  port  of,  31

Topu,  or  ornamental  pin,  146

Torre  (Juan  de  la),  221  note ;  one  of
Pizarro's  thirteen  companions,  419,
420

Totora  village,  383

Treasure  found  in  the  ruins  of  Chimu,
243  note;  found  by  Juan  de  la
Torre,  221  ;  vast  quantity  of,  buried,
77  ;  collected  for  Atahualpa's  ran-
som, 272  note

Trees  of  Peru,  129,  142,  235,  239,
397  ;  fruit  trees,  234  ;  suggestion
of  Cieza  de  Leon  to  form  planta-
tions of,  401  (see  Palms).

Truxillo,  26,  186,  242,  244

Tumbala,  lord  of  Puna,  195

Tumbez,  river  of,  23  ;  desert  of,  128,
213;  fortress,  193  ;  Pedro  de  Candia
lands  at,  193  note,  420  note

Tumebamba,  165

Tuqueme,  coast  valley  of,  239


438


Tuquma,  province,  383

Turbaco,  town,  33  ;  great  battle  of,

34  no'e
Tupac  Ynca  "Yupanqui,  147,  149,  165,

169,  178,  192,  217,  261,  269,  313,

337,  357
Tusa,  last  village  of  the  Pastos,  on

the  road  to  Quito,  132

Uchillo,  valleys  of,  147

Uchu  (see  Aji).

Umu,  a  priest,  414  and  note

Uraba,  port,  32,  35  ;  Indians  of,  36  to

39,41
Urccs  village,  354
Urco  (male  llama),  393,  231
Urochorabe,  the  woman  from  whom

the  Huancas  were  descended,  298
Ursua  (Pedro  de),  281  note
Usutas  (sandals),  146
Uzedo  (Diego  de)  goes  with  Cieza  de

Leon  to  Charcas,  365


Vaca  de  Castro  (see  Castro).
Vadillo  (Juan  de),  40,  47  note,  50;

his  fate,  63  note,  57  ;  sufferings  of

his  party,  60,  62,  94,  97,  124
Valdivia,  31
(Pedro  de)  joins  Gasca,  318

note
Valle  (Juan),  Bishop  of  Popayan,  425
Valparaiso,  31
Valverde    (Vincente   de),   300   note ;

Bishoj)  of  Cuzco,  424
Varagas  (Juan  de)  held  the  Indians

of  Tiahuanaco  in  encomienda,  379
Vasco  (Nuuez  de  Balboa),  34  note
Velasco  (Pedro  de)  collects  honey  at

Cartago,  91
Verdugo  (Melchor),  275  note
Vergara  (Pedro  de),  205
Viacha,  village  of,  380
Vicuna,  288,  289  note,  394,  396  note  ;

cloth  woven  from  wool  of,  405
Vilcamayu,  valley  of,  331  note,  354

note
Vilcas,  ruins  at,  312,  313,  314  note
Villa-diego  (Captain)  sent  against  the

Ynca  Manco,  305
Villaroel  discovers  the  mines  of  Potosi,

386
Viuaque  river  and  ruins,  3')9,  379
Vineyards,  235
Viracocha  (see  Iluira-ccocha).


Viraratu,  Indian  chief,  arrives  in  Peru,

281  note
Virgins  of  the  Sun,  136  (see  Mama-

cunas).
Viticos,  Ynca  Manco  retires  to,  304
Volcano  of  Cotopaxi,  147  note  ;  Are-

quipa,  268  note
Vuilla,  a  fruit,  69

Weapons,  39,  49,  355

Wheat   introduced   into   Peru,   400 ;

much  grown  near  Guamanga,  309
Winds  on  the  coast  of  Peru,  19  note

Xamundi  river,  107

Xaquixaguana,  battle  of,  9,  32,  150  ;

plain,  320,  321  note
Xauxa  river,  296  ;  valley,  297
Xayanca  valley,  239
Ximon  (Pedro)  killed  by  a  snake,  43
Xixarama,  name  of  the  devil  among

the  Anzerma  Indians,  64
Xuta,  bird  so  called,  175

Yahuar-cocha,  dreadful  slaughter  at,
by  the  Ynca  Huayna  Ccapac,  133

Yahuar-  huaccac  Ynca,  280  note

Yahuar-pampa,  battle  of,  280  note

Yana-cuna,  391  and  note

Yea,  valley  of,  263,  264  oiote

Yguana,  kind  of  lizard,  42

Ylo,  port  of,  265

Yncas,  origin  of,  136  ;  government  of,
149,  153,  164 ;  discovery  of  em-
balmed bodies  of  three  Yncas,  mode
of  interment,  226;  wars  of,  409;
names  of,  329  note  (see  Manco
Ccapac,  Huira-ccocha,  Tupac  Ynca
Yupanqui,  Huayna  Ccapac,  Aia-
hualpa,  Manco  Ynca,  and  Ynca
Yupanqui).

Ynca  Yupanqui,  169,  217,  261,  269,
270  note,  338

Yrrua,  Indian  chief,  82,  409

Ytata  river,  31

Yuca,  an  edible  root,  233

Yucay,  valley  of,  354

Yumalla,  chief  of  the  CoUao,  373

Yumbo  forests,  147

Yunca,  meaning  of  the  word,  162,
209,  218;  Indians  on  the  coast,  219;
their  method  of  burial,  223,  232;
their  industry,  237

Zepita  village,  37


A,


/  :/!.


/  /j^u^Uf^C/^  ^/Zy;^  M^^.^


^%^^^^^^^^^  d^^  ^^&J<^<^.  Jm^'^'  '^


I


*'^'>;>>t'**'^^*'>^^>*»^w^^^^«
