=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
Four fathers of damages; the Ox and the Pit and the 'Maaveh' 
These 4 principles from damages, they are the damages that are to do with one's property. 
And the Ox implies the legs of the Ox, as it's said, it damages what it tramples and it breaks what it breaks and ruins in the way of his walking with his legs. And the 'Maaveh' implies the tooth (of the Ox), and its damage is the result of his eating what he eats from it. It's called with this name from its action since it uproots and seeks what it eats, as it says (Obadiah 1:6): How uprooted is Esau, how sought out (Maaveh) his hidden things.  
The Ox is not like the Maaveh 
Implying that it was necessary for the Torah to delineate each of these 4 damagers one by one because it is impossible to learn out one from the other through a 'kal ve chomer' (lesser to more severe exegesis), that since in each of them there is in it a principle which is not in the other, therefore comparison is not appropriate. The Legs whose damage is common is not comparable to the Tooth whose damage is not common. And it is not comparable, the Tooth, that there is in it benefit to the damage to compare to the Legs that there is not benefit in the damage. And it is not comparable, this and this, that there are in them spirit of life, to compare to the Fire that does not have in it spirit of life. And not, this and this, that on the road they go forth and damage to compare to the Pit that does not go forth on the road and damage. Thus in each and every one of them there is in it a principle which is not found in the others so it is necessary for scripture to explain each one from them that they are obligated in damages. And this is not to say that if God may his name be blessed wrote the law of pit and one from the remaining three, we wouldn't learn from them the remaining two in the way of tzaad ha shaveh (exegesis) as is alluded to, however scripture partitioned into 4 laws to establish all from them have a law apart from the other. Tooth and Legs are exempt in the public domain, Pit is exempt from vessels, Fire is exempt from concealed items and further this will all be explained. And it was not necessary to mention at all the 'father'- 'Horn' (of the ox) because there is in it a difference if it's 'Accustomed' and 'Simple' as is explained in scripture. 
And we say the common principle that is in them etc... 
Implying everything whose way is to do damage, it is upon you to guard it, if it damages, the damager is obligated to fulfill the payment of damage with the best of the land as we have already explained, the best of the field and land he shall pay. And this has already been explained to us in the fifth section of gittin. And these fathers have offspring that are subcategories, the Legs, if it damages with its body or its hair as it's walking. The offspring of the Tooth that it rubs against a wall for its benefit or spoils fruits for its benefit. The offspring of Fire; a stone, a knife, or a load are placed on the top of a roof and fall because of a typical wind and damage. The offspring of Pit- spit and phlegm which come out from someone. And further these laws will be explained with their principles and sub-categories.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
In which manner is it that the leg is accustomed to break in its way of walking... The main idea of this whole type of damage, that it is all damage that comes from an animal while it is doing what it's accustomed to do all the time or most of the time. This is the case that is said about it that it is normal and full damages are paid.  And that which is not normal, that there will be in it a thing that it did that was uncommon for it, or that it came through an intermediary of another action, and the animal, the one that did that deed, was not the primary catalyst, for this he's obligated in half damages and this is the half damage he's obligated in for pebbles that shoot out from under his feet. That he pays (is assessed for) the full amount of damage, as it's explained in the 8th perek of this tractate.  And the explanation of 'a bucket'- a thing that was tied to its foot or it was jumping and digs its feet into the ground.  And this the chicken does more than other birds.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
A jug is placed in the public domain... And the jug broke in the public domain and someone was slipped in the water... The general rule by us, it is not the way of people to pay attention to the road, therefore, if a person comes and trups on it, he is exempt, and we do not say to him you should have noticed where you were going. And what that it says, if the jug broke and someone slipped in the water, they're obligated, the idea is that when a person damages at the time they are falling or they break another thing- the stumbler (who dropped the jug initially) is obligated to pay what he damaged. This is the opinion of Rav Meir, that he says if someone stumbles, he is negligent, but the sages say that he was not at fault at the time of the falling and he's not obligated in anything. The opinion of Rabbi Yehuda, that he says the stumbler is negligent, if he intended to take the shards. Therefore he is not at fault as we explain it is as if no one ever owned the shards. And the halakah is like Rabbi Yehuda and not like Rabbi Meir.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
An ox that gores 4 or 5 oxen one after the other... We already explained in (tractate) kesuvos that a gold dinar is worth 25 silver dinarim and when the damagee too possession of the ox to recover the money, and it went out from under his hand and it damaged another, the next damagee collects complete half damages and if there is extra he will return to the previous one. And R. Shimon does not disagree since he took possession of it, he becomes with this a paid watchman and he's obligated in damges. And all these laws, they are for an innocuous ox that the principle in our hands is that he pays for the body, as we've explained. But if it was accustomed, we don't need any of this because he pays full damages uncapped. And the halakah is like R. Shimon.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
An ox that gores a cow and a fetus was found at it's side: This mishanh is according to the opinion of Sumchos, who he says money that lies in doubt you divide. And if it would become clear to us that after it miscarried this fetus, that it was gored, we would not obligate for the fetus anything. And similarly if it became revealed to us it was gored while it was pregnant, and it miscarried, he will be obligated half damages even for the fetus. And since there's a doubt he pays a fourth of the value of the fetus, that is a half of a half, and this is in the case of a innocuous. And if it was accustomed he pays complete damages for the cow and half damages for the fetus. And thus that when a cow gores an ox and is found it's fetus at it's side, if the (goring) cow is found, you take the half damage from the body of the cow, just like usual. And if the cow was lost and not found, and yet the fetus is found, we pay from the fetus a quarter of the damages since that if it became revealed to us while it was still in it's womb when it gored the law would have been that they pay half damages from the fetus, because this principle has been explained- a pregnanant cow, it and the fetus gores. And since it is a doubt you pay a quarter as has been explained. And the halakah is not like Sumchos in all of this discussion, rather like the Rabbis who say one who takes out from his friend upon him is the onus. And even if the damagee says 'I am positive' (you owe money) and the (alleged) damager says 'I don't know', we do not take from him anything except with proof.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
One who brings sheep into a pen and locked (a gate) in front of it appropriately etc...
Appropriately, this is that he will put in the place that he brought (them) in there a door that will not cause to fall because of a common wind.  And what that it says 'the bandits brought it out' is not to say they took out the animals with their hands, because this is clear.  Rather it implies when they were the cause for their exit.  For example they stood before them until they backed off from them to another side and they try to lose them and it is as if they took them out with their hands.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
It's more broad principles of payemnt of 'double' than principles of payment etc...
They said in Sifra 'On anything of negligence' is a generality, 'on an ox and on a donkey and on a sheep and on a garment' is a specification, 'on all lost items' returns and generalizes; a generalization and a specification and a generalization, you don't judge this except that which is like the specification. [see here for more https://outorah.org/p/6471/]  Just as the specifications, as is explained, is a thing that is moveable, and they are inherently worth money, [this applies] also to anything moveable and worth money.  This excludes land that is not moveable, it excludes slaves, as there is an (biblical) association to land.  It excludes contracts that even though they are moveable, they are not inherently worth money.  And from this law it is clear to you that payment of double is made with living things and with non living things.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
One who wounds his friend is obligated to pay 5 etc:  One who embarrasses a naked person, who embarrasses etc...
When he cuts off his hand or his foot he is obligated in the 5 punishments, but when he does to him 1 of these damages or 2 from these, for example, that he embarrasses him only, he is not obligated except for embarrassment.  And similarly if it's only pain he's not obligated except for pain.  As is said as an example that he burns him with a skewer on his fingernail and all this one should examine.  And if he passes over, the victim, on the words of the doctor, and was added to his illness or another injury happens because of this, the damager is not obligated for any of this new illness, because the patient neglected himself. And know that it is very important principle from the principles of our religion, that you don't collect fines in Babylonia and all the other lands outside of the land of Israel only.  Because that he blessed be he said "before the judges" and we do not have judges that heir name is called [true] judges except for judges with ordination in the land of Israel.  And this is explained in Sanhedrin.  All judges in the world it is as if they stand in the place of judges in the land of Israel, and even so they do not fill their place except in matters of general things people do, in order that they should not lose the rights of people.  For example loans, buying, selling, acquiring, admissions, and denials.   And when an animal damages with the tooth or the foot that they are accustomed to this, as is explained, and similarly when a person damages an animal.  However an animal to a person or a person to a person, and all fines, they do not pay anything, except with the court in the land of Israel, because these are things that from them they don't happen except for a little bit, and from these things you do not lose a lot of money.  And it is appropriate to do when someone wounds his friend that it should be evaluated in all that he would be obligated, from time off work, and embarrassment, doctor bills, pain, and the fines, and they should add together everything and the one who wounds will pay at one time and will be absolved, if it was that the court case was in the land of Israel. And if it was outside the land we excommunicate the one who wounds until he gives what he obligated to pay on the basis of mutual agreement or go up with the other person to the land of Israel and when he gives what he is obligated to pay to him we release his excommunication, and even if the one who wounds is not happy with this.  It is appropriate to mention here that the half damages that an innocuous ox pays is considered a fine and we do not collect this outside of Israel except according to what is mentioned.  However half damages with stones that was mentioned already in the second chapter from this tractate and it is that when rocks shoot out from his [the animals] feet and it breaks vessels he pays half damages from the entire damage [not limited to the value of the animal], that this is law and not fines and we can collect it outside of Israel and only if it was in the domain of the person who was damaged.  However in the public domain he is not liable for any damage of the foot as it is explained there.  And full damages are not a fine and is collected outside the land of Israel except an ox that is accustomed alone because the idea in our hand there are not 'accustomed' oxen in in Babylonia [because there is no Sanhedrin].

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
One who steals wood and makes it into vessels, wool and makes it into clothes... 
It says, 'this is the principle, All robbers pay according to the time of stealing' to teach that whoever steals a small animal and it grows with him he acquired it with the change. And if he slaughters it  or he sells it after it grew, that which is his- he is slaughtering and it's his that which he sells.  And he is not obligated in 4 or 5 fold payment.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
One who steals and feeds his children or he leaves to them an inheritance etc...  we do not exchange coins from the trunk of collectors etc...
This Mishnah is built on 2 principles, the first, moveable items to a debtor are not claimed.  The second, one who borrows at their word does not collect from inheritors.  And these 2 principles, the halakah is not like them, rather from the principles that we judge on them now is moveable items to a debtor are claimed, [and] a lender on word of mouth can collect from inheritors.  And what is appropriate upon the thief to pay has the status of a loan made word of mouth.  Therefore if one steals and feeds his children, they are obligated to pay in whatever the situation will be; the owner despaired or he did not despair, whether he left over real estate or moveable items from his possessions he should take whatever was stolen.  And if the father left over nothing, if the owner despaired they are not obligated to pay, and if they ate what they ate before [the owner] despaired they are obligated to pay.  
And if the collector was gentile or the collector was Jewish but does not have boundaries rather the king has given him permission to add to the customs whatever amount he wants to the set amount that has been set to him from the king, this makes him a thief with all of this.  It is not appropriate to break anything [coins] from what there is in front of him from the money, because he is assumed to be thief.  And that money is all stolen.  And similarly he should not take charity from the collector from the money which is in front of.  However if he breaks from the money that there is to him in his house or he took money for charity when he was in the market and there was not box before him, this is permitted.  And this is the reason for what [the Mishnah] says 'from his house or from the market', and similarly one should not break money with what is before a charity collector because of suspicion that they not suspect him that it is from the possessions of charity that there is upon him an obligation when someone sees him that he gave money and he did not see him give larger money.  
And it's already explained to you from the Mishnah's words that there will be a Jewish collector and he does not add to it what the king set and does not make it lower, he is not a thief because it's from our principles that the law of the land is the law.
