=== 1 | Works and Days ===
Sacred-Texts
Classics
Hesiod
Hesiod: Works And Days
translated by Hugh G. Evelyn-White
[1914]
(ll. 1-10) Muses of Pieria who give glory through song, come
hither, tell of Zeus your father and chant his praise.  Through
him mortal men are famed or un-famed, sung or unsung alike, as
great Zeus wills.  For easily he makes strong, and easily he
brings the strong man low; easily he humbles the proud and raises
the obscure, and easily he straightens the crooked and blasts the
proud, -- Zeus who thunders aloft and has his dwelling most high.
Attend thou with eye and ear, and make judgements straight with
righteousness.  And I, Perses, would tell of true things.
(ll. 11-24) So, after all, there was not one kind of Strife
alone, but all over the earth there are two.  As for the one, a
man would praise her when he came to understand her; but the
other is blameworthy: and they are wholly different in nature.
For one fosters evil war and battle, being cruel: her no man
loves; but perforce, through the will of the deathless gods, men
pay harsh Strife her honour due.  But the other is the elder
daughter of dark Night, and the son of Cronos who sits above and
dwells in the aether, set her in the roots of the earth: and she
is far kinder to men.  She stirs up even the shiftless to toil;
for a man grows eager to work when he considers his neighbour, a
rich man who hastens to plough and plant and put his house in
good order; and neighbour vies with is neighbour as he hurries
after wealth.  This Strife is wholesome for men.  And potter is
angry with potter, and craftsman with craftsman, and beggar is
jealous of beggar, and minstrel of minstrel.
(ll. 25-41) Perses, lay up these things in your heart, and do not
let that Strife who delights in mischief hold your heart back
from work, while you peep and peer and listen to the wrangles of
the court-house.  Little concern has he with quarrels and courts
who has not a year's victuals laid up betimes, even that which
the earth bears, Demeter's grain.  When you have got plenty of
that, you can raise disputes and strive to get another's goods.
But you shall have no second chance to deal so again: nay, let us
settle our dispute here with true judgement which is of Zeus and
is perfect. For we had already divided our inheritance, but you
seized the greater share and carried it off, greatly swelling the
glory of our bribe-swallowing lords who love
to judge such a cause as this.  Fools!  They know not how much
more the half is than the whole, nor what great advantage there
is in mallow and asphodel (1).
(ll. 42-53) For the gods keep hidden from men the means of life.
Else you would easily do work enough in a day to supply you for a
full year even without working; soon would you put away your
rudder over the smoke, and the fields worked by ox and sturdy
mule would run to waste.  But Zeus in the anger of his heart hid
it, because Prometheus the crafty deceived him; therefore he
planned sorrow and mischief against men.  He hid fire; but that
the noble son of Iapetus stole again for men from Zeus the
counsellor in a hollow fennel-stalk, so that Zeus who delights in
thunder did not see it.  But afterwards Zeus who gathers the
clouds said to him in anger:
(ll. 54-59) `Son of Iapetus, surpassing all in cunning, you are
glad that you have outwitted me and stolen fire -- a great plague
to you yourself and to men that shall be.  But I will give men as
the price for fire an evil thing in which they may all be glad of
heart while they embrace their own destruction.'
(ll. 60-68) So said the father of men and gods, and laughed
aloud.  And he bade famous Hephaestus make haste and mix earth
with water and to put in it the voice and strength of human kind,
and fashion a sweet, lovely maiden-shape, like to the immortal
goddesses in face; and Athene to teach her needlework and the
weaving of the varied web; and golden Aphrodite to shed grace
upon her head and cruel longing and cares that weary the limbs.
And he charged Hermes the guide, the Slayer of Argus, to put in
her a shameless mind and a deceitful nature.
(ll. 69-82) So he ordered.  And they obeyed the lord Zeus the son
of Cronos.  Forthwith the famous Lame God moulded clay in the
likeness of a modest maid, as the son of Cronos purposed.  And
the goddess bright-eyed Athene girded and clothed her, and the
divine Graces and queenly Persuasion put necklaces of gold upon
her, and the rich-haired Hours crowned her head with spring
flowers.  And Pallas Athene bedecked her form with all manners of
finery.  Also the Guide, the Slayer of Argus, contrived within
her lies and crafty words and a deceitful nature at the will of
loud thundering Zeus, and the Herald of the gods put speech in
her.  And he called this woman Pandora (2), because all they who
dwelt on Olympus gave each a gift, a plague to men who eat bread.
(ll. 83-89) But when he had finished the sheer, hopeless snare,
the Father sent glorious Argus-Slayer, the swift messenger of the
gods, to take it to Epimetheus as a gift.  And Epimetheus did not
think on what Prometheus had said to him, bidding him never take
a gift of Olympian Zeus, but to send it back for fear it might
prove to be something harmful to men.  But he took the gift, and
afterwards, when the evil thing was already his, he understood.
(ll. 90-105) For ere this the tribes of men lived on earth remote
and free from ills and hard toil and heavy sickness which bring
the Fates upon men; for in misery men grow old quickly.  But the
woman took off the great lid of the jar (3) with her hands and
scattered all these and her thought caused sorrow and mischief to
men.  Only Hope remained there in an unbreakable home within
under the rim of the great jar, and did not fly out at the door;
for ere that, the lid of the jar stopped her, by the will of
Aegis-holding Zeus who gathers the clouds.  But the rest,
countless plagues, wander amongst men; for earth is full of evils
and the sea is full.  Of themselves diseases come upon men
continually by day and by night, bringing mischief to mortals
silently; for wise Zeus took away speech from them.  So is there
no way to escape the will of Zeus.
(ll. 106-108) Or if you will, I will sum you up another tale well
and skilfully -- and do you lay it up in your heart, -- how the
gods and mortal men sprang from one source.
(ll. 109-120) First of all the deathless gods who dwell on
Olympus made a golden race of mortal men who lived in the time of
Cronos when he was reigning in heaven.  And they lived like gods
without sorrow of heart, remote and free from toil and grief:
miserable age rested not on them; but with legs and arms never
failing they made merry with feasting beyond the reach of all
evils.  When they died, it was as though they were overcome with
sleep, and they had all good things; for the fruitful earth
unforced bare them fruit abundantly and without stint.  They
dwelt in ease and peace upon their lands with many good things,
rich in flocks and loved by the blessed gods.
(ll. 121-139) But after earth had covered this generation -- they
are called pure spirits dwelling on the earth, and are kindly,
delivering from harm, and guardians of mortal men; for they roam
everywhere over the earth, clothed in mist and keep watch on
judgements and cruel deeds, givers of wealth; for this royal
right also they received; -- then they who dwell on Olympus made
a second generation which was of silver and less noble by far.
It was like the golden race neither in body nor in spirit.  A
child was brought up at his good mother's side an hundred years,
an utter simpleton, playing childishly in his own home.  But when
they were full grown and were come to the full measure of their
prime, they lived only a little time in sorrow because of their
foolishness, for they could not keep from sinning and from
wronging one another, nor would they serve the immortals, nor
sacrifice on the holy altars of the blessed ones as it is right
for men to do wherever they dwell.  Then Zeus the son of Cronos
was angry and put them away, because they would not give honour
to the blessed gods who live on Olympus.
(ll. 140-155) But when earth had covered this generation also --
they are called blessed spirits of the underworld by men, and,
though they are of second order, yet honour attends them also --
Zeus the Father made a third generation of mortal men, a brazen
race, sprung from ash-trees (4); and it was in no way equal to
the silver age, but was terrible and strong.  They loved the
lamentable works of Ares and deeds of violence; they ate no
bread, but were hard of heart like adamant, fearful men.  Great
was their strength and unconquerable the arms which grew from
their shoulders on their strong limbs.  Their armour was of
bronze, and their houses of bronze, and of bronze were their
implements: there was no black iron.  These were destroyed by
their own hands and passed to the dank house of chill Hades, and
left no name: terrible though they were, black Death seized them,
and they left the bright light of the sun.
(ll. 156-169b) But when earth had covered this generation also,
Zeus the son of Cronos made yet another, the fourth, upon the
fruitful earth, which was nobler and more righteous, a god-like
race of hero-men who are called demi-gods, the race before our
own, throughout the boundless earth.  Grim war and dread battle
destroyed a part of them, some in the land of Cadmus at seven-
gated Thebe when they fought for the flocks of Oedipus, and some,
when it had brought them in ships over the great sea gulf to Troy
for rich-haired Helen's sake: there death's end enshrouded a part
of them.  But to the others father Zeus the son of Cronos gave a
living and an abode apart from men, and made them dwell at the
ends of earth.  And they live untouched by sorrow in the islands
of the blessed along the shore of deep swirling Ocean, happy
heroes for whom the grain-giving earth bears honey-sweet fruit
flourishing thrice a year, far from the deathless gods, and
Cronos rules over them (5); for the father of men and gods
released him from his bonds.  And these last equally have honour
and glory.
(ll. 169c-169d) And again far-seeing Zeus made yet another
generation, the fifth, of men who are upon the bounteous earth.
(ll. 170-201) Thereafter, would that I were not among the men of
the fifth generation, but either had died before or been born
afterwards.  For now truly is a race of iron, and men never rest
from labour and sorrow by day, and from perishing by night; and
the gods shall lay sore trouble upon them.  But, notwithstanding,
even these shall have some good mingled with their evils.  And
Zeus will destroy this race of mortal men also when they come to
have grey hair on the temples at their birth (6).  The father
will not agree with his children, nor the children with their
father, nor guest with his host, nor comrade with comrade; nor
will brother be dear to brother as aforetime.  Men will dishonour
their parents as they grow quickly old, and will carp at them,
chiding them with bitter words, hard-hearted they, not knowing
the fear of the gods.  They will not repay their aged parents the
cost their nurture, for might shall be their right: and one man
will sack another's city.  There will be no favour for the man
who keeps his oath or for the just or for the good; but rather
men will praise the evil-doer and his violent dealing.  Strength
will be right and reverence will cease to be; and the wicked will
hurt the worthy man, speaking false words against him, and will
swear an oath upon them.  Envy, foul-mouthed, delighting in evil,
with scowling face, will go along with wretched men one and all.
And then Aidos and Nemesis (7), with their sweet forms wrapped in
white robes, will go from the wide-pathed earth and forsake
mankind to join the company of the deathless gods: and bitter
sorrows will be left for mortal men, and there will be no help
against evil.
(ll. 202-211) And now I will tell a fable for princes who
themselves understand.  Thus said the hawk to the nightingale
with speckled neck, while he carried her high up among the
clouds, gripped fast in his talons, and she, pierced by his
crooked talons, cried pitifully.  To her he spoke disdainfully:
`Miserable thing, why do you cry out?  One far stronger than you
now holds you fast, and you must go wherever I take you,
songstress as you are.  And if I please I will make my meal of
you, or let you go.  He is a fool who tries to withstand the
stronger, for he does not get the mastery and suffers pain
besides his shame.'  So said the swiftly flying hawk, the long-
winged bird.
(ll. 212-224) But you, Perses, listen to right and do not foster
violence; for violence is bad for a poor man.  Even the
prosperous cannot easily bear its burden, but is weighed down
under it when he has fallen into delusion.  The better path is to
go by on the other side towards justice; for Justice beats
Outrage when she comes at length to the end of the race.  But
only when he has suffered does the fool learn this.  For Oath
keeps pace with wrong judgements.  There is a noise when Justice
is being dragged in the way where those who devour bribes and
give sentence with crooked judgements, take her.  And she,
wrapped in mist, follows to the city and haunts of the people,
weeping, and bringing mischief to men, even to such as have
driven her forth in that they did not deal straightly with her.
(ll. 225-237) But they who give straight judgements to strangers
and to the men of the land, and go not aside from what is just,
their city flourishes, and the people prosper in it: Peace, the
nurse of children, is abroad in their land, and all-seeing Zeus
never decrees cruel war against them.  Neither famine nor
disaster ever haunt men who do true justice; but light-heartedly
they tend the fields which are all their care.  The earth bears
them victual in plenty, and on the mountains the oak bears acorns
upon the top and bees in the midst.  Their woolly sheep are laden
with fleeces; their women bear children like their parents.  They
flourish continually with good things, and do not travel on
ships, for the grain-giving earth bears them fruit.
(ll. 238-247) But for those who practise violence and cruel deeds
far-seeing Zeus, the son of Cronos, ordains a punishment.  Often
even a whole city suffers for a bad man who sins and devises
presumptuous deeds, and the son of Cronos lays great trouble upon
the people, famine and plague together, so that the men perish
away, and their women do not bear children, and their houses
become few, through the contriving of Olympian Zeus.  And again,
at another time, the son of Cronos either destroys their wide
army, or their walls, or else makes an end of their ships on the
sea.
(ll. 248-264) You princes, mark well this punishment you also;
for the deathless gods are near among men and mark all those who
oppress their fellows with crooked judgements, and reck not the
anger of the gods.  For upon the bounteous earth Zeus has thrice
ten thousand spirits, watchers of mortal men, and these keep
watch on judgements and deeds of wrong as they roam, clothed in
mist, all over the earth.  And there is virgin Justice, the
daughter of Zeus, who is honoured and reverenced among the gods
who dwell on Olympus, and whenever anyone hurts her with lying
slander, she sits beside her father, Zeus the son of Cronos, and
tells him of men's wicked heart, until the people pay for the mad
folly of their princes who, evilly minded, pervert judgement and
give sentence crookedly.  Keep watch against this, you princes,
and make straight your judgements, you who devour bribes; put
crooked judgements altogether from your thoughts.
(ll. 265-266) He does mischief to himself who does mischief to
another, and evil planned harms the plotter most.
(ll. 267-273) The eye of Zeus, seeing all and understanding all,
beholds these things too, if so he will, and fails not to mark
what sort of justice is this that the city keeps within it.  Now,
therefore, may neither I myself be righteous among men, nor my
son -- for then it is a bad thing to be righteous -- if indeed
the unrighteous shall have the greater right.  But I think that
all-wise Zeus will not yet bring that to pass.
(ll. 274-285) But you, Perses, lay up these things within you
heart and listen now to right, ceasing altogether to think of
violence.  For the son of Cronos has ordained this law for men,
that fishes and beasts and winged fowls should devour one
another, for right is not in them; but to mankind he gave right
which proves far the best.  For whoever knows the right and is
ready to speak it, far-seeing Zeus gives him prosperity; but
whoever deliberately lies in his witness and forswears himself,
and so hurts Justice and sins beyond repair, that man's
generation is left obscure thereafter.  But the generation of the
man who swears truly is better thenceforward.
(ll. 286-292) To you, foolish Perses, I will speak good sense.
Badness can be got easily and in shoals: the road to her is
smooth, and she lives very near us.  But between us and Goodness
the gods have placed the sweat of our brows: long and steep is
the path that leads to her, and it is rough at the first; but
when a man has reached the top, then is she easy to reach, though
before that she was hard.
(ll. 293-319) That man is altogether best who considers all
things himself and marks what will be better afterwards and at
the end; and he, again, is good who listens to a good adviser;
but whoever neither thinks for himself nor keeps in mind what
another tells him, he is an unprofitable man.  But do you at any
rate, always remembering my charge, work, high-born Perses, that
Hunger may hate you, and venerable Demeter richly crowned may
love you and fill your barn with food; for Hunger is altogether a
meet comrade for the sluggard.  Both gods and men are angry with
a man who lives idle, for in nature he is like the stingless
drones who waste the labour of the bees, eating without working;
but let it be your care to order your work properly, that in the
right season your barns may be full of victual.  Through work men
grow rich in flocks and substance, and working they are much
better loved by the immortals (8).  Work is no disgrace: it is
idleness which is a disgrace.  But if you work, the idle will
soon envy you as you grow rich, for fame and renown attend on
wealth.  And whatever be your lot, work is best for you, if you
turn your misguided mind away from other men's property to your
work and attend to your livelihood as I bid you.  An evil shame
is the needy man's companion, shame which both greatly harms and
prospers men: shame is with poverty, but confidence with wealth.
(ll. 320-341) Wealth should not be seized: god-given wealth is
much better; for it a man take great wealth violently and
perforce, or if he steal it through his tongue, as often happens
when gain deceives men's sense and dishonour tramples down
honour, the gods soon blot him out and make that man's house low,
and wealth attends him only for a little time.  Alike with him
who does wrong to a suppliant or a guest, or who goes up to his
brother's bed and commits unnatural sin in lying with his wife,
or who infatuately offends against fatherless children, or who
abuses his old father at the cheerless threshold of old age and
attacks him with harsh words, truly Zeus himself is angry, and at
the last lays on him a heavy requittal for his evil doing.  But
do you turn your foolish heart altogether away from these things,
and, as far as you are able, sacrifice to the deathless gods
purely and cleanly, and burn rich meats also, and at other times
propitiate them with libations and incense, both when you go to
bed and when the holy light has come back, that they may be
gracious to you in heart and spirit, and so you may buy another's
holding and not another yours.
(ll. 342-351) Call your friend to a feast; but leave your enemy
alone; and especially call him who lives near you: for if any
mischief happen in the place, neighbours come ungirt, but kinsmen
stay to gird themselves (9).  A bad neighbour is as great a
plague as a good one is a great blessing; he who enjoys a good
neighbour has a precious possession.  Not even an ox would die
but for a bad neighbour.  Take fair measure from your neighbour
and pay him back fairly with the same measure, or better, if you
can; so that if you are in need afterwards, you may find him
sure.
(ll. 352-369) Do not get base gain: base gain is as bad as ruin.
Be friends with the friendly, and visit him who visits you.  Give
to one who gives, but do not give to one who does not give.  A
man gives to the free-handed, but no one gives to the close-
fisted.  Give is a good girl, but Take is bad and she brings
death.  For the man who gives willingly, even though he gives a
great thing, rejoices in his gift and is glad in heart; but
whoever gives way to shamelessness and takes something himself,
even though it be a small thing, it freezes his heart.  He who
adds to what he has, will keep off bright-eyed hunger; for it you
add only a little to a little and do this often, soon that little
will become great.  What a man has by him at home does not
trouble him: it is better to have your stuff at home, for
whatever is abroad may mean loss.  It is a good thing to draw on
what you have; but it grieves your heart to need something and
not to have it, and I bid you mark this.  Take your fill when the
cask is first opened and when it is nearly spent, but midways be
sparing: it is poor saving when you come to the lees.
(ll. 370-372) Let the wage promised to a friend be fixed; even
with your brother smile -- and get a witness; for trust and
mistrust, alike ruin men.
(ll. 373-375) Do not let a flaunting woman coax and cozen and
deceive you: she is after your barn.  The man who trusts
womankind trust deceivers.
(ll. 376-380) There should be an only son, to feed his father's
house, for so wealth will increase in the home; but if you leave
a second son you should die old.  Yet Zeus can easily give great
wealth to a greater number.  More hands mean more work and more
increase.
(ll. 381-382) If your heart within you desires wealth, do these
things and work with work upon work.
(ll. 383-404) When the Pleiades, daughters of Atlas, are rising
(10), begin your harvest, and your ploughing when they are going
to set (11).  Forty nights and days they are hidden and appear
again as the year moves round, when first you sharpen your
sickle.  This is the law of the plains, and of those who live
near the sea, and who inhabit rich country, the glens and dingles
far from the tossing sea, -- strip to sow and strip to plough and
strip to reap, if you wish to get in all Demeter's fruits in due
season, and that each kind may grow in its season.  Else,
afterwards, you may chance to be in want, and go begging to other
men's houses, but without avail; as you have already come to me.
But I will give you no more nor give you further measure.
Foolish Perses!  Work the work which the gods ordained for men,
lest in bitter anguish of spirit you with your wife and children
seek your livelihood amongst your neighbours, and they do not
heed you.  Two or three times, may be, you will succeed, but if
you trouble them further, it will not avail you, and all your
talk will be in vain, and your word-play unprofitable.  Nay, I
bid you find a way to pay your debts and avoid hunger.
(ll. 405-413) First of all, get a house, and a woman and an ox
for the plough -- a slave woman and not a wife, to follow the
oxen as well -- and make everything ready at home, so that you
may not have to ask of another, and he refuses you, and so,
because you are in lack, the season pass by and your work come to
nothing.  Do not put your work off till to-morrow and the day
after; for a sluggish worker does not fill his barn, nor one who
puts off his work: industry makes work go well, but a man who
putts off work is always at hand-grips with ruin.
(ll. 414-447) When the piercing power and sultry heat of the sun
abate, and almighty Zeus sends the autumn rains (12), and men's
flesh comes to feel far easier, -- for then the star Sirius
passes over the heads of men, who are born to misery, only a
little while by day and takes greater share of night, -- then,
when it showers its leaves to the ground and stops sprouting, the
wood you cut with your axe is least liable to worm.  Then
remember to hew your timber: it is the season for that work.  Cut
a mortar (13) three feet wide and a pestle three cubits long, and
an axle of seven feet, for it will do very well so; but if you
make it eight feet long, you can cut a beetle (14) from it as
well.  Cut a felloe three spans across for a waggon of ten
palms' width.  Hew also many bent timbers, and bring home a
plough-tree when you have found it, and look out on the mountain
or in the field for one of holm-oak; for this is the strongest
for oxen to plough with when one of Athena's handmen has fixed in
the share-beam and fastened it to the pole with dowels.  Get two
ploughs ready work on them at home, one all of a piece, and the
other jointed.  It is far better to do this, for if you should
break one of them, you can put the oxen to the other.  Poles of
laurel or elm are most free from worms, and a share-beam of oak
and a plough-tree of holm-oak.  Get two oxen, bulls of nine
years; for their strength is unspent and they are in the prime of
their age: they are best for work.  They will not fight in the
furrow and break the plough and then leave the work undone.  Let
a brisk fellow of forty years follow them, with a loaf of four
quarters (15) and eight slices (16) for his dinner, one who will
attend to his work and drive a straight furrow and is past the
age for gaping after his fellows, but will keep his mind on his
work.  No younger man will be better than he at scattering the
seed and avoiding double-sowing; for a man less staid gets
disturbed, hankering after his fellows.
(ll. 448-457) Mark, when you hear the voice of the crane (17) who
cries year by year from the clouds above, for she give the signal
for ploughing and shows the season of rainy winter; but she vexes
the heart of the man who has no oxen.  Then is the time to feed
up your horned oxen in the byre; for it is easy to say: `Give me
a yoke of oxen and a waggon,' and it is easy to refuse: `I have
work for my oxen.'  The man who is rich in fancy thinks his
waggon as good as built already -- the fool!  He does not know
that there are a hundred timbers to a waggon.  Take care to lay
these up beforehand at home.
(ll. 458-464) So soon as the time for ploughing is proclaimed to
men, then make haste, you and your slaves alike, in wet and in
dry, to plough in the season for ploughing, and bestir yourself
early in the morning so that your fields may be full.  Plough in
the spring; but fallow broken up in the summer will not belie
your hopes.  Sow fallow land when the soil is still getting
light: fallow land is a defender from harm and a soother of
children.
(ll. 465-478) Pray to Zeus of the Earth and to pure Demeter to
make Demeter's holy grain sound and heavy, when first you begin
ploughing, when you hold in your hand the end of the plough-tail
and bring down your stick on the backs of the oxen as they draw
on the pole-bar by the yoke-straps.  Let a slave follow a little
behind with a mattock and make trouble for the birds by hiding
the seed; for good management is the best for mortal men as bad
management is the worst.  In this way your corn-ears will bow to
the ground with fullness if the Olympian himself gives a good
result at the last, and you will sweep the cobwebs from your bins
and you will be glad, I ween, as you take of your garnered
substance.  And so you will have plenty till you come to grey
(18) springtime, and will not look wistfully to others, but
another shall be in need of your help.
(ll. 479-492) But if you plough the good ground at the solstice
(19), you will reap sitting, grasping a thin crop in your hand,
binding the sheaves awry, dust-covered, not glad at all; so you
will bring all home in a basket and not many will admire you.
Yet the will of Zeus who holds the aegis is different at
different times; and it is hard for mortal men to tell it; for if
you should plough late, you may find this remedy -- when the
cuckoo first calls (20) in the leaves of the oak and makes men
glad all over the boundless earth, if Zeus should send rain on
the third day and not cease until it rises neither above an ox's
hoof nor falls short of it, then the late-plougher will vie with
the early.  Keep all this well in mind, and fail not to mark grey
spring as it comes and the season of rain.
(ll 493-501) Pass by the smithy and its crowded lounge in winter
time when the cold keeps men from field work, -- for then an
industrious man can greatly prosper his house -- lest bitter
winter catch you helpless and poor and you chafe a swollen foot
with a shrunk hand.  The idle man who waits on empty hope,
lacking a livelihood, lays to heart mischief-making; it is not an
wholesome hope that accompanies a need man who lolls at ease
while he has no sure livelihood.
(ll. 502-503) While it is yet midsummer command your slaves: `It
will not always be summer, build barns.'
(ll. 504-535) Avoid the month Lenaeon (21), wretched days, all of
them fit to skin an ox, and the frosts which are cruel when
Boreas blows over the earth.  He blows across horse-breeding
Thrace upon the wide sea and stirs it up, while earth and the
forest howl.  On many a high-leafed oak and thick pine he falls
and brings them to the bounteous earth in mountain glens: then
all the immense wood roars and the beasts shudder and put their
tails between their legs, even those whose hide is covered with
fur; for with his bitter blast he blows even through them
although they are shaggy-breasted.  He goes even through an ox's
hide; it does not stop him.  Also he blows through the goat's
fine hair.  But through the fleeces of sheep, because their wool
is abundant, the keen wind Boreas pierces not at all; but it
makes the old man curved as a wheel.  And it does not blow
through the tender maiden who stays indoors with her dear mother,
unlearned as yet in the works of golden Aphrodite, and who washes
her soft body and anoints herself with oil and lies down in an
inner room within the house, on a winter's day when the Boneless
One (22) gnaws his foot in his fireless house and wretched home;
for the sun shows him no pastures to make for, but goes to and
fro over the land and city of dusky men (23), and shines more
sluggishly upon the whole race of the Hellenes.  Then the horned
and unhorned denizens of the wood, with teeth chattering
pitifully, flee through the copses and glades, and all, as they
seek shelter, have this one care, to gain thick coverts or some
hollow rock.  Then, like the Three-legged One (24) whose back is
broken and whose head looks down upon the ground, like him, I
say, they wander to escape the white snow.
(ll. 536-563) Then put on, as I bid you, a soft coat and a tunic
to the feet to shield your body, -- and you should weave thick
woof on thin warp.  In this clothe yourself so that your hair may
keep still and not bristle and stand upon end all over your body.
Lace on your feet close-fitting boots of the hide of a
slaughtered ox, thickly lined with felt inside.  And when the
season of frost comes on, stitch together skins of firstling kids
with ox-sinew, to put over your back and to keep off the rain.
On your head above wear a shaped cap of felt to keep your ears
from getting wet, for the dawn is chill when Boreas has once made
his onslaught, and at dawn a fruitful mist is spread over the
earth from starry heaven upon the fields of blessed men: it is
drawn from the ever flowing rivers and is raised high above the
earth by windstorm, and sometimes it turns to rain towards
evening, and sometimes to wind when Thracian Boreas huddles the
thick clouds.  Finish your work and return home ahead of him, and
do not let the dark cloud from heaven wrap round you and make
your body clammy and soak your clothes.  Avoid it; for this is
the hardest month, wintry, hard for sheep and hard for men.  In
this season let your oxen have half their usual food, but let
your man have more; for the helpful nights are long.  Observe all
this until the year is ended and you have nights and days of
equal length, and Earth, the mother of all, bears again her
various fruit.
(ll. 564-570) When Zeus has finished sixty wintry days after the
solstice, then the star Arcturus (25) leaves the holy stream of
Ocean and first rises brilliant at dusk.  After him the shrilly
wailing daughter of Pandion, the swallow, appears to men when
spring is just beginning.  Before she comes, prune the vines, for
it is best so.
(ll. 571-581) But when the House-carrier (26) climbs up the
plants from the earth to escape the Pleiades, then it is no
longer the season for digging vineyards, but to whet your sickles
and rouse up your slaves.  Avoid shady seats and sleeping until
dawn in the harvest season, when the sun scorches the body.  Then
be busy, and bring home your fruits, getting up early to make
your livelihood sure.  For dawn takes away a third part of your
work, dawn advances a man on his journey and advances him in his
work, -- dawn which appears and sets many men on their road, and
puts yokes on many oxen.
(ll. 582-596) But when the artichoke flowers (27), and the
chirping grass-hopper sits in a tree and pours down his shrill
song continually from under his wings in the season of wearisome
heat, then goats are plumpest and wine sweetest; women are most
wanton, but men are feeblest, because Sirius parches head and
knees and the skin is dry through heat.  But at that time let me
have a shady rock and wine of Biblis, a clot of curds and milk of
drained goats with the flesh of an heifer fed in the woods, that
has never calved, and of firstling kids; then also let me drink
bright wine, sitting in the shade, when my heart is satisfied
with food, and so, turning my head to face the fresh Zephyr, from
the everflowing spring which pours down unfouled thrice pour an
offering of water, but make a fourth libation of wine.
(ll. 597-608) Set your slaves to winnow Demeter's holy grain,
when strong Orion (28) first appears, on a smooth threshing-floor
in an airy place.  Then measure it and store it in jars.  And so
soon as you have safely stored all your stuff indoors, I bid you
put your bondman out of doors and look out for a servant-girl
with no children; -- for a servant with a child to nurse is
troublesome.  And look after the dog with jagged teeth; do not
grudge him his food, or some time the Day-sleeper (29) may take
your stuff.  Bring in fodder and litter so as to have enough for
your oxen and mules.  After that, let your men rest their poor
knees and unyoke your pair of oxen.
(ll. 609-617) But when Orion and Sirius are come into mid-heaven,
and rosy-fingered Dawn sees Arcturus (30), then cut off all the
grape-clusters, Perses, and bring them home.  Show them to the
sun ten days and ten nights: then cover them over for five, and
on the sixth day draw off into vessels the gifts of joyful
Dionysus.  But when the Pleiades and Hyades and strong Orion
begin to set (31), then remember to plough in season: and so the
completed year (32) will fitly pass beneath the earth.
(ll. 618-640) But if desire for uncomfortable sea-faring seize
you; when the Pleiades plunge into the misty sea (33) to escape
Orion's rude strength, then truly gales of all kinds rage.  Then
keep ships no longer on the sparkling sea, but bethink you to
till the land as I bid you.  Haul up your ship upon the land and
pack it closely with stones all round to keep off the power of
the winds which blow damply, and draw out the bilge-plug so that
the rain of heaven may not rot it.  Put away all the tackle and
fittings in your house, and stow the wings of the sea-going ship
neatly, and hang up the well-shaped rudder over the smoke.  You
yourself wait until the season for sailing is come, and then haul
your swift ship down to the sea and stow a convenient cargo in
it, so that you may bring home profit, even as your father and
mine, foolish Perses, used to sail on shipboard because he lacked
sufficient livelihood.  And one day he came to this very place
crossing over a great stretch of sea; he left Aeolian Cyme and
fled, not from riches and substance, but from wretched poverty
which Zeus lays upon men, and he settled near Helicon in a
miserable hamlet, Ascra, which is bad in winter, sultry in
summer, and good at no time.
(ll. 641-645) But you, Perses, remember all works in their season
but sailing especially.  Admire a small ship, but put your
freight in a large one; for the greater the lading, the greater
will be your piled gain, if only the winds will keep back their
harmful gales.
(ll. 646-662) If ever you turn your misguided heart to trading
and with to escape from debt and joyless hunger, I will show you
the measures of the loud-roaring sea, though I have no skill in
sea-faring nor in ships; for never yet have I sailed by ship over
the wide sea, but only to Euboea from Aulis where the Achaeans
once stayed through much storm when they had gathered a great
host from divine Hellas for Troy, the land of fair women.  Then I
crossed over to Chalcis, to the games of wise Amphidamas where
the sons of the great-hearted hero proclaimed and appointed
prizes.  And there I boast that I gained the victory with a song
and carried off an handled tripod which I dedicated to the Muses
of Helicon, in the place where they first set me in the way of
clear song.  Such is all my experience of many-pegged ships;
nevertheless I will tell you the will of Zeus who holds the
aegis; for the Muses have taught me to sing in marvellous song.
(ll. 663-677) Fifty days after the solstice (34), when the season
of wearisome heat is come to an end, is the right time for me to
go sailing.  Then you will not wreck your ship, nor will the sea
destroy the sailors, unless Poseidon the Earth-Shaker be set upon
it, or Zeus, the king of the deathless gods, wish to slay them;
for the issues of good and evil alike are with them.  At that
time the winds are steady, and the sea is harmless.  Then trust
in the winds without care, and haul your swift ship down to the
sea and put all the freight no board; but make all haste you can
to return home again and do not wait till the time of the new
wine and autumn rain and oncoming storms with the fierce gales of
Notus who accompanies the heavy autumn rain of Zeus and stirs up
the sea and makes the deep dangerous.
(ll. 678-694) Another time for men to go sailing is in spring
when a man first sees leaves on the topmost shoot of a fig-tree
as large as the foot-print that a cow makes; then the sea is
passable, and this is the spring sailing time.  For my part I do
not praise it, for my heart does not like it.  Such a sailing is
snatched, and you will hardly avoid mischief.  Yet in their
ignorance men do even this, for wealth means life to poor
mortals; but it is fearful to die among the waves.  But I bid you
consider all these things in your heart as I say.  Do not put all
your goods in hallow ships; leave the greater part behind, and
put the lesser part on board; for it is a bad business to meet
with disaster among the waves of the sea, as it is bad if you put
too great a load on your waggon and break the axle, and your
goods are spoiled.  Observe due measure: and proportion is best
in all things.
(ll. 695-705) Bring home a wife to your house when you are of the
right age, while you are not far short of thirty years nor much
above; this is the right age for marriage.  Let your wife have
been grown up four years, and marry her in the fifth.  Marry a
maiden, so that you can teach her careful ways, and especially
marry one who lives near you, but look well about you and see
that your marriage will not be a joke to your neighbours.  For a
man wins nothing better than a good wife, and, again, nothing
worse than a bad one, a greedy soul who roasts her man without
fire, strong though he may be, and brings him to a raw (35) old
age.
(ll. 706-714) Be careful to avoid the anger of the deathless
gods.  Do not make a friend equal to a brother; but if you do, do
not wrong him first, and do not lie to please the tongue.  But if
he wrongs you first, offending either in word or in deed,
remember to repay him double; but if he ask you to be his friend
again and be ready to give you satisfaction, welcome him.  He is
a worthless man who makes now one and now another his friend; but
as for you, do not let your face put your heart to shame (36).
(ll. 715-716) Do not get a name either as lavish or as churlish;
as a friend of rogues or as a slanderer of good men.
(ll. 717-721) Never dare to taunt a man with deadly poverty which
eats out the heart; it is sent by the deathless gods.  The best
treasure a man can have is a sparing tongue, and the greatest
pleasure, one that moves orderly; for if you speak evil, you
yourself will soon be worse spoken of.
(ll. 722-723) Do not be boorish at a common feast where there are
many guests; the pleasure is greatest and the expense is least
(37).
(ll. 724-726) Never pour a libation of sparkling wine to Zeus
after dawn with unwashen hands, nor to others of the deathless
gods; else they do not hear your prayers but spit them back.
(ll. 727-732) Do not stand upright facing the sun when you make
water, but remember to do this when he has set towards his
rising.  And do not make water as you go, whether on the road or
off the road, and do not uncover yourself: the nights belong to
the blessed gods.  A scrupulous man who has a wise heart sits
down or goes to the wall of an enclosed court.
(ll. 733-736) Do not expose yourself befouled by the fireside in
your house, but avoid this.  Do not beget children when you are
come back from ill-omened burial, but after a festival of the
gods.
(ll. 737-741) Never cross the sweet-flowing water of ever-rolling
rivers afoot until you have prayed, gazing into the soft flood,
and washed your hands in the clear, lovely water.  Whoever
crosses a river with hands unwashed of wickedness, the gods are
angry with him and bring trouble upon him afterwards.
(ll. 742-743) At a cheerful festival of the gods do not cut the
withered from the quick upon that which has five branches (38)
with bright steel.
(ll. 744-745) Never put the ladle upon the mixing-bowl at a wine
party, for malignant ill-luck is attached to that.
(ll. 746-747) When you are building a house, do not leave it
rough-hewn, or a cawing crow may settle on it and croak.
(ll. 748-749) Take nothing to eat or to wash with from uncharmed
pots, for in them there is mischief.
(ll. 750-759) Do not let a boy of twelve years sit on things
which may not be moved (39), for that is bad, and makes a man
unmanly; nor yet a child of twelve months, for that has the same
effect.  A man should not clean his body with water in which a
woman has washed, for there is bitter mischief in that also for a
time.  When you come upon a burning sacrifice, do not make a mock
of mysteries, for Heaven is angry at this also.  Never make water
in the mouths of rivers which flow to the sea, nor yet in
springs; but be careful to avoid this.  And do not ease yourself
in them: it is not well to do this.
(ll. 760-763) So do: and avoid the talk of men.  For Talk is
mischievous, light, and easily raised, but hard to bear and
difficult to be rid of.  Talk never wholly dies away when many
people voice her: even Talk is in some ways divine.
(ll. 765-767) Mark the days which come from Zeus, duly telling
your slaves of them, and that the thirtieth day of the month is
best for one to look over the work and to deal out supplies.
(ll. 769-768) (40) For these are days which come from Zeus the
all-wise, when men discern aright.
(ll. 770-779) To begin with, the first, the fourth, and the
seventh -- on which Leto bare Apollo with the blade of gold --
each is a holy day.  The eighth and the ninth, two days at least
of the waxing month (41), are specially good for the works of
man.  Also the eleventh and twelfth are both excellent, alike for
shearing sheep and for reaping the kindly fruits; but the twelfth
is much better than the eleventh, for on it the airy-swinging
spider spins its web in full day, and then the Wise One (42),
gathers her pile.  On that day woman should set up her loom and
get forward with her work.
(ll. 780-781) Avoid the thirteenth of the waxing month for
beginning to sow: yet it is the best day for setting plants.
(ll. 782-789) The sixth of the mid-month is very unfavourable for
plants, but is good for the birth of males, though unfavourable
for a girl either to be born at all or to be married.  Nor is the
first sixth a fit day for a girl to be born, but a kindly for
gelding kids and sheep and for fencing in a sheep-cote.  It is
favourable for the birth of a boy, but such will be fond of sharp
speech, lies, and cunning words, and stealthy converse.
(ll. 790-791) On the eighth of the month geld the boar and loud-
bellowing bull, but hard-working mules on the twelfth.
(ll. 792-799) On the great twentieth, in full day, a wise man
should be born.  Such an one is very sound-witted.  The tenth is
favourable for a male to be born; but, for a girl, the fourth day
of the mid-month.  On that day tame sheep and shambling, horned
oxen, and the sharp-fanged dog and hardy mules to the touch of
the hand.  But take care to avoid troubles which eat out the
heart on the fourth of the beginning and ending of the month; it
is a day very fraught with fate.
(ll. 800-801) On the fourth of the month bring home your bride,
but choose the omens which are best for this business.
(ll. 802-804) Avoid fifth days: they are unkindly and terrible.
On a fifth day, they say, the Erinyes assisted at the birth of
Horcus (Oath) whom Eris (Strife) bare to trouble the forsworn.
(ll. 805-809) Look about you very carefully and throw out
Demeter's holy grain upon the well-rolled (43) threshing floor on
the seventh of the mid-month.  Let the woodman cut beams for
house building and plenty of ships' timbers, such as are suitable
for ships.  On the fourth day begin to build narrow ships.
(ll. 810-813) The ninth of the mid-month improves towards
evening; but the first ninth of all is quite harmless for men.
It is a good day on which to beget or to be born both for a male
and a female: it is never an wholly evil day.
(ll. 814-818) Again, few know that the twenty-seventh of the
month is best for opening a wine-jar, and putting yokes on the
necks of oxen and mules and swift-footed horses, and for hauling
a swift ship of many thwarts down to the sparkling sea; few call
it by its right name.
(ll. 819-821) On the fourth day open a jar.  The fourth of the
mid-month is a day holy above all.  And again, few men know that
the fourth day after the twentieth is best while it is morning:
towards evening it is less good.
(ll. 822-828) These days are a great blessing to men on earth;
but the rest are changeable, luckless, and bring nothing.
Everyone praises a different day but few know their nature.
Sometimes a day is a stepmother, sometimes a mother.  That man is
happy and lucky in them who knows all these things and does his
work without offending the deathless gods, who discerns the omens
of birds and avoids transgressions.
ENDNOTES:
(1)  That is, the poor man's fare, like `bread and cheese'.
(2)  The All-endowed.
(3)  The jar or casket contained the gifts of the gods mentioned
in l.82.
(4)  Eustathius refers to Hesiod as stating that men sprung `from
oaks and stones and ashtrees'.  Proclus believed that the
Nymphs called Meliae ("Theogony", 187) are intended.
Goettling would render: `A race terrible because of their
(ashen) spears.'
(5)  Preserved only by Proclus, from whom some inferior MSS. have
copied the verse.  The four following lines occur only in
Geneva Papyri No. 94.  For the restoration of ll. 169b-c see
"Class. Quart." vii. 219-220.  (NOTE: Mr. Evelyn-White means
that the version quoted by Proclus stops at this point, then
picks up at l. 170. -- DBK).
(6)  i.e. the race will so degenerate that at the last even a
new-born child will show the marks of old age.
(7)  Aidos, as a quality, is that feeling of reverence or shame
which restrains men from wrong: Nemesis is the feeling of
righteous indignation aroused especially by the sight of the
wicked in undeserved prosperity (cf. "Psalms", lxxii. 1-19).
(8)  The alternative version is: `and, working, you will be much
better loved both by gods and men; for they greatly dislike
the idle.'
(9)  i.e. neighbours come at once and without making
preparations, but kinsmen by marriage (who live at a
distance) have to prepare, and so are long in coming.
(10) Early in May.
(11) In November.
(12) In October.
(13) For pounding corn.
(14) A mallet for breaking clods after ploughing.
(15) The loaf is a flattish cake with two intersecting lines
scored on its upper surface which divide it into four equal
parts.
(16) The meaning is obscure.  A scholiast renders `giving eight
mouthfulls'; but the elder Philostratus uses the word in
contrast to `leavened'.
(17) About the middle of November.
(18) Spring is so described because the buds have not yet cast
their iron-grey husks.
(19) In December.
(20) In March.
(21) The latter part of January and earlier part of February.
(22) i.e. the octopus or cuttle.
(23) i.e. the darker-skinned people of Africa, the Egyptians or
Aethiopians.
(24) i.e. an old man walking with a staff (the `third leg' -- as
in the riddle of the Sphinx).
(25) February to March.
(26) i.e. the snail.  The season is the middle of May.
(27) In June.
(28) July.
(29) i.e. a robber.
(30) September.
(31) The end of October.
(32) That is, the succession of stars which make up the full
year.
(33) The end of October or beginning of November.
(34) July-August.
(35) i.e. untimely, premature.  Juvenal similarly speaks of
`cruda senectus' (caused by gluttony).
(36) The thought is parallel to that of `O, what a goodly outside
falsehood hath.'
(37) The `common feast' is one to which all present subscribe.
Theognis (line 495) says that one of the chief pleasures of
a banquet is the general conversation.  Hence the present
passage means that such a feast naturally costs little,
while the many present will make pleasurable conversation.
(38) i.e. `do not cut your finger-nails'.
(39) i.e. things which it would be sacrilege to disturb, such as
tombs.
(40) H.G. Evelyn-White prefers to switch ll. 768 and 769, reading
l. 769 first then l. 768. -- DBK
(41) The month is divided into three periods, the waxing, the
mid-month, and the waning, which answer to the phases of the
moon.
(42) i.e. the ant.
(43) Such seems to be the meaning here, though the epithet is
otherwise rendered `well-rounded'.  Corn was threshed by
means of a sleigh with two runners having three or four
rollers between them, like the modern Egyptian "nurag".

=== 2 | The Theogony ===
Sacred-Texts
Classics
Hesiod
Greek
The Theogony of Hesiod
translated by Hugh G. Evelyn-White
[1914]
(ll. 1-25) From the Heliconian Muses let us begin to sing, who
hold the great and holy mount of Helicon, and dance on soft feet
about the deep-blue spring and the altar of the almighty son of
Cronos, and, when they have washed their tender bodies in
Permessus or in the Horse's Spring or Olmeius, make their fair,
lovely dances upon highest Helicon and move with vigorous feet.
Thence they arise and go abroad by night, veiled in thick mist,
and utter their song with lovely voice, praising Zeus the aegis-
holder and queenly Hera of Argos who walks on golden sandals and
the daughter of Zeus the aegis-holder bright-eyed Athene, and
Phoebus Apollo, and Artemis who delights in arrows, and Poseidon
the earth-holder who shakes the earth, and reverend Themis and
quick-glancing (1) Aphrodite, and Hebe with the crown of gold,
and fair Dione, Leto, Iapetus, and Cronos the crafty counsellor,
Eos and great Helius and bright Selene, Earth too, and great
Oceanus, and dark Night, and the holy race of all the other
deathless ones that are for ever.  And one day they taught Hesiod
glorious song while he was shepherding his lambs under holy
Helicon, and this word first the goddesses said to me -- the
Muses of Olympus, daughters of Zeus who holds the aegis:
(ll. 26-28) `Shepherds of the wilderness, wretched things of
shame, mere bellies, we know how to speak many false things as
though they were true; but we know, when we will, to utter true
things.'
(ll. 29-35) So said the ready-voiced daughters of great Zeus, and
they plucked and gave me a rod, a shoot of sturdy laurel, a
marvellous thing, and breathed into me a divine voice to
celebrate things that shall be and things there were aforetime;
and they bade me sing of the race of the blessed gods that are
eternally, but ever to sing of themselves both first and last.
But why all this about oak or stone? (2)
(ll. 36-52) Come thou, let us begin with the Muses who gladden
the great spirit of their father Zeus in Olympus with their
songs, telling of things that are and that shall be and that were
aforetime with consenting voice.  Unwearying flows the sweet
sound from their lips, and the house of their father Zeus the
loud-thunderer is glad at the lily-like voice of the goddesses as
it spread abroad, and the peaks of snowy Olympus resound, and the
homes of the immortals.  And they uttering their immortal voice,
celebrate in song first of all the reverend race of the gods from
the beginning, those whom Earth and wide Heaven begot, and the
gods sprung of these, givers of good things.  Then, next, the
goddesses sing of Zeus, the father of gods and men, as they begin
and end their strain, how much he is the most excellent among the
gods and supreme in power.  And again, they chant the race of men
and strong giants, and gladden the heart of Zeus within Olympus,
-- the Olympian Muses, daughters of Zeus the aegis-holder.
(ll. 53-74) Them in Pieria did Mnemosyne (Memory), who reigns
over the hills of Eleuther, bear of union with the father, the
son of Cronos, a forgetting of ills and a rest from sorrow.  For
nine nights did wise Zeus lie with her, entering her holy bed
remote from the immortals.  And when a year was passed and the
seasons came round as the months waned, and many days were
accomplished, she bare nine daughters, all of one mind, whose
hearts are set upon song and their spirit free from care, a
little way from the topmost peak of snowy Olympus.  There are
their bright dancing-places and beautiful homes, and beside them
the Graces and Himerus (Desire) live in delight.  And they,
uttering through their lips a lovely voice, sing the laws of all
and the goodly ways of the immortals, uttering their lovely
voice.  Then went they to Olympus, delighting in their sweet
voice, with heavenly song, and the dark earth resounded about
them as they chanted, and a lovely sound rose up beneath their
feet as they went to their father.  And he was reigning in
heaven, himself holding the lightning and glowing thunderbolt,
when he had overcome by might his father Cronos; and he
distributed fairly to the immortals their portions and declared
their privileges.
(ll. 75-103) These things, then, the Muses sang who dwell on
Olympus, nine daughters begotten by great Zeus, Cleio and
Euterpe, Thaleia, Melpomene and Terpsichore, and Erato and
Polyhymnia and Urania and Calliope (3), who is the chiefest of
them all, for she attends on worshipful princes: whomsoever of
heaven-nourished princes the daughters of great Zeus honour, and
behold him at his birth, they pour sweet dew upon his tongue, and
from his lips flow gracious words.  All the people look towards
him while he settles causes with true judgements: and he,
speaking surely, would soon make wise end even of a great
quarrel; for therefore are there princes wise in heart, because
when the people are being misguided in their assembly, they set
right the matter again with ease, persuading them with gentle
words.  And when he passes through a gathering, they greet him as
a god with gentle reverence, and he is conspicuous amongst the
assembled: such is the holy gift of the Muses to men.  For it is
through the Muses and far-shooting Apollo that there are singers
and harpers upon the earth; but princes are of Zeus, and happy is
he whom the Muses love: sweet flows speech from his mouth.  For
though a man have sorrow and grief in his newly-troubled soul and
live in dread because his heart is distressed, yet, when a
singer, the servant of the Muses, chants the glorious deeds of
men of old and the blessed gods who inhabit Olympus, at once he
forgets his heaviness and remembers not his sorrows at all; but
the gifts of the goddesses soon turn him away from these.
(ll. 104-115) Hail, children of Zeus!  Grant lovely song and
celebrate the holy race of the deathless gods who are for ever,
those that were born of Earth and starry Heaven and gloomy Night
and them that briny Sea did rear.  Tell how at the first gods and
earth came to be, and rivers, and the boundless sea with its
raging swell, and the gleaming stars, and the wide heaven above,
and the gods who were born of them, givers of good things, and
how they divided their wealth, and how they shared their honours
amongst them, and also how at the first they took many-folded
Olympus.  These things declare to me from the beginning, ye Muses
who dwell in the house of Olympus, and tell me which of them
first came to be.
(ll. 116-138) Verily at the first Chaos came to be, but next
wide-bosomed Earth, the ever-sure foundations of all (4) the
deathless ones who hold the peaks of snowy Olympus, and dim
Tartarus in the depth of the wide-pathed Earth, and Eros (Love),
fairest among the deathless gods, who unnerves the limbs and
overcomes the mind and wise counsels of all gods and all men
within them.  From Chaos came forth Erebus and black Night; but
of Night were born Aether (5) and Day, whom she conceived and
bare from union in love with Erebus.  And Earth first bare starry
Heaven, equal to herself, to cover her on every side, and to be
an ever-sure abiding-place for the blessed gods.  And she brought
forth long Hills, graceful haunts of the goddess-Nymphs who dwell
amongst the glens of the hills.  She bare also the fruitless deep
with his raging swell, Pontus, without sweet union of love.  But
afterwards she lay with Heaven and bare deep-swirling Oceanus,
Coeus and Crius and Hyperion and Iapetus, Theia and Rhea, Themis
and Mnemosyne and gold-crowned Phoebe and lovely Tethys.  After
them was born Cronos the wily, youngest and most terrible of her
children, and he hated his lusty sire.
(ll. 139-146) And again, she bare the Cyclopes, overbearing in
spirit, Brontes, and Steropes and stubborn-hearted Arges (6), who
gave Zeus the thunder and made the thunderbolt: in all else they
were like the gods, but one eye only was set in the midst of
their fore-heads.  And they were surnamed Cyclopes (Orb-eyed)
because one orbed eye was set in their foreheads.  Strength and
might and craft were in their works.
(ll. 147-163) And again, three other sons were born of Earth and
Heaven, great and doughty beyond telling, Cottus and Briareos and
Gyes, presumptuous children.  From their shoulders sprang an
hundred arms, not to be approached, and each had fifty heads upon
his shoulders on their strong limbs, and irresistible was the
stubborn strength that was in their great forms.  For of all the
children that were born of Earth and Heaven, these were the most
terrible, and they were hated by their own father from the first.
And he used to hide them all away in a secret place of Earth so
soon as each was born, and would not suffer them to come up into
the light: and Heaven rejoiced in his evil doing.  But vast Earth
groaned within, being straitened, and she made the element of
grey flint and shaped a great sickle, and told her plan to her
dear sons.  And she spoke, cheering them, while she was vexed in
her dear heart:
(ll. 164-166) `My children, gotten of a sinful father, if you
will obey me, we should punish the vile outrage of your father;
for he first thought of doing shameful things.'
(ll. 167-169) So she said; but fear seized them all, and none of
them uttered a word.  But great Cronos the wily took courage and
answered his dear mother:
(ll. 170-172) `Mother, I will undertake to do this deed, for I
reverence not our father of evil name, for he first thought of
doing shameful things.'
(ll. 173-175) So he said: and vast Earth rejoiced greatly in
spirit, and set and hid him in an ambush, and put in his hands a
jagged sickle, and revealed to him the whole plot.
(ll. 176-206) And Heaven came, bringing on night and longing for
love, and he lay about Earth spreading himself full upon her (7).
Then the son from his ambush stretched forth his left hand and in
his right took the great long sickle with jagged teeth, and
swiftly lopped off his own father's members and cast them away to
fall behind him.  And not vainly did they fall from his hand; for
all the bloody drops that gushed forth Earth received, and as the
seasons moved round she bare the strong Erinyes and the great
Giants with gleaming armour, holding long spears in their hands
and the Nymphs whom they call Meliae (8) all over the boundless
earth.  And so soon as he had cut off the members with flint and
cast them from the land into the surging sea, they were swept
away over the main a long time: and a white foam spread around
them from the immortal flesh, and in it there grew a maiden.
First she drew near holy Cythera, and from there, afterwards, she
came to sea-girt Cyprus, and came forth an awful and lovely
goddess, and grass grew up about her beneath her shapely feet.
Her gods and men call Aphrodite, and the foam-born goddess and
rich-crowned Cytherea, because she grew amid the foam, and
Cytherea because she reached Cythera, and Cyprogenes because she
was born in billowy Cyprus, and Philommedes (9) because sprang
from the members.  And with her went Eros, and comely Desire
followed her at her birth at the first and as she went into the
assembly of the gods.  This honour she has from the beginning,
and this is the portion allotted to her amongst men and undying
gods, -- the whisperings of maidens and smiles and deceits with
sweet delight and love and graciousness.
(ll. 207-210) But these sons whom be begot himself great Heaven
used to call Titans (Strainers) in reproach, for he said that
they strained and did presumptuously a fearful deed, and that
vengeance for it would come afterwards.
(ll. 211-225) And Night bare hateful Doom and black Fate and
Death, and she bare Sleep and the tribe of Dreams.  And again the
goddess murky Night, though she lay with none, bare Blame and
painful Woe, and the Hesperides who guard the rich, golden apples
and the trees bearing fruit beyond glorious Ocean.  Also she bare
the Destinies and ruthless avenging Fates, Clotho and Lachesis
and Atropos (10), who give men at their birth both evil and good
to have, and they pursue the transgressions of men and of gods:
and these goddesses never cease from their dread anger until they
punish the sinner with a sore penalty.  Also deadly Night bare
Nemesis (Indignation) to afflict mortal men, and after her,
Deceit and Friendship and hateful Age and hard-hearted Strife.
(ll. 226-232) But abhorred Strife bare painful Toil and
Forgetfulness and Famine and tearful Sorrows, Fightings also,
Battles, Murders, Manslaughters, Quarrels, Lying Words, Disputes,
Lawlessness and Ruin, all of one nature, and Oath who most
troubles men upon earth when anyone wilfully swears a false oath.
(ll. 233-239) And Sea begat Nereus, the eldest of his children,
who is true and lies not: and men call him the Old Man because he
is trusty and gentle and does not forget the laws of
righteousness, but thinks just and kindly thoughts.  And yet
again he got great Thaumas and proud Phoreys, being mated with
Earth, and fair-cheeked Ceto and Eurybia who has a heart of flint
within her.
(ll. 240-264) And of Nereus and rich-haired Doris, daughter of
Ocean the perfect river, were born children (11), passing lovely
amongst goddesses, Ploto, Eucrante, Sao, and Amphitrite, and
Eudora, and Thetis, Galene and Glauce, Cymothoe, Speo, Thoe and
lovely Halie, and Pasithea, and Erato, and rosy-armed Eunice, and
gracious Melite, and Eulimene, and Agaue, Doto, Proto, Pherusa,
and Dynamene, and Nisaea, and Actaea, and Protomedea, Doris,
Panopea, and comely Galatea, and lovely Hippothoe, and rosy-armed
Hipponoe, and Cymodoce who with Cymatolege (12) and Amphitrite
easily calms the waves upon the misty sea and the blasts of
raging winds, and Cymo, and Eione, and rich-crowned Alimede, and
Glauconome, fond of laughter, and Pontoporea, Leagore, Euagore,
and Laomedea, and Polynoe, and Autonoe, and Lysianassa, and
Euarne, lovely of shape and without blemish of form, and Psamathe
of charming figure and divine Menippe, Neso, Eupompe, Themisto,
Pronoe, and Nemertes (13) who has the nature of her deathless
father.  These fifty daughters sprang from blameless Nereus,
skilled in excellent crafts.
(ll. 265-269) And Thaumas wedded Electra the daughter of deep-
flowing Ocean, and she bare him swift Iris and the long-haired
Harpies, Aello (Storm-swift) and Ocypetes (Swift-flier) who on
their swift wings keep pace with the blasts of the winds and the
birds; for quick as time they dart along.
(ll 270-294) And again, Ceto bare to Phoreys the fair-cheeked
Graiae, sisters grey from their birth: and both deathless gods
and men who walk on earth call them Graiae, Pemphredo well-clad,
and saffron-robed Enyo, and the Gorgons who dwell beyond glorious
Ocean in the frontier land towards Night where are the clear-
voiced Hesperides, Sthenno, and Euryale, and Medusa who suffered
a woeful fate: she was mortal, but the two were undying and grew
not old.  With her lay the Dark-haired One (14) in a soft meadow
amid spring flowers.  And when Perseus cut off her head, there
sprang forth great Chrysaor and the horse Pegasus who is so
called because he was born near the springs (pegae) of Ocean; and
that other, because he held a golden blade (aor) in his hands.
Now Pegasus flew away and left the earth, the mother of flocks,
and came to the deathless gods: and he dwells in the house of
Zeus and brings to wise Zeus the thunder and lightning.  But
Chrysaor was joined in love to Callirrhoe, the daughter of
glorious Ocean, and begot three-headed Geryones.  Him mighty
Heracles slew in sea-girt Erythea by his shambling oxen on that
day when he drove the wide-browed oxen to holy Tiryns, and had
crossed the ford of Ocean and killed Orthus and Eurytion the
herdsman in the dim stead out beyond glorious Ocean.
(ll. 295-305) And in a hollow cave she bare another monster,
irresistible, in no wise like either to mortal men or to the
undying gods, even the goddess fierce Echidna who is half a nymph
with glancing eyes and fair cheeks, and half again a huge snake,
great and awful, with speckled skin, eating raw flesh beneath the
secret parts of the holy earth.  And there she has a cave deep
down under a hollow rock far from the deathless gods and mortal
men.  There, then, did the gods appoint her a glorious house to
dwell in: and she keeps guard in Arima beneath the earth, grim
Echidna, a nymph who dies not nor grows old all her days.
(ll. 306-332) Men say that Typhaon the terrible, outrageous and
lawless, was joined in love to her, the maid with glancing eyes.
So she conceived and brought forth fierce offspring; first she
bare Orthus the hound of Geryones, and then again she bare a
second, a monster not to be overcome and that may not be
described, Cerberus who eats raw flesh, the brazen-voiced hound
of Hades, fifty-headed, relentless and strong.  And again she
bore a third, the evil-minded Hydra of Lerna, whom the goddess,
white-armed Hera nourished, being angry beyond measure with the
mighty Heracles.  And her Heracles, the son of Zeus, of the house
of Amphitryon, together with warlike Iolaus, destroyed with the
unpitying sword through the plans of Athene the spoil-driver.
She was the mother of Chimaera who breathed raging fire, a
creature fearful, great, swift-footed and strong, who had three
heads, one of a grim-eyed lion; in her hinderpart, a dragon; and
in her middle, a goat, breathing forth a fearful blast of blazing
fire.  Her did Pegasus and noble Bellerophon slay; but Echidna
was subject in love to Orthus and brought forth the deadly Sphinx
which destroyed the Cadmeans, and the Nemean lion, which Hera,
the good wife of Zeus, brought up and made to haunt the hills of
Nemea, a plague to men.  There he preyed upon the tribes of her
own people and had power over Tretus of Nemea and Apesas: yet the
strength of stout Heracles overcame him.
(ll. 333-336) And Ceto was joined in love to Phorcys and bare her
youngest, the awful snake who guards the apples all of gold in
the secret places of the dark earth at its great bounds.  This is
the offspring of Ceto and Phoreys.
(ll. 334-345) And Tethys bare to Ocean eddying rivers, Nilus, and
Alpheus, and deep-swirling Eridanus, Strymon, and Meander, and
the fair stream of Ister, and Phasis, and Rhesus, and the silver
eddies of Achelous, Nessus, and Rhodius, Haliacmon, and
Heptaporus, Granicus, and Aesepus, and holy Simois, and Peneus,
and Hermus, and Caicus fair stream, and great Sangarius, Ladon,
Parthenius, Euenus, Ardescus, and divine Scamander.
(ll. 346-370) Also she brought forth a holy company of daughters
(15) who with the lord Apollo and the Rivers have youths in their
keeping -- to this charge Zeus appointed them -- Peitho, and
Admete, and Ianthe, and Electra, and Doris, and Prymno, and
Urania divine in form, Hippo, Clymene, Rhodea, and Callirrhoe,
Zeuxo and Clytie, and Idyia, and Pasithoe, Plexaura, and
Galaxaura, and lovely Dione, Melobosis and Thoe and handsome
Polydora, Cerceis lovely of form, and soft eyed Pluto, Perseis,
Ianeira, Acaste, Xanthe, Petraea the fair, Menestho, and Europa,
Metis, and Eurynome, and Telesto saffron-clad, Chryseis and Asia
and charming Calypso, Eudora, and Tyche, Amphirho, and Ocyrrhoe,
and Styx who is the chiefest of them all.  These are the eldest
daughters that sprang from Ocean and Tethys; but there are many
besides.  For there are three thousand neat-ankled daughters of
Ocean who are dispersed far and wide, and in every place alike
serve the earth and the deep waters, children who are glorious
among goddesses.  And as many other rivers are there, babbling as
they flow, sons of Ocean, whom queenly Tethys bare, but their
names it is hard for a mortal man to tell, but people know those
by which they severally dwell.
(ll. 371-374) And Theia was subject in love to Hyperion and bare
great Helius (Sun) and clear Selene (Moon) and Eos (Dawn) who
shines upon all that are on earth and upon the deathless Gods who
live in the wide heaven.
(ll. 375-377) And Eurybia, bright goddess, was joined in love to
Crius and bare great Astraeus, and Pallas, and Perses who also
was eminent among all men in wisdom.
(ll. 378-382) And Eos bare to Astraeus the strong-hearted winds,
brightening Zephyrus, and Boreas, headlong in his course, and
Notus, -- a goddess mating in love with a god.  And after these
Erigenia (16) bare the star Eosphorus (Dawn-bringer), and the
gleaming stars with which heaven is crowned.
(ll. 383-403) And Styx the daughter of Ocean was joined to Pallas
and bare Zelus (Emulation) and trim-ankled Nike (Victory) in the
house.  Also she brought forth Cratos (Strength) and Bia (Force),
wonderful children.  These have no house apart from Zeus, nor any
dwelling nor path except that wherein God leads them, but they
dwell always with Zeus the loud-thunderer.  For so did Styx the
deathless daughter of Ocean plan on that day when the Olympian
Lightener called all the deathless gods to great Olympus, and
said that whosoever of the gods would fight with him against the
Titans, he would not cast him out from his rights, but each
should have the office which he had before amongst the deathless
gods.  And he declared that he who was without office and rights
as is just.  So deathless Styx came first to Olympus with her
children through the wit of her dear father.  And Zeus honoured
her, and gave her very great gifts, for her he appointed to be
the great oath of the gods, and her children to live with him
always.  And as he promised, so he performed fully unto them all.
But he himself mightily reigns and rules.
(ll. 404-452) Again, Phoebe came to the desired embrace of Coeus.
Then the goddess through the love of the god conceived and
brought forth dark-gowned Leto, always mild, kind to men and to
the deathless gods, mild from the beginning, gentlest in all
Olympus.  Also she bare Asteria of happy name, whom Perses once
led to his great house to be called his dear wife.  And she
conceived and bare Hecate whom Zeus the son of Cronos honoured
above all.  He gave her splendid gifts, to have a share of the
earth and the unfruitful sea.  She received honour also in starry
heaven, and is honoured exceedingly by the deathless gods.  For
to this day, whenever any one of men on earth offers rich
sacrifices and prays for favour according to custom, he calls
upon Hecate.  Great honour comes full easily to him whose prayers
the goddess receives favourably, and she bestows wealth upon him;
for the power surely is with her.  For as many as were born of
Earth and Ocean amongst all these she has her due portion.  The
son of Cronos did her no wrong nor took anything away of all that
was her portion among the former Titan gods: but she holds, as
the division was at the first from the beginning, privilege both
in earth, and in heaven, and in sea.  Also, because she is an
only child, the goddess receives not less honour, but much more
still, for Zeus honours her.  Whom she will she greatly aids and
advances: she sits by worshipful kings in judgement, and in the
assembly whom she will is distinguished among the people.  And
when men arm themselves for the battle that destroys men, then
the goddess is at hand to give victory and grant glory readily to
whom she will.  Good is she also when men contend at the games,
for there too the goddess is with them and profits them: and he
who by might and strength gets the victory wins the rich prize
easily with joy, and brings glory to his parents.  And she is
good to stand by horsemen, whom she will: and to those whose
business is in the grey discomfortable sea, and who pray to
Hecate and the loud-crashing Earth-Shaker, easily the glorious
goddess gives great catch, and easily she takes it away as soon
as seen, if so she will.  She is good in the byre with Hermes to
increase the stock.  The droves of kine and wide herds of goats
and flocks of fleecy sheep, if she will, she increases from a
few, or makes many to be less.  So, then. albeit her mother's
only child (17), she is honoured amongst all the deathless gods.
And the son of Cronos made her a nurse of the young who after
that day saw with their eyes the light of all-seeing Dawn.  So
from the beginning she is a nurse of the young, and these are her
honours.
(ll. 453-491) But Rhea was subject in love to Cronos and bare
splendid children, Hestia (18), Demeter, and gold-shod Hera and
strong Hades, pitiless in heart, who dwells under the earth, and
the loud-crashing Earth-Shaker, and wise Zeus, father of gods and
men, by whose thunder the wide earth is shaken.  These great
Cronos swallowed as each came forth from the womb to his mother's
knees with this intent, that no other of the proud sons of Heaven
should hold the kingly office amongst the deathless gods.  For he
learned from Earth and starry Heaven that he was destined to be
overcome by his own son, strong though he was, through the
contriving of great Zeus (19).  Therefore he kept no blind
outlook, but watched and swallowed down his children: and
unceasing grief seized Rhea.  But when she was about to bear
Zeus, the father of gods and men, then she besought her own dear
parents, Earth and starry Heaven, to devise some plan with her
that the birth of her dear child might be concealed, and that
retribution might overtake great, crafty Cronos for his own
father and also for the children whom he had swallowed down.  And
they readily heard and obeyed their dear daughter, and told her
all that was destined to happen touching Cronos the king and his
stout-hearted son.  So they sent her to Lyetus, to the rich land
of Crete, when she was ready to bear great Zeus, the youngest of
her children.  Him did vast Earth receive from Rhea in wide Crete
to nourish and to bring up.  Thither came Earth carrying him
swiftly through the black night to Lyctus first, and took him in
her arms and hid him in a remote cave beneath the secret places
of the holy earth on thick-wooded Mount Aegeum; but to the
mightily ruling son of Heaven, the earlier king of the gods, she
gave a great stone wrapped in swaddling clothes.  Then he took it
in his hands and thrust it down into his belly: wretch!  he knew
not in his heart that in place of the stone his son was left
behind, unconquered and untroubled, and that he was soon to
overcome him by force and might and drive him from his honours,
himself to reign over the deathless gods.
(ll. 492-506) After that, the strength and glorious limbs of the
prince increased quickly, and as the years rolled on, great
Cronos the wily was beguiled by the deep suggestions of Earth,
and brought up again his offspring, vanquished by the arts and
might of his own son, and he vomited up first the stone which he
had swallowed last.  And Zeus set it fast in the wide-pathed
earth at goodly Pytho under the glens of Parnassus, to be a sign
thenceforth and a marvel to mortal men (20).  And he set free
from their deadly bonds the brothers of his father, sons of
Heaven whom his father in his foolishness had bound.  And they
remembered to be grateful to him for his kindness, and gave him
thunder and the glowing thunderbolt and lightening: for before
that, huge Earth had hidden these.  In them he trusts and rules
over mortals and immortals.
(ll. 507-543) Now Iapetus took to wife the neat-ankled mad
Clymene, daughter of Ocean, and went up with her into one bed.
And she bare him a stout-hearted son, Atlas: also she bare very
glorious Menoetius and clever Prometheus, full of various wiles,
and scatter-brained Epimetheus who from the first was a mischief
to men who eat bread; for it was he who first took of Zeus the
woman, the maiden whom he had formed.  But Menoetius was
outrageous, and far-seeing Zeus struck him with a lurid
thunderbolt and sent him down to Erebus because of his mad
presumption and exceeding pride.  And Atlas through hard
constraint upholds the wide heaven with unwearying head and arms,
standing at the borders of the earth before the clear-voiced
Hesperides; for this lot wise Zeus assigned to him.  And ready-
witted Prometheus he bound with inextricable bonds, cruel chains,
and drove a shaft through his middle, and set on him a long-
winged eagle, which used to eat his immortal liver; but by night
the liver grew as much again everyway as the long-winged bird
devoured in the whole day.  That bird Heracles, the valiant son
of shapely-ankled Alcmene, slew; and delivered the son of Iapetus
from the cruel plague, and released him from his affliction --
not without the will of Olympian Zeus who reigns on high, that
the glory of Heracles the Theban-born might be yet greater than
it was before over the plenteous earth.  This, then, he regarded,
and honoured his famous son; though he was angry, he ceased from
the wrath which he had before because Prometheus matched himself
in wit with the almighty son of Cronos.  For when the gods and
mortal men had a dispute at Mecone, even then Prometheus was
forward to cut up a great ox and set portions before them, trying
to befool the mind of Zeus.  Before the rest he set flesh and
inner parts thick with fat upon the hide, covering them with an
ox paunch; but for Zeus he put the white bones dressed up with
cunning art and covered with shining fat.  Then the father of men
and of gods said to him:
(ll. 543-544) `Son of Iapetus, most glorious of all lords, good
sir, how unfairly you have divided the portions!'
(ll. 545-547) So said Zeus whose wisdom is everlasting, rebuking
him.  But wily Prometheus answered him, smiling softly and not
forgetting his cunning trick:
(ll. 548-558) `Zeus, most glorious and greatest of the eternal
gods, take which ever of these portions your heart within you
bids.'  So he said, thinking trickery.  But Zeus, whose wisdom is
everlasting, saw and failed not to perceive the trick, and in his
heart he thought mischief against mortal men which also was to be
fulfilled.  With both hands he took up the white fat and was
angry at heart, and wrath came to his spirit when he saw the
white ox-bones craftily tricked out: and because of this the
tribes of men upon earth burn white bones to the deathless gods
upon fragrant altars.  But Zeus who drives the clouds was greatly
vexed and said to him:
(ll. 559-560) `Son of Iapetus, clever above all!  So, sir, you
have not yet forgotten your cunning arts!'
(ll. 561-584) So spake Zeus in anger, whose wisdom is
everlasting; and from that time he was always mindful of the
trick, and would not give the power of unwearying fire to the
Melian (21) race of mortal men who live on the earth.  But the
noble son of Iapetus outwitted him and stole the far-seen gleam
of unwearying fire in a hollow fennel stalk.  And Zeus who
thunders on high was stung in spirit, and his dear heart was
angered when he saw amongst men the far-seen ray of fire.
Forthwith he made an evil thing for men as the price of fire; for
the very famous Limping God formed of earth the likeness of a shy
maiden as the son of Cronos willed.  And the goddess bright-eyed
Athene girded and clothed her with silvery raiment, and down from
her head she spread with her hands a broidered veil, a wonder to
see; and she, Pallas Athene, put about her head lovely garlands,
flowers of new-grown herbs.  Also she put upon her head a crown
of gold which the very famous Limping God made himself and worked
with his own hands as a favour to Zeus his father.  On it was
much curious work, wonderful to see; for of the many creatures
which the land and sea rear up, he put most upon it, wonderful
things, like living beings with voices: and great beauty shone
out from it.
(ll. 585-589) But when he had made the beautiful evil to be the
price for the blessing, he brought her out, delighting in the
finery which the bright-eyed daughter of a mighty father had
given her, to the place where the other gods and men were.  And
wonder took hold of the deathless gods and mortal men when they
saw that which was sheer guile, not to be withstood by men.
(ll. 590-612) For from her is the race of women and female kind:
of her is the deadly race and tribe of women who live amongst
mortal men to their great trouble, no helpmeets in hateful
poverty, but only in wealth.  And as in thatched hives bees feed
the drones whose nature is to do mischief -- by day and
throughout the day until the sun goes down the bees are busy and
lay the white combs, while the drones stay at home in the covered
skeps and reap the toil of others into their own bellies -- even
so Zeus who thunders on high made women to be an evil to mortal
men, with a nature to do evil.  And he gave them a second evil to
be the price for the good they had: whoever avoids marriage and
the sorrows that women cause, and will not wed, reaches deadly
old age without anyone to tend his years, and though he at least
has no lack of livelihood while he lives, yet, when he is dead,
his kinsfolk divide his possessions amongst them.  And as for the
man who chooses the lot of marriage and takes a good wife suited
to his mind, evil continually contends with good; for whoever
happens to have mischievous children, lives always with unceasing
grief in his spirit and heart within him; and this evil cannot be
healed.
(ll. 613-616) So it is not possible to deceive or go beyond the
will of Zeus; for not even the son of Iapetus, kindly Prometheus,
escaped his heavy anger, but of necessity strong bands confined
him, although he knew many a wile.
(ll. 617-643) But when first their father was vexed in his heart
with Obriareus and Cottus and Gyes, he bound them in cruel bonds,
because he was jealous of their exceeding manhood and comeliness
and great size: and he made them live beneath the wide-pathed
earth, where they were afflicted, being set to dwell under the
ground, at the end of the earth, at its great borders, in bitter
anguish for a long time and with great grief at heart.  But the
son of Cronos and the other deathless gods whom rich-haired Rhea
bare from union with Cronos, brought them up again to the light
at Earth's advising.  For she herself recounted all things to the
gods fully, how that with these they would gain victory and a
glorious cause to vaunt themselves.  For the Titan gods and as
many as sprang from Cronos had long been fighting together in
stubborn war with heart-grieving toil, the lordly Titans from
high Othyrs, but the gods, givers of good, whom rich-haired Rhea
bare in union with Cronos, from Olympus.  So they, with bitter
wrath, were fighting continually with one another at that time
for ten full years, and the hard strife had no close or end for
either side, and the issue of the war hung evenly balanced.  But
when he had provided those three with all things fitting, nectar
and ambrosia which the gods themselves eat, and when their proud
spirit revived within them all after they had fed on nectar and
delicious ambrosia, then it was that the father of men and gods
spoke amongst them:
(ll. 644-653) `Hear me, bright children of Earth and Heaven, that
I may say what my heart within me bids.  A long while now have
we, who are sprung from Cronos and the Titan gods, fought with
each other every day to get victory and to prevail.  But do you
show your great might and unconquerable strength, and face the
Titans in bitter strife; for remember our friendly kindness, and
from what sufferings you are come back to the light from your
cruel bondage under misty gloom through our counsels.'
(ll. 654-663) So he said.  And blameless Cottus answered him
again: `Divine one, you speak that which we know well: nay, even
of ourselves we know that your wisdom and understanding is
exceeding, and that you became a defender of the deathless ones
from chill doom.  And through your devising we are come back
again from the murky gloom and from our merciless bonds, enjoying
what we looked not for, O lord, son of Cronos.  And so now with
fixed purpose and deliberate counsel we will aid your power in
dreadful strife and will fight against the Titans in hard
battle.'
(ll. 664-686) So he said: and the gods, givers of good things,
applauded when they heard his word, and their spirit longed for
war even more than before, and they all, both male and female,
stirred up hated battle that day, the Titan gods, and all that
were born of Cronos together with those dread, mighty ones of
overwhelming strength whom Zeus brought up to the light from
Erebus beneath the earth.  An hundred arms sprang from the
shoulders of all alike, and each had fifty heads growing upon his
shoulders upon stout limbs.  These, then, stood against the
Titans in grim strife, holding huge rocks in their strong hands.
And on the other part the Titans eagerly strengthened their
ranks, and both sides at one time showed the work of their hands
and their might.  The boundless sea rang terribly around, and the
earth crashed loudly: wide Heaven was shaken and groaned, and
high Olympus reeled from its foundation under the charge of the
undying gods, and a heavy quaking reached dim Tartarus and the
deep sound of their feet in the fearful onset and of their hard
missiles.  So, then, they launched their grievous shafts upon one
another, and the cry of both armies as they shouted reached to
starry heaven; and they met together with a great battle-cry.
(ll. 687-712) Then Zeus no longer held back his might; but
straight his heart was filled with fury and he showed forth all
his strength.  From Heaven and from Olympus he came forthwith,
hurling his lightning: the bold flew thick and fast from his
strong hand together with thunder and lightning, whirling an
awesome flame.  The life-giving earth crashed around in burning,
and the vast wood crackled loud with fire all about.  All the
land seethed, and Ocean's streams and the unfruitful sea.  The
hot vapour lapped round the earthborn Titans: flame unspeakable
rose to the bright upper air: the flashing glare of the thunder-
stone and lightning blinded their eyes for all that there were
strong.  Astounding heat seized Chaos: and to see with eyes and
to hear the sound with ears it seemed even as if Earth and wide
Heaven above came together; for such a mighty crash would have
arisen if Earth were being hurled to ruin, and Heaven from on
high were hurling her down; so great a crash was there while the
gods were meeting together in strife.  Also the winds brought
rumbling earthquake and duststorm, thunder and lightning and the
lurid thunderbolt, which are the shafts of great Zeus, and
carried the clangour and the warcry into the midst of the two
hosts.  An horrible uproar of terrible strife arose: mighty deeds
were shown and the battle inclined.  But until then, they kept at
one another and fought continually in cruel war.
(ll. 713-735) And amongst the foremost Cottus and Briareos and
Gyes insatiate for war raised fierce fighting: three hundred
rocks, one upon another, they launched from their strong hands
and overshadowed the Titans with their missiles, and buried them
beneath the wide-pathed earth, and bound them in bitter chains
when they had conquered them by their strength for all their
great spirit, as far beneath the earth to Tartarus.  For a brazen
anvil falling down from heaven nine nights and days would reach
the earth upon the tenth: and again, a brazen anvil falling from
earth nine nights and days would reach Tartarus upon the tenth.
Round it runs a fence of bronze, and night spreads in triple line
all about it like a neck-circlet, while above grow the roots of
the earth and unfruitful sea.  There by the counsel of Zeus who
drives the clouds the Titan gods are hidden under misty gloom, in
a dank place where are the ends of the huge earth.  And they may
not go out; for Poseidon fixed gates of bronze upon it, and a
wall runs all round it on every side.  There Gyes and Cottus and
great-souled Obriareus live, trusty warders of Zeus who holds the
aegis.
(ll. 736-744) And there, all in their order, are the sources and
ends of gloomy earth and misty Tartarus and the unfruitful sea
and starry heaven, loathsome and dank, which even the gods abhor.
It is a great gulf, and if once a man were within the gates, he
would not reach the floor until a whole year had reached its end,
but cruel blast upon blast would carry him this way and that.
And this marvel is awful even to the deathless gods.
(ll. 744-757) There stands the awful home of murky Night wrapped
in dark clouds.  In front of it the son of Iapetus (22) stands
immovably upholding the wide heaven upon his head and unwearying
hands, where Night and Day draw near and greet one another as
they pass the great threshold of bronze: and while the one is
about to go down into the house, the other comes out at the door.
And the house never holds them both within; but always one is
without the house passing over the earth, while the other stays
at home and waits until the time for her journeying come; and the
one holds all-seeing light for them on earth, but the other holds
in her arms Sleep the brother of Death, even evil Night, wrapped
in a vaporous cloud.
(ll. 758-766) And there the children of dark Night have their
dwellings, Sleep and Death, awful gods.  The glowing Sun never
looks upon them with his beams, neither as he goes up into
heaven, nor as he comes down from heaven.  And the former of them
roams peacefully over the earth and the sea's broad back and is
kindly to men; but the other has a heart of iron, and his spirit
within him is pitiless as bronze: whomsoever of men he has once
seized he holds fast: and he is hateful even to the deathless
gods.
(ll. 767-774) There, in front, stand the echoing halls of the god
of the lower-world, strong Hades, and of awful Persephone.  A
fearful hound guards the house in front, pitiless, and he has a
cruel trick.  On those who go in he fawns with his tail and both
is ears, but suffers them not to go out back again, but keeps
watch and devours whomsoever he catches going out of the gates of
strong Hades and awful Persephone.
(ll. 775-806) And there dwells the goddess loathed by the
deathless gods, terrible Styx, eldest daughter of back-flowing
(23) Ocean.  She lives apart from the gods in her glorious house
vaulted over with great rocks and propped up to heaven all round
with silver pillars.  Rarely does the daughter of Thaumas, swift-
footed Iris, come to her with a message over the sea's wide back.
But when strife and quarrel arise among the deathless gods, and
when any of them who live in the house of Olympus lies, then Zeus
sends Iris to bring in a golden jug the great oath of the gods
from far away, the famous cold water which trickles down from a
high and beetling rock.  Far under the wide-pathed earth a branch
of Oceanus flows through the dark night out of the holy stream,
and a tenth part of his water is allotted to her.  With nine
silver-swirling streams he winds about the earth and the sea's
wide back, and then falls into the main (24); but the tenth flows
out from a rock, a sore trouble to the gods.  For whoever of the
deathless gods that hold the peaks of snowy Olympus pours a
libation of her water is forsworn, lies breathless until a full
year is completed, and never comes near to taste ambrosia and
nectar, but lies spiritless and voiceless on a strewn bed: and a
heavy trance overshadows him.  But when he has spent a long year
in his sickness, another penance and an harder follows after the
first.  For nine years he is cut off from the eternal gods and
never joins their councils of their feasts, nine full years.  But
in the tenth year he comes again to join the assemblies of the
deathless gods who live in the house of Olympus.  Such an oath,
then, did the gods appoint the eternal and primaeval water of
Styx to be: and it spouts through a rugged place.
(ll. 807-819) And there, all in their order, are the sources and
ends of the dark earth and misty Tartarus and the unfruitful sea
and starry heaven, loathsome and dank, which even the gods abhor.
And there are shining gates and an immoveable threshold of bronze
having unending roots and it is grown of itself (25).  And
beyond, away from all the gods, live the Titans, beyond gloomy
Chaos.  But the glorious allies of loud-crashing Zeus have their
dwelling upon Ocean's foundations, even Cottus and Gyes; but
Briareos, being goodly, the deep-roaring Earth-Shaker made his
son-in-law, giving him Cymopolea his daughter to wed.
(ll. 820-868) But when Zeus had driven the Titans from heaven,
huge Earth bare her youngest child Typhoeus of the love of
Tartarus, by the aid of golden Aphrodite.  Strength was with his
hands in all that he did and the feet of the strong god were
untiring.  From his shoulders grew an hundred heads of a snake, a
fearful dragon, with dark, flickering tongues, and from under the
brows of his eyes in his marvellous heads flashed fire, and fire
burned from his heads as he glared.  And there were voices in all
his dreadful heads which uttered every kind of sound unspeakable;
for at one time they made sounds such that the gods understood,
but at another, the noise of a bull bellowing aloud in proud
ungovernable fury; and at another, the sound of a lion,
relentless of heart; and at anothers, sounds like whelps,
wonderful to hear; and again, at another, he would hiss, so that
the high mountains re-echoed.  And truly a thing past help would
have happened on that day, and he would have come to reign over
mortals and immortals, had not the father of men and gods been
quick to perceive it.  But he thundered hard and mightily: and
the
earth around resounded terribly and the wide heaven above, and
the sea and Ocean's streams and the nether parts of the earth.
Great Olympus reeled beneath the divine feet of the king as he
arose and earth groaned thereat.  And through the two of them
heat took hold on the dark-blue sea, through the thunder and
lightning, and through the fire from the monster, and the
scorching winds and blazing thunderbolt.  The whole earth
seethed, and sky and sea: and the long waves raged along the
beaches round and about, at the rush of the deathless gods: and
there arose an endless shaking.  Hades trembled where he rules
over the dead below, and the Titans under Tartarus who live with
Cronos, because of the unending clamour and the fearful strife.
So when Zeus had raised up his might and seized his arms, thunder
and lightning and lurid thunderbolt, he leaped form Olympus and
struck him, and burned all the marvellous heads of the monster
about him.  But when Zeus had conquered him and lashed him with
strokes, Typhoeus was hurled down, a maimed wreck, so that the
huge earth groaned.  And flame shot forth from the thunder-
stricken lord in the dim rugged glens of the mount (26), when he
was smitten.  A great part of huge earth was scorched by the
terrible vapour and melted as tin melts when heated by men's art
in channelled (27) crucibles; or as iron, which is hardest of all
things, is softened by glowing fire in mountain glens and melts
in the divine earth through the strength of Hephaestus (28).
Even so, then, the earth melted in the glow of the blazing fire.
And in the bitterness of his anger Zeus cast him into wide
Tartarus.
(ll. 869-880) And from Typhoeus come boisterous winds which blow
damply, except Notus and Boreas and clear Zephyr.  These are a
god-sent kind, and a great blessing to men; but the others blow
fitfully upon the seas.  Some rush upon the misty sea and work
great havoc among men with their evil, raging blasts; for varying
with the season they blow, scattering ships and destroying
sailors.  And men who meet these upon the sea have no help
against the mischief.  Others again over the boundless, flowering
earth spoil the fair fields of men who dwell below, filling them
with dust and cruel uproar.
(ll. 881-885) But when the blessed gods had finished their toil,
and settled by force their struggle for honours with the Titans,
they pressed far-seeing Olympian Zeus to reign and to rule over
them, by Earth's prompting.  So he divided their dignities
amongst them.
(ll. 886-900) Now Zeus, king of the gods, made Metis his wife
first, and she was wisest among gods and mortal men.  But when
she was about to bring forth the goddess bright-eyed Athene, Zeus
craftily deceived her with cunning words and put her in his own
belly, as Earth and starry Heaven advised.  For they advised him
so, to the end that no other should hold royal sway over the
eternal gods in place of Zeus; for very wise children were
destined to be born of her, first the maiden bright-eyed
Tritogeneia, equal to her father in strength and in wise
understanding; but afterwards she was to bear a son of
overbearing spirit, king of gods and men.  But Zeus put her into
his own belly first, that the goddess might devise for him both
good and evil.
(ll. 901-906) Next he married bright Themis who bare the Horae
(Hours), and Eunomia (Order), Dike (Justice), and blooming Eirene
(Peace), who mind the works of mortal men, and the Moerae (Fates)
to whom wise Zeus gave the greatest honour, Clotho, and Lachesis,
and Atropos who give mortal men evil and good to have.
(ll. 907-911) And Eurynome, the daughter of Ocean, beautiful in
form, bare him three fair-cheeked Charites (Graces), Aglaea, and
Euphrosyne, and lovely Thaleia, from whose eyes as they glanced
flowed love that unnerves the limbs: and beautiful is their
glance beneath their brows.
(ll. 912-914) Also he came to the bed of all-nourishing Demeter,
and she bare white-armed Persephone whom Aidoneus carried off
from her mother; but wise Zeus gave her to him.
(ll. 915-917) And again, he loved Mnemosyne with the beautiful
hair: and of her the nine gold-crowned Muses were born who
delight in feasts and the pleasures of song.
(ll. 918-920) And Leto was joined in love with Zeus who holds the
aegis, and bare Apollo and Artemis delighting in arrows, children
lovely above all the sons of Heaven.
(ll. 921-923) Lastly, he made Hera his blooming wife: and she was
joined in love with the king of gods and men, and brought forth
Hebe and Ares and Eileithyia.
(ll. 924-929) But Zeus himself gave birth from his own head to
bright-eyed Tritogeneia (29), the awful, the strife-stirring, the
host-leader, the unwearying, the queen, who delights in tumults
and wars and battles.  But Hera without union with Zeus -- for
she was very angry and quarrelled with her mate -- bare famous
Hephaestus, who is skilled in crafts more than all the sons of
Heaven.
(ll. 929a-929t) (30) But Hera was very angry and quarrelled with
her mate.  And because of this strife she bare without union with
Zeus who holds the aegis a glorious son, Hephaestus, who excelled
all the sons of Heaven in crafts.  But Zeus lay with the fair-
cheeked daughter of Ocean and Tethys apart from Hera....
((LACUNA))
....deceiving Metis (Thought) although she was full wise.  But he
seized her with his hands and put her in his belly, for fear that
she might bring forth something stronger than his thunderbolt:
therefore did Zeus, who sits on high and dwells in the aether,
swallow her down suddenly.  But she straightway conceived Pallas
Athene: and the father of men and gods gave her birth by way of
his head on the banks of the river Trito.  And she remained
hidden beneath the inward parts of Zeus, even Metis, Athena's
mother, worker of righteousness, who was wiser than gods and
mortal men.  There the goddess (Athena) received that (31)
whereby she excelled in strength all the deathless ones who dwell
in Olympus, she who made the host-scaring weapon of Athena.  And
with it (Zeus) gave her birth, arrayed in arms of war.
(ll. 930-933) And of Amphitrite and the loud-roaring Earth-Shaker
was born great, wide-ruling Triton, and he owns the depths of the
sea, living with his dear mother and the lord his father in their
golden house, an awful god.
(ll. 933-937) Also Cytherea bare to Ares the shield-piercer Panic
and Fear, terrible gods who drive in disorder the close ranks of
men in numbing war, with the help of Ares, sacker of towns: and
Harmonia whom high-spirited Cadmus made his wife.
(ll. 938-939) And Maia, the daughter of Atlas, bare to Zeus
glorious Hermes, the herald of the deathless gods, for she went
up into his holy bed.
(ll. 940-942) And Semele, daughter of Cadmus was joined with him
in love and bare him a splendid son, joyous Dionysus, -- a mortal
woman an immortal son.  And now they both are gods.
(ll. 943-944) And Alemena was joined in love with Zeus who drives
the clouds and bare mighty Heracles.
(ll. 945-946) And Hephaestus, the famous Lame One, made Aglaea,
youngest of the Graces, his buxom wife.
(ll. 947-949) And golden-haired Dionysus made brown-haired
Ariadne, the daughter of Minos, his buxom wife: and the son of
Cronos made her deathless and unageing for him.
(ll. 950-955) And mighty Heracles, the valiant son of neat-ankled
Alemena, when he had finished his grievous toils, made Hebe the
child of great Zeus and gold-shod Hera his shy wife in snowy
Olympus.  Happy he!  For he has finished his great works and
lives amongst the dying gods, untroubled and unaging all his
days.
(ll. 956-962) And Perseis, the daughter of Ocean, bare to
unwearying Helios Circe and Aeetes the king.  And Aeetes, the son
of Helios who shows light to men, took to wife fair-cheeked
Idyia, daughter of Ocean the perfect stream, by the will of the
gods: and she was subject to him in love through golden Aphrodite
and bare him neat-ankled Medea.
(ll. 963-968) And now farewell, you dwellers on Olympus and you
islands and continents and thou briny sea within.  Now sing the
company of goddesses, sweet-voiced Muses of Olympus, daughter of
Zeus who holds the aegis, -- even those deathless one who lay
with mortal men and bare children like unto gods.
(ll. 969-974) Demeter, bright goddess, was joined in sweet love
with the hero Iasion in a thrice-ploughed fallow in the rich land
of Crete, and bare Plutus, a kindly god who goes everywhere over
land and the sea's wide back, and him who finds him and into
whose hands he comes he makes rich, bestowing great wealth upon
him.
(ll. 975-978) And Harmonia, the daughter of golden Aphrodite,
bare to Cadmus Ino and Semele and fair-cheeked Agave and Autonoe
whom long haired Aristaeus wedded, and Polydorus also in rich-
crowned Thebe.
(ll. 979-983) And the daughter of Ocean, Callirrhoe was joined in
the love of rich Aphrodite with stout hearted Chrysaor and bare a
son who was the strongest of all men, Geryones, whom mighty
Heracles killed in sea-girt Erythea for the sake of his shambling
oxen.
(ll. 984-991) And Eos bare to Tithonus brazen-crested Memnon,
king of the Ethiopians, and the Lord Emathion.  And to Cephalus
she bare a splendid son, strong Phaethon, a man like the gods,
whom, when he was a young boy in the tender flower of glorious
youth with childish thoughts, laughter-loving Aphrodite seized
and caught up and made a keeper of her shrine by night, a divine
spirit.
(ll. 993-1002) And the son of Aeson by the will of the gods led
away from Aeetes the daughter of Aeetes the heaven-nurtured king,
when he had finished the many grievous labours which the great
king, over bearing Pelias, that outrageous and presumptuous doer
of violence, put upon him.  But when the son of Aeson had
finished them, he came to Iolcus after long toil bringing the
coy-eyed girl with him on his swift ship, and made her his buxom
wife.  And she was subject to Iason, shepherd of the people, and
bare a son Medeus whom Cheiron the son of Philyra brought up in
the mountains.  And the will of great Zeus was fulfilled.
(ll. 1003-1007) But of the daughters of Nereus, the Old man of
the Sea, Psamathe the fair goddess, was loved by Aeacus through
golden Aphrodite and bare Phocus.  And the silver-shod goddess
Thetis was subject to Peleus and brought forth lion-hearted
Achilles, the destroyer of men.
(ll. 1008-1010) And Cytherea with the beautiful crown was joined
in sweet love with the hero Anchises and bare Aeneas on the peaks
of Ida with its many wooded glens.
(ll. 1011-1016) And Circe the daughter of Helius, Hyperion's son,
loved steadfast Odysseus and bare Agrius and Latinus who was
faultless and strong: also she brought forth Telegonus by the
will of golden Aphrodite.  And they ruled over the famous
Tyrenians, very far off in a recess of the holy islands.
(ll. 1017-1018) And the bright goddess Calypso was joined to
Odysseus in sweet love, and bare him Nausithous and Nausinous.
(ll. 1019-1020) These are the immortal goddesses who lay with
mortal men and bare them children like unto gods.
(ll. 1021-1022) But now, sweet-voiced Muses of Olympus, daughters
of Zeus who holds the aegis, sing of the company of women.
ENDNOTES:
(1)  The epithet probably indicates coquettishness.
(2)  A proverbial saying meaning, `why enlarge on irrelevant
topics?'
(3)  `She of the noble voice': Calliope is queen of Epic poetry.
(4)  Earth, in the cosmology of Hesiod, is a disk surrounded by
the river Oceanus and floating upon a waste of waters.  It
is called the foundation of all (the qualification `the
deathless ones...' etc. is an interpolation), because not
only trees, men, and animals, but even the hills and seas
(ll. 129, 131) are supported by it.
(5)  Aether is the bright, untainted upper atmosphere, as
distinguished from Aer, the lower atmosphere of the earth.
(6)  Brontes is the Thunderer; Steropes, the Lightener; and
Arges, the Vivid One.
(7)  The myth accounts for the separation of Heaven and Earth.
In Egyptian cosmology Nut (the Sky) is thrust and held apart
from her brother Geb (the Earth) by their father Shu, who
corresponds to the Greek Atlas.
(8)  Nymphs of the ash-trees, as Dryads are nymphs of the oak-
trees.  Cp. note on "Works and Days", l. 145.
(9)  `Member-loving': the title is perhaps only a perversion of
the regular PHILOMEIDES (laughter-loving).
(10) Cletho (the Spinner) is she who spins the thread of man's
life; Lachesis (the Disposer of Lots) assigns to each man
his destiny; Atropos (She who cannot be turned) is the `Fury
with the abhorred shears.'
(11) Many of the names which follow express various qualities or
aspects of the sea: thus Galene is `Calm', Cymothoe is the
`Wave-swift', Pherusa and Dynamene are `She who speeds
(ships)' and `She who has power'.
(12) The `Wave-receiver' and the `Wave-stiller'.
(13) `The Unerring' or `Truthful'; cp. l. 235.
(14) i.e. Poseidon.
(15) Goettling notes that some of these nymphs derive their names
from lands over which they preside, as Europa, Asia, Doris,
Ianeira (`Lady of the Ionians'), but that most are called
after some quality which their streams possessed: thus
Xanthe is the `Brown' or `Turbid', Amphirho is the
`Surrounding' river, Ianthe is `She who delights', and
Ocyrrhoe is the `Swift-flowing'.
(16) i.e. Eos, the `Early-born'.
(17) Van Lennep explains that Hecate, having no brothers to
support her claim, might have been slighted.
(18) The goddess of the hearth (the Roman "Vesta"), and so of the
house.  Cp. "Homeric Hymns" v.22 ff.; xxxix.1 ff.
(19) The variant reading `of his father' (sc. Heaven) rests on
inferior MS. authority and is probably an alteration due to
the difficulty stated by a Scholiast: `How could Zeus, being
not yet begotten, plot against his father?'  The phrase is,
however, part of the prophecy.  The whole line may well be
spurious, and is rejected by Heyne, Wolf, Gaisford and
Guyet.
(20) Pausanias (x. 24.6) saw near the tomb of Neoptolemus `a
stone of no great size', which the Delphians anointed every
day with oil, and which he says was supposed to be the stone
given to Cronos.
(21) A Scholiast explains: `Either because they (men) sprang from
the Melian nymphs (cp. l. 187); or because, when they were
born (?), they cast themselves under the ash-trees, that is,
the trees.'  The reference may be to the origin of men from
ash-trees: cp. "Works and Days", l. 145 and note.
(22) sc. Atlas, the Shu of Egyptian mythology: cp. note on line
177.
(23) Oceanus is here regarded as a continuous stream enclosing
the earth and the seas, and so as flowing back upon himself.
(24) The conception of Oceanus is here different: he has nine
streams which encircle the earth and the flow out into the
`main' which appears to be the waste of waters on which,
according to early Greek and Hebrew cosmology, the disk-like
earth floated.
(25) i.e. the threshold is of `native' metal, and not artificial.
(26) According to Homer Typhoeus was overwhelmed by Zeus amongst
the Arimi in Cilicia.  Pindar represents him as buried under
Aetna, and Tzetzes reads Aetna in this passage.
(27) The epithet (which means literally `well-bored') seems to
refer to the spout of the crucible.
(28) The fire god.  There is no reference to volcanic action:
iron was smelted on Mount Ida; cp. "Epigrams of Homer", ix.
2-4.
(29) i.e. Athena, who was born `on the banks of the river Trito'
(cp. l. 929l)
(30) Restored by Peppmuller.  The nineteen following lines from
another recension of lines 889-900, 924-9 are quoted by
Chrysippus (in Galen).
(31) sc. the aegis.  Line 929s is probably spurious, since it
disagrees with l. 929q and contains a suspicious reference
to Athens.

=== 3 | The Theogony in Greek ===
Sacred-texts
Classics
Hesiod
English
The Theogony of Hesiod
This is a Unicode version of the Theogony of Hesiod. To view the polytonic
Greek in this file, your browser needs to be set up to display Unicode correctly.
For more information, refer to
this file
.
Ἡσίοδος
Θεογονία
Μουσάων Ἑλικωνιάδων ἀρχώμεθ᾽ ἀείδειν,
αἵ θ᾽ Ἑλικῶνος ἔχουσιν ὄρος μέγα τε ζάθεόν τε
καί τε περὶ κρήνην ἰοειδέα πόσσ᾽ ἁπαλοῖσιν
ὀρχεῦνται καὶ βωμὸν ἐρισθενέος Κρονίωνος·
καί τε λοεσσάμεναι τέρενα χρόα Περμησσοῖο                                                                        5
ἢ Ἵππου κρήνης ἢ Ὀλμειοῦ ζαθέοιο
ἀκροτάτῳ Ἑλικῶνι χοροὺς ἐνεποιήσαντο
καλούς, ἱμερόεντας· ἐπερρώσαντο δὲ ποσσίν.
Ἔνθεν ἀπορνύμεναι, κεκαλυμμέναι ἠέρι πολλῇ,
ἐννύχιαι στεῖχον περικαλλέα ὄσσαν ἱεῖσαι,                                                                           10
ὑμνεῦσαι Δία τ᾽ αἰγίοχον καὶ πότνιαν Ἥρην
Ἀργεΐην, χρυσέοισι πεδίλοις ἐμβεβαυῖαν,
κούρην τ᾽ αἰγιόχοιο Διὸς γλαυκῶπιν Ἀθήνην
Φοῖβόν τ᾽ Ἀπόλλωνα καὶ Ἄρτεμιν ἰοχέαιραν
ἠδὲ Ποσειδάωνα γαιήοχον, ἐννοσίγαιον,                                                                                 15
καὶ Θέμιν αἰδοίην ἑλικοβλέφαρόν τ᾽ Ἀφροδίτην
Ἥβην τε χρυσοστέφανον καλήν τε Διώνην
Λητώ τ᾽ Ἰαπετόν τε ἰδὲ Κρόνον ἀγκυλομήτην
Ἠῶ τ᾽ Ἠέλιόν τε μέγαν λαμπράν τε Σελήνην
Γαῖάν τ᾽ Ὠκεανόν τε μέγαν καὶ Νύκτα μέλαιναν                                                                 20
ἄλλων τ᾽ ἀθανάτων ἱερὸν γένος αἰὲν ἐόντων.
Αἵ νύ ποθ᾽ Ἡσίοδον καλὴν ἐδίδαξαν ἀοιδήν,
ἄρνας ποιμαίνονθ᾽ Ἑλικῶνος ὕπο ζαθέοιο.
Τόνδε δέ με πρώτιστα θεαὶ πρὸς μῦθον ἔειπον,
Μοῦσαι Ὀλυμπιάδες, κοῦραι Διὸς αἰγιόχοιο·                                                                        25
«Ποιμένες ἄγραυλοι, κάκ᾽ ἐλέγχεα, γαστέρες οἶον,
ἴδμεν ψεύδεα πολλὰ λέγειν ἐτύμοισιν ὁμοῖα,
ἴδμεν δ᾽, εὖτ᾽ ἐθέλωμεν, ἀληθέα γηρύσασθαι.»
Ὥς ἔφασαν κοῦραι μεγάλου Διὸς ἀρτιέπειαι·
καί μοι σκῆπτρον ἔδον δάφνης ἐριθηλέος ὄζον                                                                     30
δρέψασαι, θηητόν· ἐνέπνευσαν δέ μοι ἀοιδὴν
θέσπιν, ἵνα κλείοιμι τά τ᾽ ἐσσόμενα πρό τ᾽ ἐόντα.
Καί μ᾽ ἐκέλονθ᾽ ὑμνεῖν μακάρων γένος αἰὲν ἐόντων,
σφᾶς δ᾽ αὐτὰς πρῶτόν τε καὶ ὕστατον αἰὲν ἀείδειν.
Ἀλλὰ τί ἦ μοι ταῦτα περὶ δρῦν ἢ περὶ πέτρην;                                                                        35
Τύνη, Μουσάων ἀρχώμεθα, ταὶ Διὶ πατρὶ
ὑμνεῦσαι τέρπουσι μέγαν νόον ἐντὸς Ὀλύμπου,
εἰρεῦσαι τά τ᾽ ἐόντα τά τ᾽ ἐσσόμενα πρό τ᾽ ἐόντα,
φωνῇ ὁμηρεῦσαι· τῶν δ᾽ ἀκάματος ῥέει αὐδὴ
ἐκ στομάτων ἡδεῖα· γελᾷ δέ τε δώματα πατρὸς                                                                      40
Ζηνὸς ἐριγδούποιο θεᾶν ὀπὶ λειριοέσσῃ
σκιδναμένῃ· ἠχεῖ δὲ κάρη νιφόεντος Ὀλύμπου
δώματά τ᾽ ἀθανάτων. Αἳ δ᾽ ἄμβροτον ὄσσαν ἱεῖσαι
θεῶν γένος αἰδοῖον πρῶτον κλείουσιν ἀοιδῇ
ἐξ ἀρχῆς, οὓς Γαῖα καὶ Οὐρανὸς εὐρὺς ἔτικτεν,                                                                     45
οἵ τ᾽ ἐκ τῶν ἐγένοντο θεοί, δωτῆρες ἐάων.
Δεύτερον αὖτε Ζῆνα, θεῶν πατέρ᾽ ἠδὲ καὶ ἀνδρῶν,
ἀρχόμεναί θ᾽ ὑμνεῦσι θεαὶ λήγουσαί τ' ἀοιδῆς,
ὅσσον φέρτατός ἐστι θεῶν κράτεΐ τε μέγιστος.
Αὖτις δ᾽ ἀνθρώπων τε γένος κρατερῶν τε Γιγάντων                                                            50
ὑμνεῦσαι τέρπουσι Διὸς νόον ἐντὸς Ὀλύμπου
Μοῦσαι Ὀλυμπιάδες, κοῦραι Διὸς αἰγιόχοιο.
Τὰς ἐν Πιερίῃ Κρονίδῃ τέκε πατρὶ μιγεῖσα
Μνημοσύνη, γουνοῖσιν Ἐλευθῆρος μεδέουσα,
λησμοσύνην τε κακῶν ἄμπαυμά τε μερμηράων.                                                                   55
Ἐννέα γάρ οἱ νυκτὸς ἐμίσγετο μητίετα Ζεὺς
νόσφιν ἀπ᾽ ἀθανάτων ἱερὸν λέχος εἰσαναβαίνων·
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε δή ῥ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸς ἔην, περὶ δ᾽ ἔτραπον ὧραι
μηνῶν φθινόντων, περὶ δ᾽ ἤματα πόλλ᾽ ἐτελέσθη,
ἣ δ᾽ ἔτεκ᾽ ἐννέα κούρας ὁμόφρονας, ᾗσιν ἀοιδὴ                                                                     60
μέμβλεται ἐν στήθεσσιν, ἀκηδέα θυμὸν ἐχούσαις,
τυτθὸν ἀπ᾽ ἀκροτάτης κορυφῆς νιφόεντος Ὀλύμπου.
[Ἔνθα σφιν λιπαροί τε χοροὶ καὶ δώματα καλά.
Πὰρ δ᾽ αὐτῇς Χάριτές τε καὶ Ἵμερος οἰκί᾽ ἔχουσιν
ἐν θαλίῃς· ἐρατὴν δὲ διὰ στόμα ὄσσαν ἱεῖσαι                                                                         65
μέλπονται πάντων τε νόμους καὶ ἤθεα κεδνὰ
ἀθανάτων κλείουσιν, ἐπήρατον ὄσσαν ἱεῖσαι.]
Αἳ τότ᾽ ἴσαν πρὸς Ὄλυμπον ἀγαλλόμεναι ὀπὶ καλῇ,
ἀμβροσίῃ μολπῇ· περὶ δ᾽ ἴαχε γαῖα μέλαινα
ὑμνεύσαις, ἐρατὸς δὲ ποδῶν ὕπο δοῦπος ὀρώρει                                                                   70
νισσομένων πατέρα ὅν· ὃ δ᾽ οὐρανῷ ἐμβασιλεύει,
αὐτὸς ἔχων βροντὴν ἠδ᾽ αἰθαλόεντα κεραυνόν,
κάρτεϊ νικήσας πατέρα Κρόνον· εὖ δὲ ἕκαστα
ἀθανάτοις διέταξεν ὁμῶς καὶ ἐπέφραδε τιμάς.
Ταῦτ᾽ ἄρα Μοῦσαι ἄειδον, Ὀλύμπια δώματ᾽ ἔχουσαι,                                                       75
ἐννέα θυγατέρες μεγάλου Διὸς ἐκγεγαυῖαι,
Κλειώ τ᾽ Εὐτέρπη τε Θάλειά τε Μελπομέενη τε
Τερψιχόρη τ᾽ Ἐρατώ τε Πολύμνιά τ᾽ Οὐρανίη τε
Καλλιόπη θ᾽· ἣ δὲ προφερεστάτη ἐστὶν ἁπασέων.
Ἥ γὰρ καὶ βασιλεῦσιν ἅμ᾽ αἰδοίοισιν ὀπηδεῖ.                                                                      80
Ὅν τινα τιμήσωσι Διὸς κοῦραι μεγάλοιο
γεινόμενόν τε ἴδωσι διοτρεφέων βασιλήων,
τῷ μὲν ἐπὶ γλώσσῃ γλυκερὴν χείουσιν ἐέρσην,
τοῦ δ᾽ ἔπε᾽ ἐκ στόματος ῥεῖ μείλιχα· οἱ δέ τε λαοὶ
πάντες ἐς αὐτὸν ὁρῶσι διακρίνοντα θέμιστας                                                                       85
ἰθείῃσι δίκῃσιν· ὃ δ᾽ ἀσφαλέως ἀγορεύων
αἶψά κε καὶ μέγα νεῖκος ἐπισταμένως κατέπαυσεν·
τοὔνεκα γὰρ βασιλῆες ἐχέφρονες, οὕνεκα λαοῖς
βλαπτομένοις ἀγορῆφι μετάτροπα ἔργα τελεῦσι
ῥηιδίως, μαλακοῖσι παραιφάμενοι ἐπέεσσιν.                                                                        90
Ἐρχόμενον δ᾽ ἀν᾽ ἀγῶνα θεὸν ὣς ἱλάσκονται
αἰδοῖ μειλιχίῃ, μετὰ δὲ πρέπει ἀγρομένοισιν·
τοίη Μουσάων ἱερὴ δόσις ἀνθρώποισιν.
Ἐκ γάρ τοι Μουσέων καὶ ἑκηβόλου Ἀπόλλωνος
ἄνδρες ἀοιδοὶ ἔασιν ἐπὶ χθόνα καὶ κιθαρισταί,                                                                   95
ἐκ δὲ Διὸς βασιλῆες· ὃ δ᾽ ὄλβιος, ὅν τινα Μοῦσαι
φίλωνται· γλυκερή οἱ ἀπὸ στόματος ῥέει αὐδή.
Εἰ γάρ τις καὶ πένθος ἔχων νεοκηδέι θυμῷ
ἄζηται κραδίην ἀκαχήμενος, αὐτὰρ ἀοιδὸς
Μουσάων θεράπων κλέεα προτέρων ἀνθρώπων                                                                  100
ὑμνήσῃ μάκαράς τε θεούς, οἳ Ὄλυμπον ἔχουσιν,
αἶψ᾽ ὅ γε δυσφροσυνέων ἐπιλήθεται οὐδέ τι κηδέων
μέμνηται· ταχέως δὲ παρέτραπε δῶρα θεάων.
Χαίρετε, τέκνα Διός, δότε δ᾽ ἱμερόεσσαν ἀοιδήν.
Κλείετε δ᾽ ἀθανάτων ἱερὸν γένος αἰὲν ἐόντων,                                                                      105
οἳ Γῆς τ᾽ ἐξεγένοντο καὶ Οὐρανοῦ ἀστερόεντος,
Νυκτός τε δνοφερῆς, οὕς θ᾽ ἁλμυρὸς ἔτρεφε Πόντος.
Εἴπατε δ᾽, ὡς τὰ πρῶτα θεοὶ καὶ γαῖα γένοντο
καὶ ποταμοὶ καὶ πόντος ἀπείριτος, οἴδματι θυίων,
ἄστρα τε λαμπετόωντα καὶ οὐρανὸς εὐρὺς ὕπερθεν                                                           110
οἵ τ᾽ ἐκ τῶν ἐγένοντο θεοί, δωτῆρες ἐάων
ὥς τ᾽ ἄφενος δάσσαντο καὶ ὡς τιμὰς διέλοντο
ἠδὲ καὶ ὡς τὰ πρῶτα πολύπτυχον ἔσχον Ὄλυμπον.
Ταῦτά μοι ἔσπετε Μοῦσαι, Ὀλύμπια δώματ᾽ ἔχουσαι
[ἐξ ἀρχῆς, καὶ εἴπαθ᾽, ὅ τι πρῶτον γένετ᾽ αὐτῶν.]                                                                115
Ἦ τοι μὲν πρώτιστα Χάος γένετ᾽, αὐτὰρ ἔπειτα
Γαῖ᾽ εὐρύστερνος, πάντων ἕδος ἀσφαλὲς αἰεὶ
[ἀθανάτων, οἳ ἔχουσι κάρη νιφόεντος Ὀλύμπου,
Τάρταρά τ᾽ ἠερόεντα μυχῷ χθονὸς εὐρυοδείης,]
ἠδ᾽ Ἔρος, ὃς κάλλιστος ἐν ἀθανάτοισι θεοῖσι,                                                                       120
λυσιμελής, πάντων δὲ θεῶν πάντων τ᾽ ἀνθρώπων
δάμναται ἐν στήθεσσι νόον καὶ ἐπίφρονα βουλήν.
Ἐκ Χάεος δ᾽ Ἔρεβός τε μέλαινά τε Νὺξ ἐγένοντο·
Νυκτὸς δ᾽ αὖτ᾽ Αἰθήρ τε καὶ Ἡμέρη ἐξεγένοντο,
οὓς τέκε κυσαμένη Ἐρέβει φιλότητι μιγεῖσα.                                                                         125
Γαῖα δέ τοι πρῶτον μὲν ἐγείνατο ἶσον ἑ᾽ αὐτῇ
Οὐρανὸν ἀστερόενθ᾽, ἵνα μιν περὶ πάντα καλύπτοι,
ὄφρ᾽ εἴη μακάρεσσι θεοῖς ἕδος ἀσφαλὲς αἰεί.
Γείνατο δ᾽ Οὔρεα μακρά, θεῶν χαρίεντας ἐναύλους,
[Νυμφέων, αἳ ναίουσιν ἀν᾽ οὔρεα βησσήεντα.]                                                                    130
Ἥ δὲ καὶ ἀτρύγετον πέλαγος τέκεν, οἴδματι θυῖον,
Πόντον, ἄτερ φιλότητος ἐφιμέρου· αὐτὰρ ἔπειτα
Οὐρανῷ εὐνηθεῖσα τέκ᾽ Ὠκεανὸν βαθυδίνην,
Κοῖόν τε Κρῖόν θ᾽ Ὑπερίονά τ᾽ Ἰαπετόν τε
Θείαν τε ῾Ρείαν τε Θέμιν τε Μνημοσύνην τε                                                                             135
Φοίβην τε χρυσοστέφανον Τηθύν τ᾽ ἐρατεινήν.
Τοὺς δὲ μέθ᾽ ὁπλότατος γένετο Κρόνος ἀγκυλομήτης,
δεινότατος παίδων· θαλερὸν δ᾽ ἤχθηρε τοκῆα.
Γείνατο δ᾽ αὖ Κύκλωπας ὑπέρβιον ἦτορ ἔχοντας,
Βρόντην τε Στερόπην τε καὶ Ἄργην ὀβριμόθυμον,                                                                 140
[οἳ Ζηνὶ βροντήν τε δόσαν τεῦξάν τε κεραυνόν.]
Οἳ δή τοι τὰ μὲν ἄλλα θεοῖς ἐναλίγκιοι ἦσαν,
μοῦνος δ᾽ ὀφθαλμὸς μέσσῳ ἐνέκειτο μετώπῳ.
[Κύκλωπες δ᾽ ὄνομ᾽ ἦσαν ἐπώνυμον, οὕνεκ᾽ ἄρα σφέων
κυκλοτερὴς ὀφθαλμὸς ἕεις ἐνέκειτο μετώπῳ·]                                                                       145
ἰσχὺς δ᾽ ἠδὲ βίη καὶ μηχαναὶ ἦσαν ἐπ᾽ ἔργοις.
Ἄλλοι δ᾽ αὖ Γαίης τε καὶ Οὐρανοῦ ἐξεγένοντο
τρεῖς παῖδες μεγάλοι τε καὶ ὄβριμοι, οὐκ ὀνομαστοί,
Κόττος τε Βριάρεώς τε Γύης θ᾽, ὑπερήφανα τέκνα.
Τῶν ἑκατὸν μὲν χεῖρες ἀπ᾽ ὤμων ἀίσσοντο,                                                                             150
ἄπλαστοι, κεφαλαὶ δὲ ἑκάστῳ πεντήκοντα
ἐξ ὤμων ἐπέφυκον ἐπὶ στιβαροῖσι μέλεσσιν·
ἰσχὺς δ᾽ ἄπλητος κρατερὴ μεγάλῳ ἐπὶ εἴδει.
Ὅσσοι γὰρ Γαίης τε καὶ Οὐρανοῦ ἐξεγένοντο,
δεινότατοι παίδων, σφετέρῳ δ᾽ ἤχθοντο τοκῆι                                                                       155
ἐξ ἀρχῆς· καὶ τῶν μὲν ὅπως τις πρῶτα γένοιτο,
πάντας ἀποκρύπτασκε, καὶ ἐς φάος οὐκ ἀνίεσκε,
Γαίης ἐν κευθμῶνι, κακῷ δ᾽ ἐπετέρπετο ἔργῳ
Οὐρανός. ἣ δ᾽ ἐντὸς στοναχίζετο Γαῖα πελώρη
στεινομένη· δολίην δὲ κακήν τ᾽ ἐφράσσατο τέχνην.                                                             160
Αἶψα δὲ ποιήσασα γένος πολιοῦ ἀδάμαντος
τεῦξε μέγα δρέπανον καὶ ἐπέφραδε παισὶ φίλοισιν·
εἶπε δὲ θαρσύνουσα, φίλον τετιημένη ἦτορ·
«Παῖδες ἐμοὶ καὶ πατρὸς ἀτασθάλου, αἴ κ᾽ ἐθέλητε
πείθεσθαι, πατρός κε κακὴν τισαίμεθα λώβην                                                                    165
ὑμετέρου· πρότερος γὰρ ἀεικέα μήσατο ἔργα.»
Ὥς φάτο· τοὺς δ᾽ ἄρα πάντας ἕλεν δέος, οὐδέ τις αὐτῶν
φθέγξατο. Θαρσήσας δὲ μέγας Κρόνος ἀγκυλομήτης
ἂψ αὖτις μύθοισι προσηύδα μητέρα κεδνήν·
«Μῆτερ, ἐγώ κεν τοῦτό γ᾽ ὑποσχόμενος τελέσαιμι                                                            170
ἔργον, ἐπεὶ πατρός γε δυσωνύμου οὐκ ἀλεγίζω
ἡμετέρου· πρότερος γὰρ ἀεικέα μήσατο ἔργα».
Ὥς φάτο· γήθησεν δὲ μέγα φρεσὶ Γαῖα πελώρη·
Εἷσε δέ μιν κρύψασα λόχῳ· ἐνέθηκε δὲ χερσὶν
ἅρπην καρχαρόδοντα· δόλον δ᾽ ὑπεθήκατο πάντα.                                                             175
Ἦλθε δὲ νύκτ᾽ ἐπάγων μέγας Οὐρανός, ἀμφὶ δὲ Γαίῃ
ἱμείρων φιλότητος ἐπέσχετο καί ῥ᾽ ἐτανύσθη
πάντη· ὃ δ᾽ ἐκ λοχεοῖο πάις ὠρέξατο χειρὶ
σκαιῇ, δεξιτερῇ δὲ πελώριον ἔλλαβεν ἅρπην
μακρὴν καρχαρόδοντα, φίλου δ᾽ ἀπὸ μήδεα πατρὸς                                                           180
ἐσσυμένως ἤμησε, πάλιν δ᾽ ἔρριψε φέρεσθαι
ἐξοπίσω· τὰ μὲν οὔ τι ἐτώσια ἔκφυγε χειρός·
ὅσσαι γὰρ ῥαθάμιγγες ἀπέσσυθεν αἱματόεσσαι,
πάσας δέξατο Γαῖα· περιπλομένων δ᾽ ἐνιαυτῶν
γείνατ᾽ Ἐρινῦς τε κρατερὰς μεγάλους τε Γίγαντας,                                                             185
τεύχεσι λαμπομένους, δολίχ᾽ ἔγχεα χερσὶν ἔχοντας,
Νύμφας θ᾽, ἃς Μελίας καλέουσ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀπείρονα γαῖαν.
Μήδεα δ᾽ ὡς τὸ πρῶτον ἀποτμήξας ἀδάμαντι
κάββαλ᾽ ἀπ᾽ ἠπείροιο πολυκλύστῳ ἐνὶ πόντῳ,
ὣς φέρετ᾽ ἂμ πέλαγος πουλὺν χρόνον, ἀμφὶ δὲ λευκὸς                                                      190
ἀφρὸς ἀπ᾽ ἀθανάτου χροὸς ὤρνυτο· τῷ δ᾽ ἔνι κούρη
ἐθρέφθη· πρῶτον δὲ Κυθήροισιν ζαθέοισιν
ἔπλητ᾽, ἔνθεν ἔπειτα περίρρυτον ἵκετο Κύπρον.
Ἐκ δ᾽ ἔβη αἰδοίη καλὴ θεός, ἀμφὶ δὲ ποίη
ποσσὶν ὕπο ῥαδινοῖσιν ἀέξετο· τὴν δ᾽ Ἀφροδίτην                                                                 195
[ἀφρογενέα τε θεὰν καὶ ἐυστέφανον Κυθέρειαν]
κικλῄσκουσι θεοί τε καὶ ἀνέρες, οὕνεκ᾽ ἐν ἀφρῷ
θρέφθη· ἀτὰρ Κυθέρειαν, ὅτι προσέκυρσε Κυθήροις·
[Κυπρογενέα δ᾽, ὅτι γέντο πολυκλύστῳ ἐνὶ Κύπρῳ·
ἠδὲ φιλομμηδέα, ὅτι μηδέων ἐξεφαάνθη.]                                                                               200
Τῇ δ᾽ Ἔρος ὡμάρτησε καὶ Ἵμερος ἕσπετο καλὸς
γεινομένῃ τὰ πρῶτα θεῶν τ᾽ ἐς φῦλον ἰούσῃ.
Ταύτην δ᾽ ἐξ ἀρχῆς τιμὴν ἔχει ἠδὲ λέλογχε
μοῖραν ἐν ἀνθρώποισι καὶ ἀθανάτοισι θεοῖσι,
Παρθενίους τ᾽ ὀάρους μειδήματά τ᾽ ἐξαπάτας τε                                                                 205
τέρψιν τε γλυκερὴν φιλότητά τε μειλιχίην τε.
Τοὺς δὲ πατὴρ Τιτῆνας ἐπίκλησιν καλέεσκε
παῖδας νεικείων μέγας Οὐρανός, οὓς τέκεν αὐτός·
φάσκε δὲ τιταίνοντας ἀτασθαλίῃ μέγα ῥέξαι
ἔργον, τοῖο δ᾽ ἔπειτα τίσιν μετόπισθεν ἔσεσθαι.                                                                   210
Νὺξ δ᾽ ἔτεκεν στυγερόν τε Μόρον καὶ Κῆρα μέλαιναν
καὶ Θάνατον, τέκε δ᾽ Ὕπνον, ἔτικτε δὲ φῦλον Ὀνείρων·
— οὔ τινι κοιμηθεῖσα θεὰ τέκε Νὺξ ἐρεβεννή, —
δεύτερον αὖ Μῶμον καὶ Ὀιζὺν ἀλγινόεσσαν
Ἑσπερίδας θ᾽, ᾗς μῆλα πέρην κλυτοῦ Ὠκεανοῖο                                                                   215
χρύσεα καλὰ μέλουσι φέροντά τε δένδρεα καρπόν.
Καὶ Μοίρας καὶ Κῆρας ἐγείνατο νηλεοποίνους,
[Κλωθώ τε Λάχεσίν τε καὶ Ἄτροπον, αἵτε βροτοῖσι
γεινομένοισι διδοῦσιν ἔχειν ἀγαθόν τε κακόν τε,]
αἵτ᾽ ἀνδρῶν τε θεῶν τε παραιβασίας ἐφέπουσιν·                                                                 220
οὐδέ ποτε λήγουσι θεαὶ δεινοῖο χόλοιο,
πρίν γ᾽ ἀπὸ τῷ δώωσι κακὴν ὄπιν, ὅς τις ἁμάρτῃ.
Τίκτε δὲ καὶ Νέμεσιν, πῆμα θνητοῖσι βροτοῖσι,
Νὺξ ὀλοή· μετὰ τὴν δ᾽ Ἀπάτην τέκε καὶ Φιλότητα
Γῆράς τ᾽ οὐλόμενον, καὶ Ἔριν τέκε καρτερόθυμον.                                                               225
Αὐτὰρ Ἔρις στυγερὴ τέκε μὲν Πόνον ἀλγινόεντα
Λήθην τε Λιμόν τε καὶ Ἄλγεα δακρυόεντα
Ὑσμίνας τε Μάχας τε Φόνους τ᾽ Ἀνδροκτασίας τε
Νείκεά τε ψευδέας τε Λόγους Ἀμφιλλογίας τε
Δυσνομίην τ᾽ Ἀάτην τε, συνήθεας ἀλλήλῃσιν,                                                                      230
Ὅρκον θ᾽, ὃς δὴ πλεῖστον ἐπιχθονίους ἀνθρώπους
πημαίνει, ὅτε κέν τις ἑκὼν ἐπίορκον ὀμόσσῃ.
Νηρέα δ᾽ ἀψευδέα καὶ ἀληθέα γείνατο Πόντος,
πρεσβύτατον παίδων· αὐτὰρ καλέουσι γέροντα,
οὕνεκα νημερτής τε καὶ ἤπιος, οὐδὲ θεμιστέων                                                                     235
λήθεται, ἀλλὰ δίκαια καὶ ἤπια δήνεα οἶδεν·
αὖτις δ᾽ αὖ Θαύμαντα μέγαν καὶ ἀγήνορα Φόρκυν
Γαίῃ μισγόμενος καὶ Κητὼ καλλιπάρῃον
Εὐρυβίην τ᾽ ἀδάμαντος ἐνὶ φρεσὶ θυμὸν ἔχουσαν.
Νηρῆος δ᾽ ἐγένοντο μεγήρατα τέκνα θεάων                                                                           240
πόντῳ ἐν ἀτρυγέτῳ καὶ Δωρίδος ἠυκόμοιο,
κούρης Ὠκεανοῖο, τελήεντος ποταμοῖο,
Πλωτώ τ᾽ Εὐκράντη τε Σαώ τ᾽ Ἀμφιτρίτη τε
Εὐδώρη τε Θέτις τε Γαλήνη τε Γλαύκη τε
Κυμοθόη Σπειώ τε Θόη θ᾽ Ἀλίη τ᾽ ἐρόεσσα                                                                              245
Πασιθέη τ᾽ Ἐρατώ τε καὶ Εὐνίκη ῥοδόπηχυς
καὶ Μελίτη χαρίεσσα καὶ Εὐλιμένη καὶ Ἀγαυὴ
Δωτώ τε Πρωτώ τε Φέρουσά τε Δυναμένη τε
Νησαίη τε καὶ Ἀκταίη καὶ Πρωτομέδεια
Δωρὶς καὶ Πανόπεια καὶ εὐειδὴς Γαλάτεια                                                                            250
Ἱπποθόη τ᾽ ἐρόεσσα καὶ Ἱππονόη ῥοδόπηχυς
Κυμοδόκη θ᾽, ἣ κύματ᾽ ἐν ἠεροειδέι πόντῳ
πνοιάς τε ζαέων ἀνέμων σὺν Κυματολήγῃ
ῥεῖα πρηΰνει καὶ ἐυσφύρῳ Ἀμφιτρίτῃ,
Κυμώ τ᾽ Ἠιόνη τε ἐυστέφανός θ᾽ Ἁλιμήδη                                                                               255
Γλαυκονόμη τε φιλομμειδὴς καὶ Ποντοπόρεια
Ληαγόρη τε καὶ Εὐαγόρη καὶ Λαομέδεια
Πουλυνόη τε καὶ Αὐτονόη καὶ Λυσιάνασσα
[Εὐάρνη τε φυήν τ᾽ ἐρατὴ καὶ εἶδος ἄμωμος]
καὶ Ψαμάθη χαρίεσσα δέμας δίη τε Μενίππη                                                                       260
Νησώ τ᾽ Εὐπόμπη τε Θεμιστώ τε Προνόη τε
Νημερτής θ᾽, ἣ πατρὸς ἔχει νόον ἀθανάτοιο.
Αὗται μὲν Νηρῆος ἀμύμονος ἐξεγένοντο
κοῦραι πεντήκοντα, ἀμύμονα ἔργα ἰδυῖαι.
Θαύμας δ᾽ Ὠκεανοῖο βαθυρρείταο θύγατρα                                                                      265
ἠγάγετ᾽ Ἠλέκτρην· ἣ δ᾽ ὠκεῖαν τέκεν Ἶριν
ἠυκόμους θ᾽ Ἁρπυίας Ἀελλώ τ᾽ Ὠκυπέτην τε,
αἵ ῥ᾽ ἀνέμων πνοιῇσι καὶ οἰωνοῖς ἕμ᾽ ἕπονται
ὠκείῃς πτερύγεσσι· μεταχρόνιαι γὰρ ἴαλλον.
Φόρκυϊ δ᾽ αὖ Κητὼ Γραίας τέκε καλλιπαρῄους                                                                 270
ἐκ γενετῆς πολιάς, τὰς δὴ Γραίας καλέουσιν
ἀθάνατοί τε θεοὶ χαμαὶ ἐρχόμενοί τ᾽ ἄνθρωποι,
Πεμφρηδώ τ᾽ ἐύπεπλον Ἐνυώ τε κροκόπεπλον,
Γοργούς θ᾽, αἳ ναίουσι πέρην κλυτοῦ Ὠκεανοῖο
ἐσχατιῇ πρὸς Νυκτός, ἵν᾽ Ἑσπερίδες λιγύφωνοι,                                                                  275
Σθεννώ τ᾽ Εὐρυάλη τε Μέδουσά τε λυγρὰ παθοῦσα.
Ἥ μὲν ἔην θνητή, αἳ δ᾽ ἀθάνατοι καὶ ἀγήρῳ,
αἱ δύο· τῇ δὲ μιῇ παρελέξατο Κυανοχαίτης
ἐν μαλακῷ λειμῶνι καὶ ἄνθεσιν εἰαρινοῖσιν.
Τῆς δ᾽ ὅτε δὴ Περσεὺς κεφαλὴν ἀπεδειροτόμησεν,                                                           280
ἔκθορε Χρυσαωρ τε μέγας καὶ Πήγασος ἵππος.
Τῷ μὲν ἐπώνυμον ἦεν, ὅτ᾽ Ὠκεανοῦ περὶ πηγὰς
γένθ᾽, ὃ δ᾽ ἄορ χρύσειον ἔχων μετὰ χερσὶ φίλῃσιν.
Χὠ μὲν ἀποπτάμενος προλιπὼν χθόνα, μητέρα μήλων,
ἵκετ᾽ ἐς ἀθανάτους· Ζηνὸς δ᾽ ἐν δώμασι ναίει                                                                        285
βροντήν τε στεροπήν τε φέρων Διὶ μητιόεντι.
Χρυσάωρ δ᾽ ἔτεκεν τρικέφαλον Γηρυονῆα
μιχθεὶς Καλλιρόῃ κούρῃ κλυτοῦ Ὠκεανοῖο.
Τὸν μὲν ἄρ᾽ ἐξενάριξε βίη Ἡρακληείη
βουσὶ παρ᾽ εἰλιπόδεσσι περιρρύτῳ εἰν Ἐρυθείῃ                                                                   290
ἤματι τῷ ὅτε περ βοῦς ἤλασεν εὐρυμετώπους
Τίρυνθ᾽ εἰς ἱερὴν διαβὰς πόρον Ὠκεανοῖο
Ὄρθον τε κτείνας καὶ βουκόλον Εὐρυτίωνα
σταθμῷ ἐν ἠερόεντι πέρην κλυτοῦ Ὠκεανοῖο.
Ἥ δ᾽ ἔτεκ᾽ ἄλλο πέλωρον ἀμήχανον, οὐδὲν ἐοικὸς                                                           295
θνητοῖς ἀνθρώποις οὐδ᾽ ἀθανάτοισι θεοῖσιν,
ἐν σπῆι ἔνι γλαφυρῷ θείην κρατερόφρον᾽ Ἔχιδναν,
ἥμισυ μὲν νύμφην ἑλικώπιδα καλλιπάρῃον,
ἥμισυ δ᾽ αὖτε πέλωρον ὄφιν δεινόν τε μέγαν τε
αἰόλον ὠμηστὴν ζαθέης ὑπὸ κεύθεσι γαίης.                                                                         300
Ἔνθα δέ οἱ σπέος ἐστὶ κάτω κοίλῃ ὑπὸ πέτρῃ
τηλοῦ ἀπ᾽ ἀθανάτων τε θεῶν θνητῶν τ᾽ ἀνθρώπων·
ἔνθ᾽ ἄρα οἱ δάσσαντο θεοὶ κλυτὰ δώματα ναίειν.
Ἥ δ᾽ ἐρυτ᾽ εἰν Ἀρίμοισιν ὑπὸ χθόνα λυγρὴ Ἔχιδνα,
ἀθάνατος νύμφη καὶ ἀγήραος ἤματα πάντα.                                                                       305
Τῇ δὲ Τυφάονά φασι μιγήμεναι ἐν φιλότητι
δεινόν θ᾽ ὑβριστήν τ᾽ ἄνομόν θ᾽ ἑλικώπιδι κούρῃ·
ἣ δ᾽ ὑποκυσαμένη τέκετο κρατερόφρονα τέκνα.
Ὄρθον μὲν πρῶτον κύνα γείνατο Γηρυονῆι·
δεύτερον αὖτις ἔτικτεν ἀμήχανον, οὔ τι φατειὸν                                                                   310
Κέρβερον ὠμηστήν, Ἀίδεω κύνα χαλκεόφωνον,
πεντηκοντακέφαλον, ἀναιδέα τε κρατερόν τε·
τὸ τρίτον Ὕδρην αὖτις ἐγείνατο λυγρὰ ἰδυῖαν
Λερναίην, ἣν θρέψε θεὰ λευκώλενος Ἥρη
ἄπλητον κοτέουσα βίῃ Ἡρακληείῃ.                                                                                           315
Καὶ τὴν μὲν Διὸς υἱὸς ἐνήρατο νηλέι χαλκῷ
Ἀμφιτρυωνιάδης σὺν ἀρηιφίλῳ Ἰολάῳ
Ἡρακλέης βουλῇσιν Ἀθηναίης ἀγελείης.
Ἥ δὲ Χίμαιραν ἔτικτε πνέουσαν ἀμαιμάκετον πῦρ,
δεινήν τε μεγάλην τε ποδώκεά τε κρατερήν τε·                                                                       320
Τῆς δ᾽ ἦν τρεῖς κεφαλαί· μία μὲν χαροποῖο λέοντος,
ἣ δὲ χιμαίρης, ἣ δ᾽ ὄφιος, κρατεροῖο δράκοντος,
[πρόσθε λέων, ὄπιθεν δὲ δράκων, μέσση δὲ χίμαιρα,
δεινὸν ἀποπνείουσα πυρὸς μένος αἰθομένοιο.]
Τὴν μὲν Πήγασος εἷλε καὶ ἐσθλὸς Βελλεροφόντης.                                                              325
Ἥ δ᾽ ἄρα Φῖκ᾽ ὀλοὴν τέκε Καδμείοισιν ὄλεθρον
Ὅρθῳ ὑποδμηθεῖσα Νεμειαῖόν τε λέοντα,
τόν ῥ᾽ Ἥρη θρέψασα Διὸς κυδρὴ παράκοιτις
γουνοῖσιν κατένασσε Νεμείης, πῆμ᾽ ἀνθρώποις.
Ἔνθ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ὃ οἰκείων ἐλεφαίρετο φῦλ᾽ ἀνθρώπων,                                                                 330
κοιρανέων Τρητοῖο Νεμείης ἠδ᾽ Ἀπέσαντος·
ἀλλά ἑ ἲς ἐδάμασσε βίης Ἡρακληείης.
Κητὼ δ᾽ ὁπλότατον Φόρκυι φιλότητι μιγεῖσα
γείνατο δεινὸν ὄφιν, ὃς ἐρεμνῆς κεύθεσι γαίης
σπείρησιν μεγάλοις παγχρύσεα μῆλα φυλάσσει.                                                               335
Τοῦτο μὲν ἐκ Κητοῦς καὶ Φόρκυνος γένος ἐστίν.
Τηθὺς δ᾽ Ὠκεανῷ Ποταμοὺς τέκε δινήεντας,
Νεῖλόν τ᾽ Ἀλφειόν τε καὶ Ἠριδανὸν βαθυδίνην
Στρυμόνα Μαίανδρόν τε καὶ Ἴστρον καλλιρέεθρον
Φᾶσίν τε ῾Ρῆσόν τ᾽ Ἀχελώιόν τ᾽ ἀργυροδίνην                                                                         340
Νέσσον τε ῾Ροδίον θ᾽ Ἁλιάκμονά θ᾽ Ἑπτάπορόν τε
Γρήνικόν τε καὶ Αἴσηπον θεῖόν τε Σιμοῦντα
Πηνειόν τε καὶ Ἕρμον ἐυρρείτην τε Κάικον
Σαγγάριόν τε μέγαν Λάδωνά τε Παρθένιόν τε
Εὔηνόν τε καὶ Ἄρδησκον θεῖόν τε Σκάμανδρον.                                                                     345
Τίκτε δὲ θυγατέρων ἱερὸν γένος, αἳ κατὰ γαῖαν
ἄνδρας κουρίζουσι σὺν Ἀπόλλωνι ἄνακτι
καὶ Ποταμοῖς, ταύτην δὲ Διὸς πάρα μοῖραν ἔχουσι,
Πειθώ τ᾽ Ἀδμήτη τε Ἰάνθη τ᾽ Ἠλέκτρη τε
Δωρίς τε Πρυμνώ τε καὶ Οὐρανίη θεοειδὴς                                                                             350
Ἱππώ τε Κλυμένη τε ῾Ρόδειά τε Καλλιρόη τε
Ζευξώ τε Κλυτίη τε Ἰδυῖά τε Πασιθόη τε
Πληξαύρη τε Γαλαξαύρη τ᾽ ἐρατή τε Διώνη
Μηλόβοσίς τε Φόη τε καὶ εὐειδὴς Πολυδώρη
Κερκηίς τε φυὴν ἐρατὴ Πλουτώ τε βοῶπις                                                                               355
Περσηίς τ᾽ Ἰάνειρά τ᾽ Ἀκάστη τε Ξάνθη τε
Πετραίη τ᾽ ἐρόεσσα Μενεσθώ τ᾽ Εὐρώπη τε
Μῆτίς τ᾽ Εὐρυνόμη τε Τελεστώ τε κροκόπεπλος
Χρυσηίς τ᾽ Ἀσίη τε καὶ ἱμερόεσσα Καλυψὼ
Εὐδώρη τε Τύχη τε καὶ Ἀμφιρὼ Ὠκυρόη τε                                                                              360
καὶ Στύξ, ἣ δή σφεων προφερεστάτη ἐστὶν ἁπασέων.
Αὗται δ᾽ Ὠκεανοῦ καὶ Τηθύος ἐξεγένοντο
πρεσβύταται κοῦραι· πολλαί γε μέν εἰσι καὶ ἄλλαι.
Τρὶς γὰρ χίλιαί εἰσι τανύσφυροι Ὠκεανῖναι,
αἵ ῥα πολυσπερέες γαῖαν καὶ βένθεα λίμνης                                                                        365
πάντη ὁμῶς ἐφέπουσι, θεάων ἀγλαὰ τέκνα.
Τόσσοι δ᾽ αὖθ᾽ ἕτεροι ποταμοὶ καναχηδὰ ῥέοντες,
υἱέες Ὠκεανοῦ, τοὺς γείνατο πότνια Τηθύς·
τῶν ὄνομ᾽ ἀργαλέον πάντων βροτὸν ἀνέρ᾽ ἐνισπεῖν,
Οἳ δὲ ἕκαστοι ἴσασιν, ὅσοι περιναιετάωσιν.                                                                           370
Θεία δ᾽ Ἠέλιόν τε μέγαν λαμπράν τε Σελήνην
Ἠῶ θ᾽, ἣ πάντεσσιν ἐπιχθονίοισι φαείνει
ἀθανάτοις τε θεοῖσι, τοὶ οὐρανὸν εὐρὺν ἔχουσι,
γείναθ᾽ ὑποδμηθεῖσ᾽ Ὑπερίονος ἐν φιλότητι.
Κρίῳ δ᾽ Εὐρυβίη τέκεν ἐν φιλότητι μιγεῖσα                                                                             375
Ἀστραῖόν τε μέγαν Πάλλαντά τε δῖα θεάων
Πέρσην θ᾽, ὃς καὶ πᾶσι μετέπρεπεν ἰδμοσύνῃσιν.
Ἀστραίῳ δ᾽ Ἠὼς ἀνέμους τέκε καρτεροθύμους,
ἀργέστην Ζέφυρον Βορέην τ᾽ αἰψηροκέλευθον
καὶ Νότον, ἐν φιλότητι θεὰ θεῷ εὐνηθεῖσα.                                                                           380
Τοὺς δὲ μέτ᾽ ἀστέρα τίκτ' Ἠοσφόρον Ἠριγένεια
ἄστρα τε λαμπετόωντα, τά τ᾽ οὐρανὸς ἐστεφάνωται.
Στὺξ δ᾽ ἔτεκ᾽ Ὠκεανοῦ θυγάτηρ Πάλλαντι μιγεῖσα
Ζῆλον καὶ Νίκην καλλίσφυρον ἐν μεγάροισιν·
καὶ Κράτος ἠδὲ Βίην ἀριδείκετα γείνατο τέκνα,                                                                    385
τῶν οὐκ ἔστ᾽ ἀπάνευθε Διὸς δόμος, οὐδέ τις ἕδρη,
οὐδ᾽ ὁδός, ὅππη μὴ κείνοις θεὸς ἡγεμονεύῃ,
ἀλλ᾽ αἰεὶ πὰρ Ζηνὶ βαρυκτύπῳ ἑδριόωνται.
Ὥς γὰρ ἐβούλευσεν Στὺξ ἄφθιτος Ὠκεανίνη
ἥματι τῷ, ὅτε πάντας Ὀλύμπιος ἀστεροπητὴς                                                                       390
ἀθανάτους ἐκάλεσσε θεοὺς ἐς μακρὸν Ὄλυμπον,
εἶπε δ᾽, ὃς ἂν μετὰ εἷο θεῶν Τιτῆσι μάχοιτο,
μή τιν᾽ ἀπορραίσειν γεράων, τιμὴν δὲ ἕκαστον
ἑξέμεν, ἣν τὸ πάρος γε μετ᾽ ἀθανάτοισι θεοῖσιν
Τὸν δ᾽ ἔφαθ᾽, ὅς τις ἄτιμος ὑπὸ Κρόνου ἠδ᾽ ἀγέραστος,                                                      395
τιμῆς καὶ γεράων ἐπιβησέμεν, ἧ θέμις ἐστίν.
Ἦλθε δ᾽ ἄρα πρώτη Στὺξ ἄφθιτος Οὔλυμπόνδε
σὺν σφοῖσιν παίδεσσι φίλου διὰ μήδεα πατρός.
Τὴν δὲ Ζεὺς τίμησε, περισσὰ δὲ δῶρα ἔδωκεν.
Αὐτὴν μὲν γὰρ ἔθηκε θεῶν μέγαν ἔμμεναι ὅρκον,                                                                400
παῖδας δ᾽ ἤματα πάντα ἕο μεταναιέτας εἶναι.
Ὥς δ᾽ αὔτως πάντεσσι διαμπερές, ὥς περ ὑπέστη,
ἐξετέλεσσ᾽· αὐτὸς δὲ μέγα κρατεῖ ἠδὲ ἀνάσσει.
Φοίβη δ᾽ αὖ Κοίου πολυήρατον ἦλθεν ἐς εὐνήν·
κυσαμένη δὴ ἔπειτα θεὰ θεοῦ ἐν φιλότητι                                                                              405
Λητὼ κυανόπεπλον ἐγείνατο, μείλιχον αἰεί,
μείλιχον ἐξ ἀρχῆς, ἀγανώτατον ἐντὸς Ὀλύμπου,                                                                  408
ἤπιον ἀνθρώποισι καὶ ἀθανάτοισι θεοῖσιν.                                                                          407
Γείνατο δ᾽ Ἀστερίην ἐυώνυμον, ἥν ποτε Πέρσης
ἠγάγετ᾽ ἐς μέγα δῶμα φίλην κεκλῆσθαι ἄκοιτιν.                                                               410
Ἤ δ᾽ ὑποκυσαμένη Ἑκάτην τέκε, τὴν περὶ πάντων
Ζεὺς Κρονίδης τίμησε· πόρεν δέ οἱ ἀγλαὰ δῶρα,
μοῖραν ἔχειν γαίης τε καὶ ἀτρυγέτοιο θαλάσσης.
Ἥ δὲ καὶ ἀστερόεντος ἀπ᾽ οὐρανοῦ ἔμμορε τιμῆς
ἀθανάτοις τε θεοῖσι τετιμένη ἐστὶ μάλιστα.                                                                           415
Καὶ γὰρ νῦν, ὅτε πού τις ἐπιχθονίων ἀνθρώπων
ἔρδων ἱερὰ καλὰ κατὰ νόμον ἱλάσκηται,
κικλῄσκει Ἑκάτην· πολλή τέ οἱ ἕσπετο τιμὴ
ῥεῖα μάλ᾽, ᾧ πρόφρων γε θεὰ ὑποδέξεται εὐχάς,
καί τέ οἱ ὄλβον ὀπάζει, ἐπεὶ δύναμίς γε πάρεστιν.                                                               420
Ὅσσοι γὰρ Γαίης τε καὶ Οὐρανοῦ ἐξεγένοντο
καὶ τιμὴν ἔλαχον, τούτων ἔχει αἶσαν ἁπάντων.
Οὐδέ τί μιν Κρονίδης ἐβιήσατο οὐδέ τ᾽ ἀπηύρα,
ὅσσ᾽ ἔλαχεν Τιτῆσι μετὰ προτέροισι θεοῖσιν,
ἀλλ᾽ ἔχει, ὡς τὸ πρῶτον ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς ἔπλετο δασμός,                                                              425
καὶ γέρας ἐν γαίῃ τε καὶ οὐρανῷ ἠδὲ θαλάσσῃ·                                                                   427
οὐδ᾽, ὅτι μουνογενής, ἧσσον θεὰ ἔμμορε τιμῆς,                                                                      426
ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι καὶ πολὺ μᾶλλον, ἐπεὶ Ζεὺς τίεται αὐτήν.                                                             428
ᾮ  δ᾽ ἐθέλει, μεγάλως παραγίγνεται ἠδ᾽ ὀνίνησιν·
ἔν τε δίκῃ βασιλεῦσι παρ᾽ αἰδοίοισι καθίζει,                                                                        434
ἔν τ᾽ ἀγορῇ λαοῖσι μεταπρέπει, ὅν κ᾽ ἐθέλῃσιν·                                                                     430
ἠδ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἐς πόλεμον φθεισήνορα θωρήσσωνται
ἀνέρες, ἔνθα θεὰ παραγίγνεται, οἷς κ᾽ ἐθέλῃσι
νίκην προφρονέως ὀπάσαι καὶ κῦδος ὀρέξαι.                                                                        433
Ἐσθλὴ δ᾽ αὖθ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἄνδρες ἀεθλεύωσιν ἀγῶνι,                                                                  435
ἔνθα θεὰ καὶ τοῖς παραγίγνεται ἠδ᾽ ὀνίνησιν·
νικήσας δὲ βίῃ καὶ κάρτεϊ καλὸν ἄεθλον
ῥεῖα φέρει χαίρων τε, τοκεῦσι δὲ κῦδος ὀπάζει.
Ἐσθλὴ δ᾽ ἱππήεσσι παρεστάμεν, οἷς κ᾽ ἐθέλῃσιν.
Καὶ τοῖς, οἳ γλαυκὴν δυσπέμφελον ἐργάζονται,                                                                   440
εὔχονται δ᾽ Ἑκάτῃ καὶ ἐρικτύπῳ Ἐννοσιγαίῳ,
ῥηιδίως ἄγρην κυδρὴ θεὸς ὤπασε πολλήν,
ῥεῖα δ᾽ ἀφείλετο φαινομένην, ἐθέλουσά γε θυμῷ.
Ἐσθλὴ δ᾽ ἐν σταθμοῖσι σὺν Ἑρμῇ ληίδ᾽ ἀέξειν·
βουκολίας δ᾽ ἀγέλας τε καὶ αἰπόλια πλατέ᾽ αἰγῶν                                                            445
ποίμνας τ᾽ εἰροπόκων ὀίων, θυμῷ γ᾽ ἐθέλουσα,
ἐξ ὀλίγων βριάει καὶ ἐκ πολλῶν μείονα θῆκεν.
Οὕτω τοι καὶ μουνογενὴς ἐκ μητρὸς ἐοῦσα
πᾶσι μετ᾽ ἀθανάτοισι τετίμηται γεράεσσιν.
Θῆκε δέ μιν Κρονίδης κουροτρόφον, οἳ μετ᾽ ἐκείνην                                                             450
ὀφθαλμοῖσιν ἴδοντο φάος πολυδερκέος Ἠοῦς.
Οὕτως ἐξ ἀρχῆς κουροτρόφος, αἳ δέ τε τιμαί.
῾Ρείη δὲ δμηθεῖσα Κρόνῳ τέκε φαίδιμα τέκνα,
Ἱστίην Δήμητρα καὶ Ἥρην χρυσοπέδιλον
ἴφθιμόν τ᾽ Ἀίδην, ὃς ὑπὸ χθονὶ δώματα ναίει                                                                        455
νηλεὲς ἦτορ ἔχων, καὶ ἐρίκτυπον Ἐννοσίγαιον
Ζῆνά τε μητιόεντα, θεῶν πατέρ᾽ ἠδὲ καὶ ἀνδρῶν,
τοῦ καὶ ὑπὸ βροντῆς πελεμίζεται εὐρεῖα χθών.
Καὶ τοὺς μὲν κατέπινε μέγας Κρόνος, ὥς τις ἕκαστος
νηδύος ἐξ ἱερῆς μητρὸς πρὸς γούναθ᾽ ἵκοιτο,                                                                          460
τὰ φρονέων, ἵνα μή τις ἀγαυῶν Οὐρανιώνων
ἄλλος ἐν ἀθανάτοισιν ἔχοι βασιληίδα τιμήν.
Πεύθετο γὰρ Γαίης τε καὶ Οὐρανοῦ ἀστερόεντος,
οὕνεκά οἱ πέπρωτο ἑῷ ὑπὸ παιδὶ δαμῆναι
καὶ κρατερῷ περ ἐόντι — Διὸς μεγάλου διὰ βουλάς· —                                                     465
τῷ ὅ γ᾽ ἄρ᾽ οὐκ ἀλαὸς σκοπιὴν ἔχεν, ἀλλὰ δοκεύων
παῖδας ἑοὺς κατέπινε· ῾Ρέην δ᾽ ἔχε πένθος ἄλαστον.
Ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε δὴ Δί᾽ ἔμελλε θεῶν πατέρ᾽ ἠδὲ καὶ ἀνδρῶν
τέξεσθαι, τότ᾽ ἔπειτα φίλους λιτάνευε τοκῆας
τοὺς αὐτῆς, Γαῖάν τε καὶ Οὐρανὸν ἀστερόεντα,                                                                     470
μῆτιν συμφράσσασθαι, ὅπως λελάθοιτο τεκοῦσα
παῖδα φίλον, τείσαιτο δ᾽ ἐρινῦς πατρὸς ἑοῖο
παίδων θ᾽, οὓς κατέπινε μέγας Κρόνος ἀγκυλομήτης.
Οἳ δὲ θυγατρὶ φίλῃ μάλα μὲν κλύον ἠδ᾽ ἐπίθοντο,
καί οἱ πεφραδέτην, ὅσα περ πέπρωτο γενέσθαι                                                                    475
ἀμφὶ Κρόνῳ βασιλῆι καὶ υἱέι καρτεροθύμῳ.
Πέμψαν δ᾽ ἐς Λύκτον, Κρήτης ἐς πίονα δῆμον,
ὁππότ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ὁπλότατον παίδων τέξεσθαι ἔμελλε,
Ζῆνα μέγαν· τὸν μέν οἱ ἐδέξατο Γαῖα πελώρη
Κρήτῃ ἐν εὐρείῃ τραφέμεν ἀτιταλλέμεναί τε.                                                                         480
Ἔνθα μιν ἷκτο φέρουσα θοὴν διὰ νύκτα μέλαιναν
πρώτην ἐς Λύκτον· κρύψεν δέ ἑ χερσὶ λαβοῦσα
ἄντρῳ ἐν ἠλιβάτῳ, ζαθέης ὑπὸ κεύθεσι γαίης,
Αἰγαίῳ ἐν ὄρει πεπυκασμένῳ ὑλήεντι.
Τῷ δὲ σπαργανίσασα μέγαν λίθον ἐγγυάλιξεν                                                                    485
Οὐρανίδῃ μέγ᾽ ἄνακτι, θεῶν προτέρῳ βασιλῆι.
Τὸν τόθ᾽ ἑλὼν χείρεσσιν ἑὴν ἐσκάτθετο νηδὺν
σχέτλιος· οὐδ᾽ ἐνόησε μετὰ φρεσίν, ὥς οἱ ὀπίσσω
ἀντὶ λίθου ἑὸς υἱὸς ἀνίκητος καὶ ἀκηδὴς
λείπεθ᾽, ὅ μιν τάχ᾽ ἔμελλε βίῃ καὶ χερσὶ δαμάσσας                                                             490
τιμῆς ἐξελάειν, ὃ δ᾽ ἐν ἀθανάτοισι ἀνάξειν.
Καρπαλίμως δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἔπειτα μένος καὶ φαίδιμα γυῖα
ηὔξετο τοῖο ἄνακτος· ἐπιπλομένων δ᾽ ἐνιαυτῶν
[Γαίης ἐννεσίῃσι πολυφραδέεσσι δολωθεὶς]
ὃν γόνον ἄψ ἀνέηκε μέγας Κρόνος ἀγκυλομήτης                                                                  495
νικηθεὶς τέχνῃσι βίηφί τε παιδὸς ἑοῖο.
Πρῶτον δ᾽ ἐξέμεσεν λίθον, πύματον καταπίνων·
τὸν μὲν Ζεὺς στήριξε κατὰ χθονὸς εὐρυοδείης
Πυθοῖ ἐν ἠγαθέῃ γυάλοις ὕπο Παρνησοῖο
σῆμ᾽ ἔμεν ἐξοπίσω, θαῦμα θνητοῖσι βροτοῖσιν.                                                                    500
[Λῦσε δὲ πατροκασιγνήτους ὀλοῶν ὑπὸ δεσμῶν
Οὐρανίδας, οὓς δῆσε πατὴρ ἀεσιφροσύνῃσιν·
οἳ οἱ ἀπεμνήσαντο χάριν εὐεργεσιάων,
δῶκαν δὲ βροντὴν ἠδ᾽ αἰθαλόεντα κεραυνὸν
καὶ στεροπήν· τὸ πρὶν δὲ πελώρη Γαῖα κεκεύθει·                                                                  505
τοῖς πίσυνος θνητοῖσι καὶ ἀθανάτοισιν ἀνάσσει.]
Κούρην δ᾽ Ἰαπετὸς καλλίσφυρον Ὠκεανίνην
ἠγάγετο Κλυμένην καὶ ὁμὸν λέχος εἰσανέβαινεν.
Ἥ δέ οἱ Ἄτλαντα κρατερόφρονα γείνατο παῖδα·
τίκτε δ᾽ ὑπερκύδαντα Μενοίτιον ἠδὲ Προμηθέα,                                                                   510
ποικίλον αἰολόμητιν, ἁμαρτίνοόν τ᾽ Ἐπιμηθέα,
ὃς κακὸν ἐξ ἀρχῆς γένετ᾽ ἀνδράσιν ἀλφηστῇσιν·
πρῶτος γάρ ῥα Διὸς πλαστὴν ὑπέδεκτο γυναῖκα
παρθένον. Ὑβριστὴν δὲ Μενοίτιον εὐρύοπα Ζεὺς
εἰς Ἔρεβος κατέπεμψε βαλὼν ψολόεντι κεραυνῷ                                                                 515
εἵνεκ᾽ ἀτασθαλίης τε καὶ ἠνορέης ὑπερόπλου.
Ἄτλας δ᾽ οὐρανὸν εὐρὺν ἔχει κρατερῆς ὑπ᾽ ἀνάγκης
πείρασιν ἐν γαίης, πρόπαρ Ἑσπερίδων λιγυφώνων,
ἑστηὼς κεφαλῇ τε καὶ ἀκαμάτῃσι χέρεσσιν·
ταύτην γάρ οἱ μοῖραν ἐδάσσατο μητίετα Ζεύς.                                                                      520
Δῆσε δ᾽ ἀλυκτοπέδῃσι Προμηθέα ποικιλόβουλον
δεσμοῖς ἀργαλέοισι μέσον διὰ κίον᾽ ἐλάσσας·
καί οἱ ἐπ᾽ αἰετὸν ὦρσε τανύπτερον· αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ ἧπαρ
ἤσθιεν ἀθάνατον, τὸ δ᾽ ἀέξετο ἶσον ἁπάντη
νυκτός, ὅσον πρόπαν ἦμαρ ἔδοι τανυσίπτερος ὄρνις.                                                          525
Τὸν μὲν ἄρ᾽ Ἀλκμήνης καλλισφύρου ἄλκιμος υἱὸς
Ἡρακλέης ἔκτεινε, κακὴν δ᾽ ἀπὸ νοῦσον ἄλαλκεν
Ἰαπετιονίδῃ καὶ ἐλύσατο δυσφροσυνάων
οὐκ ἀέκητι Ζηνὸς Ὀλυμπίου ὑψιμέδοντος,
ὄφρ᾽ Ἡρακλῆος Θηβαγενέος κλέος εἴη                                                                                     530
πλεῖον ἔτ᾽ ἢ τὸ πάροιθεν ἐπὶ χθόνα πουλυβότειραν.
Ταῦτά γ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἁζόμενος τίμα ἀριδείκετον υἱόν·
καί περ χωόμενος παύθη χόλου, ὃν πρὶν ἔχεσκεν,
οὕνεκ᾽ ἐρίζετο βουλὰς ὑπερμενέει Κρονίωνι.
Καὶ γὰρ ὅτ᾽ ἐκρίνοντο θεοὶ θνητοί τ᾽ ἄνθρωποι                                                                    535
Μηκώνῃ, τότ᾽ ἔπειτα μέγαν βοῦν πρόφρονι θυμῷ
δασσάμενος προέθηκε, Διὸς νόον ἐξαπαφίσκων.
Τοῖς μὲν γὰρ σάρκας τε καὶ ἔγκατα πίονα δημῷ
ἐν ῥινῷ κατέθηκε καλύψας γαστρὶ βοείῃ,
τῷ δ᾽ αὖτ᾽ ὀστέα λευκὰ βοὸς δολίῃ ἐπὶ τέχνῃ                                                                          540
εὐθετίσας κατέθηκε καλύψας ἀργέτι δημῷ.
Δὴ τότε μιν προσέειπε πατὴρ ἀνδρῶν τε θεῶν τε·
Ἰαπετιονίδη, πάντων ἀριδείκετ᾽ ἀνάκτων,
ὦ πέπον, ὡς ἑτεροζήλως διεδάσσαο μοίρας.
Ὥς φάτο κερτομέων Ζεὺς ἄφθιτα μήδεα εἰδώς.                                                                545
Τὸν δ᾽ αὖτε προσέειπε Προμηθεὺς ἀγκυλομήτης
ἦκ᾽ ἐπιμειδήσας, δολίης δ᾽ οὐ λήθετο τέχνης·
Ζεῦ κύδιστε μέγιστε θεῶν αἰειγενετάων,
τῶν δ᾽ ἕλε᾽, ὁπποτέρην σε ἐνὶ φρεσὶ θυμὸς ἀνώγει.
Φῆ ῥα δολοφρονέων· Ζεὺς δ᾽ ἄφθιτα μήδεα εἰδὼς                                                            550
γνῶ ῥ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἠγνοίησε δόλον· κακὰ δ᾽ ὄσσετο θυμῷ
θνητοῖς ἀνθρώποισι, τὰ καὶ τελέεσθαι ἔμελλεν.
Χερσὶ δ᾽ ὅ γ᾽ ἀμφοτέρῃσιν ἀνείλετο λευκὸν ἄλειφαρ.
Χώσατο δὲ φρένας ἀμφί, χόλος δέ μιν ἵκετο θυμόν,
ὡς ἴδεν ὀστέα λευκὰ βοὸς δολίῃ ἐπὶ τέχνῃ.                                                                              555
Ἐκ τοῦ δ᾽ ἀθανάτοισιν ἐπὶ χθονὶ φῦλ᾽ ἀνθρώπων
καίουσ᾽ ὀστέα λευκὰ θυηέντων ἐπὶ βωμῶν.
Τὸν δὲ μέγ᾽ ὀχθήσας προσέφη νεφεληγερέτα Ζεύς·
Ἰαπετιονίδη, πάντων πέρι μήδεα εἰδώς,
ὦ πέπον, οὐκ ἄρα πω δολίης ἐπιλήθεο τέχνης.                                                                      560
Ὥς φάτο χωόμενος Ζεὺς ἄφθιτα μήδεα εἰδώς·
ἐκ τούτου δὴ ἔπειτα δόλου μεμνημένος αἰεὶ
οὐκ ἐδίδου μελίῃσι πυρὸς μένος ἀκαμάτοιο
θνητοῖς ἀνθρώποις, οἳ ἐπὶ χθονὶ ναιετάουσιν.
Ἀλλά μιν ἐξαπάτησεν ἐὺς πάις Ἰαπετοῖο                                                                                 565
κλέψας ἀκαμάτοιο πυρὸς τηλέσκοπον αὐγὴν
ἐν κοΐλῳ νάρθηκι· δάκεν δέ ἑ νειόθι θυμόν,
Ζῆν᾽ ὑψιβρεμέτην, ἐχόλωσε δέ μιν φίλον ἦτορ,
ὡς ἴδ᾽ ἐν ἀνθρώποισι πυρὸς τηλέσκοπον αὐγήν.
Αὐτίκα δ᾽ ἀντὶ πυρὸς τεῦξεν κακὸν ἀνθρώποισιν·                                                               570
γαίης γὰρ σύμπλασσε περικλυτὸς Ἀμφιγυήεις
παρθένῳ αἰδοίῃ ἴκελον Κρονίδεω διὰ βουλάς.
Ζῶσε δὲ καὶ κόσμησε θεὰ γλαυκῶπις Ἀθήνη
ἀργυφέη ἐσθῆτι· κατὰ κρῆθεν δὲ καλύπτρην
δαιδαλέην χείρεσσι κατέσχεθε, θαῦμα ἰδέσθαι·                                                                  575
[ἀμφὶ δέ οἱ στεφάνους, νεοθηλέος ἄνθεα ποίης,
ἱμερτοὺς περίθηκε καρήατι Παλλὰς Ἀθήνη. ]
ἀμφὶ δέ οἱ στεφάνην χρυσέην κεφαλῆφιν ἔθηκε,
τὴν αὐτὸς ποίησε περικλυτὸς Ἀμφιγυήεις
ἀσκήσας παλάμῃσι, χαριζόμενος Διὶ πατρί.                                                                          580
Τῇ δ᾽ ἐνὶ δαίδαλα πολλὰ τετεύχατο, θαῦμα ἰδέσθαι,
κνώδαλ᾽, ὅσ᾽ ἤπειρος πολλὰ τρέφει ἠδὲ θάλασσα·
τῶν ὅ γε πόλλ᾽ ἐνέθηκε,—χάρις δ᾽ ἀπελάμπετο πολλή,—
θαυμάσια, ζῴοισιν ἐοικότα φωνήεσσιν.
Αὐτὰρ ἐπεὶ δὴ τεῦξε καλὸν κακὸν ἀντ᾽ ἀγαθοῖο,                                                             585
ἐξάγαγ᾽, ἔνθα περ ἄλλοι ἔσαν θεοὶ ἠδ᾽ ἄνθρωποι,
κόσμῳ ἀγαλλομένην γλαυκώπιδος ὀβριμοπάτρης.
θαῦμα δ᾽ ἔχ᾽ ἀθανάτους τε θεοὺς θνητούς τ᾽ ἀνθρώπους,
ὡς ἔιδον δόλον αἰπύν, ἀμήχανον ἀνθρώποισιν.
[ἐκ τῆς γὰρ γένος ἐστὶ γυναικῶν θηλυτεράων,]                                                                590
τῆς γὰρ ὀλώιόν ἐστι γένος καὶ φῦλα γυναικῶν,
πῆμα μέγ᾽ αἳ θνητοῖσι μετ᾽ ἀνδράσι ναιετάουσιν
οὐλομένης πενίης οὐ σύμφοροι, ἀλλὰ κόροιο.
Ὡς δ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἐν σμήνεσσι κατηρεφέεσσι μέλισσαι
κηφῆνας βόσκωσι, κακῶν ξυνήονας ἔργων·                                                                           595
αἳ μέν τε πρόπαν ἦμαρ ἐς ἠέλιον καταδύντα
ἠμάτιαι σπεύδουσι τιθεῖσί τε κηρία λευκά,
οἳ δ᾽ ἔντοσθε μένοντες ἐπηρεφέας κατὰ σίμβλους
ἀλλότριον κάματον σφετέρην ἐς γαστέρ᾽ ἀμῶνται·
ὣς δ᾽ αὔτως ἄνδρεσσι κακὸν θνητοῖσι γυναῖκας                                                                 600
Ζεὺς ὑψιβρεμέτης θῆκεν, ξυνήονας ἔργων
ἀργαλέων· ἕτερον δὲ πόρεν κακὸν ἀντ᾽ ἀγαθοῖο·
ὅς κε γάμον φεύγων καὶ μέρμερα ἔργα γυναικῶν
μὴ γῆμαι ἐθέλῃ, ὀλοὸν δ᾽ ἐπὶ γῆρας ἵκοιτο
χήτεϊ γηροκόμοιο· ὅ γ᾽ οὐ βιότου ἐπιδευὴς                                                                               605
ζώει, ἀποφθιμένου δὲ διὰ κτῆσιν δατέονται
χηρωσταί· ᾧ δ᾽ αὖτε γάμου μετὰ μοῖρα γένηται,
κεδνὴν δ᾽ ἔσχεν ἄκοιτιν ἀρηρυῖαν πραπίδεσσι,
τῷ δέ τ᾽ ἀπ᾽ αἰῶνος κακὸν ἐσθλῷ ἀντιφερίζει
ἐμμενές· ὃς δέ κε τέτμῃ ἀταρτηροῖο γενέθλης,                                                                         610
ζώει ἐνὶ στήθεσσιν ἔχων ἀλίαστον ἀνίην
θυμῷ καὶ κραδίῃ, καὶ ἀνήκεστον κακόν ἐστιν.
Ὥς οὐκ ἔστι Διὸς κλέψαι νόον οὐδὲ παρελθεῖν.
Οὐδὲ γὰρ Ἰαπετιονίδης ἀκάκητα Προμηθεὺς
τοῖό γ᾽ ὑπεξήλυξε βαρὺν χόλον, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ἀνάγκης                                                             615
καὶ πολύιδριν ἐόντα μέγας κατὰ δεσμὸς ἐρύκει.
Βριάρεῳ δ᾽ ὡς πρῶτα πατὴρ ὠδύσσατο θυμῷ
Κόττῳ τ᾽ ἠδὲ Γύῃ, δῆσεν κρατερῷ ἐνὶ δεσμῷ
ἠνορέην ὑπέροπλον ἀγώμενος ἠδὲ καὶ εἶδος
καὶ μέγεθος· κατένασσε δ᾽ ὑπὸ χθονὸς εὐρυοδείης.                                                             620
Ἔνθ᾽ οἵ γ᾽ ἄλγε᾽ ἔχοντες ὑπὸ χθονὶ ναιετάοντες
ἥατ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἐσχατιῇ, μεγάλης ἐν πείρασι γαίης,
δηθὰ μάλ᾽ ἀχνύμενοι, κραδίῃ μέγα πένθος ἔχοντες.
ἀλλά σφεας Κρονίδης τε καὶ ἀθάνατοι θεοὶ ἄλλοι,
οὓς τέκεν ἠύκομος ῾Ρείη Κρόνου ἐν φιλότητι,                                                                         625
Γαίης φραδμοσύνῃσιν ἀνήγαγον ἐς φάος αὖτις·
αὐτὴ γάρ σφιν ἅπαντα διηνεκέως κατέλεξε
σὺν κείνοις νίκην τε καὶ ἀγλαὸν εὖχος ἀρέσθαι.
δηρὸν γὰρ μάρναντο πόνον θυμαλγέ᾽ ἔχοντες
ἀντίον ἀλλήλοισι διὰ κρατερὰς ὑσμίνας,                                                                                631
Τιτῆνές τε θεοὶ καὶ ὅσοι Κρόνου ἐξεγένοντο·                                                                           630
οἳ μὲν ἀφ᾽ ὑψηλῆς Ὄθρυος Τιτῆνες ἀγαυοί,
οἳ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἀπ᾽ Οὐλύμποιο θεοί, δωτῆρες ἐάων,
οὓς τέκεν ἠύκομος ῾Ρείη Κρόνῳ εὐνηθεῖσα.
οἵ ῥα τότ᾽ ἀλλήλοισι χόλον θυμαλγέ᾽ ἔχοντες                                                                        635
συνεχέως ἐμάχοντο δέκα πλείους ἐνιαυτούς·
οὐδέ τις ἦν ἔριδος χαλεπῆς λύσις οὐδὲ τελευτὴ
οὐδετέροις, ἶσον δὲ τέλος τέτατο πτολέμοιο.
Ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε δὴ κείνοισι παρέσχεθεν ἄρμενα πάντα,
νέκταρ τ᾽ ἀμβροσίην τε, τά περ θεοὶ αὐτοὶ ἔδουσι,                                                               640
πάντων ἐν στήθεσσιν ἀέξετο θυμὸς ἀγήνωρ.
[Ὡς νέκταρ τ᾽ ἐπάσαντο καὶ ἀμβροσίην ἐρατεινήν,]
δὴ τότε τοῖς μετέειπε πατὴρ ἀνδρῶν τε θεῶν τε·
κέκλυτε μευ, Γαίης τε καὶ Οὐρανοῦ ἀγλαὰ τέκνα,
ὄφρ᾽ εἴπω, τά με θυμὸς ἐνὶ στήθεσσι κελεύει.                                                                        645
Ἤδη γὰρ μάλα δηρὸν ἐναντίοι ἀλλήλοισι
νίκης καὶ κράτεος πέρι μαρνάμεθ᾽ ἤματα πάντα
Τιτῆνές τε θεοὶ καὶ ὅσοι Κρόνου ἐκγενόμεσθα.
Ὑμεῖς δὲ μεγάλην τε βίην καὶ χεῖρας ἀάπτους
φαίνετε Τιτήνεσσιν ἐναντίοι ἐν δαῒ λυγρῇ                                                                              650
μνησάμενοι φιλότητος ἐνηέος, ὅσσα παθόντες
ἐς φάος ἂψ ἀφίκεσθε δυσηλεγέος ὑπὸ δεσμοῦ
ἡμετέρας διὰ βουλὰς ὑπὸ ζόφου ἠερόεντος.
Ὥς φάτο· τὸν δ᾽ ἐξαῦτις ἀμείβετο Κόττος ἀμύμων·
δαιμόνι᾽, οὐκ ἀδάητα πιφαύσκεαι· ἀλλὰ καὶ αὐτοὶ                                                           655
ἴδμεν, ὅ τοι περὶ μὲν πραπίδες, περὶ δ᾽ ἐστὶ νόημα,
ἀλκτὴρ δ᾽ ἀθανάτοισιν ἀρῆς γένεο κρυεροῖο.
Σῇσι δ᾽ ἐπιφροσύνῃσιν ὑπὸ ζόφου ἠερόεντος
ἄψορρον δεῦρ᾽ αὖτις ἀμειλίκτων ὑπὸ δεσμῶν
ἠλύθομεν, Κρόνου υἱὲ ἄναξ, ἀνάελπτα παθόντες.                                                               660
Τῷ καὶ νῦν ἀτενεῖ τε νόῳ καὶ ἐπίφρονι βουλῇ
ῥυσόμεθα κράτος ὑμὸν ἐν αἰνῇ δηιοτῆτι
μαρνάμενοι Τιτῆσιν ἀνὰ κρατερὰς ὑσμίνας.
Ὥς φάτ᾽· ἐπῄνεσσαν δὲ θεοί, δωτῆρες ἐάων,
μῦθον ἀκούσαντες· πολέμου δ᾽ ἐλιλαίετο θυμὸς                                                                  665
μᾶλλον ἔτ᾽ ἢ τὸ πάροιθε· μάχην δ᾽ ἀμέγαρτον ἔγειραν
πάντες, θήλειαι τε καὶ ἄρσενες, ἤματι κείνῳ,
Τιτῆνές τε θεοὶ καὶ ὅσοι Κρόνου ἐξεγένοντο,
οὕς τε Ζεὺς Ἐρέβεσφιν ὑπὸ χθονὸς ἧκε φόωσδε
δεινοί τε κρατεροί τε, βίην ὑπέροπλον ἔχοντες.                                                                      670
Τῶν ἑκατὸν μὲν χεῖρες ἀπ᾽ ὤμων ἀίσσοντο
πᾶσιν ὁμῶς, κεφαλαὶ δὲ ἑκάστῳ πεντήκοντα
ἐξ ὤμων ἐπέφυκον ἐπὶ στιβαροῖσι μέλεσσιν.
Οἳ τότε Τιτήνεσσι κατέσταθεν ἐν δαῒ λυγρῇ
πέτρας ἠλιβάτους στιβαρῇς ἐν χερσὶν ἔχοντες.                                                                      675
Τιτῆνες δ᾽ ἑτέρωθεν ἐκαρτύναντο φάλαγγας
προφρονέως, χειρῶν τε βίης θ᾽ ἅμα ἔργον ἔφαινον
ἀμφότεροι· δεινὸν δὲ περίαχε πόντος ἀπείρων,
γῆ δὲ μέγ᾽ ἐσμαράγησεν, ἐπέστενε δ᾽ οὐρανὸς εὐρὺς
σειόμενος, πεδόθεν δὲ τινάσσετο μακρὸς Ὄλυμπος                                                             680
ῥιπῇ ὕπ᾽ ἀθανάτων, ἔνοσις δ᾽ ἵκανε βαρεῖα
Τάρταρον ἠερόεντα, ποδῶν τ᾽ αἰπεῖα ἰωὴ
ἀσπέτου ἰωχμοῖο βολάων τε κρατεράων·
Ὥς ἄρ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλοις ἵεσαν βέλεα στονόεντα.
Φωνὴ δ᾽ ἀμφοτέρων ἵκετ᾽ οὐρανὸν ἀστερόεντα                                                                     685
κεκλομένων· οἳ δὲ ξύνισαν μεγάλῳ ἀλαλητῷ.
Οὐδ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἔτι Ζεὺς ἴσχεν ἑὸν μένος, ἀλλά νυ τοῦ γε
εἶθαρ μὲν μένεος πλῆντο φρένες, ἐκ δέ τε πᾶσαν
φαῖνε βίην· ἄμυδις δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἀπ᾽ οὐρανοῦ ἠδ᾽ ἀπ᾽ Ὀλύμπου
ἀστράπτων ἔστειχε συνωχαδόν· οἱ δὲ κεραυνοὶ                                                                     690
ἴκταρ ἅμα βροντῇ τε καὶ ἀστεροπῇ ποτέοντο
χειρὸς ἄπο στιβαρῆς, ἱερὴν φλόγα εἰλυφόωντες
ταρφέες· ἀμφὶ δὲ γαῖα φερέσβιος ἐσμαράγιζε
καιομένη, λάκε δ᾽ ἀμφὶ πυρὶ μεγάλ᾽ ἄσπετος ὕλη.
Ἔζεε δὲ χθὼν πᾶσα καὶ Ὠκεανοῖο ῥέεθρα                                                                               695
πόντος τ᾽ ἀτρύγετος· τοὺς δ᾽ ἄμφεπε θερμὸς ἀυτμὴ
Τιτῆνας χθονίους, φλὸξ δ᾽ αἰθέρα δῖαν ἵκανεν
ἄσπετος, ὄσσε δ᾽ ἄμερδε καὶ ἰφθίμων περ ἐόντων
αὐγὴ μαρμαίρουσα κεραυνοῦ τε στεροπῆς τε.
Καῦμα δὲ θεσπέσιον κάτεχεν Χάος· εἴσατο δ᾽ ἄντα                                                             700
ὀφθαλμοῖσιν ἰδεῖν ἠδ᾽ οὔασι ὄσσαν ἀκοῦσαι
αὔτως, ὡς εἰ Γαῖα καὶ Οὐρανὸς εὐρὺς ὕπερθε
πίλνατο· τοῖος γάρ κε μέγας ὑπὸ δοῦπος ὀρώρει
τῆς μὲν ἐρειπομένης, τοῦ δ᾽ ὑψόθεν ἐξεριπόντος·
τόσσος δοῦπος ἔγεντο θεῶν ἔριδι ξυνιόντων.                                                                          705
Σὺν δ᾽ ἄνεμοι ἔνοσίν τε κονίην τ᾽ ἐσφαράγιζον
βροντήν τε στεροπήν τε καὶ αἰθαλόεντα κεραυνόν,
κῆλα Διὸς μεγάλοιο, φέρον δ᾽ ἰαχήν τ᾽ ἐνοπήν τε
ἐς μέσον ἀμφοτέρων· ὄτοβος δ᾽ ἄπλητος ὀρώρει
σμερδαλέης ἔριδος, κάρτος δ᾽ ἀνεφαίνετο ἔργων.                                                                 710
Ἔκλίνθη δὲ μάχη· πρὶν δ᾽ ἀλλήλοις ἐπέχοντες
ἐμμενέως ἐμάχοντο διὰ κρατερὰς ὑσμίνας.
Οἳ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἐνὶ πρώτοισι μάχην δριμεῖαν ἔγειραν
Κόττος τε Βριάρεώς τε Γύης τ᾽ ἄατος πολέμοιο,
οἵ ῥα τριηκοσίας πέτρας στιβαρῶν ἀπὸ χειρῶν                                                                     715
πέμπον ἐπασσυτέρας, κατὰ δ᾽ ἐσκίασαν βελέεσσι
Τιτῆνας, καὶ τοὺς μὲν ὑπὸ χθονὸς εὐρυοδείης
πέμψαν καὶ δεσμοῖσιν ἐν ἀργαλέοισιν ἔδησαν
χερσὶν νικήσαντες ὑπερθύμους περ ἐόντας,
τόσσον ἔνερθ᾽ ὑπὸ γῆς, ὅσον οὐρανός ἐστ᾽ ἀπὸ γαίης·                                                        720
[τόσσον γάρ τ᾽ ἀπὸ γῆς ἐς Τάρταρον ἠερόεντα.]
Ἔννέα γὰρ νύκτας τε καὶ ἤματα χάλκεος ἄκμων
οὐρανόθεν κατιὼν δεκάτῃ κ᾽ ἐς γαῖαν ἵκοιτο·
ἐννέα δ᾽ αὖ νύκτας τε καὶ ἤματα χάλκεος ἄκμων
ἐκ γαίης κατιὼν δεκάτῃ κ᾽ ἐς Τάρταρον ἵκοι.                                                                         725
Τὸν πέρι χάλκεον ἕρκος ἐλήλαται· ἀμφὶ δέ μιν νὺξ
τριστοιχεὶ κέχυται περὶ δειρήν· αὐτὰρ ὕπερθεν
γῆς ῥίζαι πεφύασι καὶ ἀτρυγέτοιο θαλάσσης.
Ἔνθα θεοὶ Τιτῆνες ὑπὸ ζόφῳ ἠερόεντι
κεκρύφαται βουλῇσι Διὸς νεφεληγερέταο                                                                              730
[χώρῳ ἐν εὐρώεντι, πελώρης ἔσχατα γαίης.]
Τοῖς οὐκ ἐξιτόν ἐστι. θύρας δ᾽ ἐπέθηκε Ποσειδέων
χαλκείας, τεῖχος δὲ περοίχεται ἀμφοτέρωθεν.
Ἔνθα Γύης Κόττος τε καὶ Ὀβριάρεως μεγάθυμος
ναίουσιν, φύλακες πιστοὶ Διὸς αἰγιόχοιο.                                                                              735
Ἔνθα δὲ γῆς δνοφερῆς καὶ Ταρτάρου ἠερόεντος
πόντου τ᾽ ἀτρυγέτοιο καὶ οὐρανοῦ ἀστερόεντος
ἑξείης πάντων πηγαὶ καὶ πείρατ᾽ ἔασιν
ἀργαλέ᾽ εὐρώεντα, τά τε στυγέουσι θεοί περ,
χάσμα μέγ᾽, οὐδέ κε πάντα τελεσφόρον εἰς ἐνιαυτὸν                                                          740
οὖδας ἵκοιτ᾽, εἰ πρῶτα πυλέων ἔντοσθε γένοιτο.
[Ἀλλά κεν ἔνθα καὶ ἔνθα φέροι πρὸ θύελλα θυέλλῃ
ἀργαλέη· δεινὸν δὲ καὶ ἀθανάτοισι θεοῖσι
τοῦτο τέρας. Νυκτὸς δ᾽ ἐρεβεννῆς οἰκία δεινὰ
ἕστηκεν νεφέλῃς κεκαλυμμένα κυανέῃσιν.]                                                                          745
Τῶν πρόσθ᾽ Ἰαπετοῖο πάις ἔχει οὐρανὸν εὐρὺν
ἑστηὼς κεφαλῇ τε καὶ ἀκαμάτῃσι χέρεσσιν
ἀστεμφέως, ὅθι Νύξ τε καὶ Ἡμέρη ἆσσον ἰοῦσαι
ἀλλήλας προσέειπον, ἀμειβόμεναι μέγαν οὐδὸν
χάλκεον· ἣ μὲν ἔσω καταβήσεται, ἣ δὲ θύραζε                                                                      750
ἔρχεται, οὐδέ ποτ᾽ ἀμφοτέρας δόμος ἐντὸς ἐέργει,
ἀλλ᾽ αἰεὶ ἑτέρη γε δόμων ἔκτοσθεν ἐοῦσα
γαῖαν ἐπιστρέφεται, ἣ δ᾽ αὖ δόμου ἐντὸς ἐοῦσα
μίμνει τὴν αὐτῆς ὥρην ὁδοῦ, ἔστ᾽ ἂν ἵκηται,
ἣ μὲν ἐπιχθονίοισι φάος πολυδερκὲς ἔχουσα,                                                                        755
ἣ δ᾽ Ὕπνον μετὰ χερσί, κασίγνητον Θανάτοιο.
Νὺξ ὀλοή, νεφέλῃ κεκαλυμμένη ἠεροειδεῖ.
Ἔνθα δὲ Νυκτὸς παῖδες ἐρεμνῆς οἰκί᾽ ἔχουσιν,
Ὕπνος καὶ Θάνατος, δεινοὶ θεοί· οὐδέ ποτ᾽ αὐτοὺς
Ἠέλιος φαέθων ἐπιδέρκεται ἀκτίνεσσιν                                                                                 760
οὐρανὸν εἰς ἀνιὼν οὐδ᾽ οὐρανόθεν καταβαίνων.
Τῶν δ᾽ ἕτερος γαῖάν τε καὶ εὐρέα νῶτα θαλάσσης
ἥσυχος ἀνστρέφεται καὶ μείλιχος ἀνθρώποισι,
τοῦ δὲ σιδηρέη μὲν κραδίη, χάλκεον δέ οἱ ἦτορ
νηλεὲς ἐν στήθεσσιν· ἔχει δ᾽ ὃν πρῶτα λάβῃσιν                                                                     765
ἀνθρώπων· ἐχθρὸς δὲ καὶ ἀθανάτοισι θεοῖσιν.
Ἔνθα θεοῦ χθονίου πρόσθεν δόμοι ἠχήεντες
[ἰφθίμου τ᾽ Ἀίδεω καὶ ἐπαινῆς Περσεφονείης]
ἑστᾶσιν, δεινὸς δὲ κύων προπάροιθε φυλάσσει
νηλειής, τέχνην δὲ κακὴν ἔχει· ἐς μὲν ἰόντας                                                                           770
σαίνει ὁμῶς οὐρῇ τε καὶ οὔασιν ἀμφοτέροισιν,
ἐξελθεῖν δ᾽ οὐκ αὖτις ἐᾷ πάλιν, ἀλλὰ δοκεύων
ἐσθίει, ὅν κε λάβῃσι πυλέων ἔκτοσθεν ἰόντα.
[ἰφθίμου τ᾽ Ἀίδεω καὶ ἐπαινῆς Περσεφονείης. ]
Ἔνθα δὲ ναιετάει στυγερὴ θεὸς ἀθανάτοισι,                                                                     775
δεινὴ Στύξ, θυγάτηρ ἀψορρόου Ὠκεανοῖο
πρεσβυτάτη· νόσφιν δὲ θεῶν κλυτὰ δώματα ναίει
μακρῇσιν πέτρῃσι κατηρεφέ᾽· ἀμφὶ δὲ πάντη
κίοσιν ἀργυρέοισι πρὸς οὐρανὸν ἐστήρικται.
Παῦρα δὲ Θαύμαντος θυγάτηρ πόδας ὠκέα Ἶρις                                                                 780
ἀγγελίην πωλεῖται ἐπ᾽ εὐρέα νῶτα θαλάσσης.
Ὁππότ᾽ ἔρις καὶ νεῖκος ἐν ἀθανάτοισιν ὄρηται
καί ῥ᾽ ὅς τις ψεύδηται Ὀλύμπια δώματ᾽ ἐχόντων,
Ζεὺς δέ τε Ἶριν ἔπεμψε θεῶν μέγαν ὅρκον ἐνεῖκαι
τηλόθεν ἐν χρυσέῃ προχόῳ πολυώνυμον ὕδωρ                                                                      785
ψυχρόν, ὅτ᾽ ἐκ πέτρης καταλείβεται ἠλιβάτοιο
ὑψηλῆς· πολλὸν δὲ ὑπὸ χθονὸς εὐρυοδείης
ἐξ ἱεροῦ ποταμοῖο ῥέει διὰ νύκτα μέλαιναν
Ὠκεανοῖο κέρας· δεκάτη δ᾽ ἐπὶ μοῖρα δέδασται·
ἐννέα μὲν περὶ γῆν τε καὶ εὐρέα νῶτα θαλάσσης                                                                 790
δίνῃς ἀργυρέῃς εἱλιγμένος εἰς ἅλα πίπτει,
ἣ δὲ μί᾽ ἐκ πέτρης προρέει μέγα πῆμα θεοῖσιν.
Ὅς κεν τὴν ἐπίορκον ἀπολλείψας ἐπομόσσῃ
ἀθανάτων, οἳ ἔχουσι κάρη νιφόεντος Ὀλύμπου,
κεῖται νήυτμος τετελεσμένον εἰς ἐνιαυτόν·                                                                              795
οὐδέ ποτ᾽ ἀμβροσίης καὶ νέκταρος ἔρχεται ἆσσον
βρώσιος, ἀλλά τε κεῖται ἀνάπνευστος καὶ ἄναυδος
στρωτοῖς ἐν λεχέεσσι, κακὸν δέ ἑ κῶμα καλύπτει.
Αὐτὰρ ἐπεὶ νοῦσον τελέσῃ μέγαν εἰς ἐνιαυτόν,
ἄλλος γ᾽ ἐξ ἄλλου δέχεται χαλεπώτερος ἄεθλος.                                                                 800
Εἰνάετες δὲ θεῶν ἀπαμείρεται αἰὲν ἐόντων,
οὐδέ ποτ᾽ ἐς βουλὴν ἐπιμίσγεται οὐδ᾽ ἐπὶ δαῖτας
ἐννέα πάντα ἔτεα· δεκάτῳ δ᾽ ἐπιμίσγεται αὖτις
εἴρας ἐς ἀθανάτων, οἳ Ὀλύμπια δώματ᾽ ἔχουσιν.
Τοῖον ἄρ᾽ ὅρκον ἔθεντο θεοὶ Στυγὸς ἄφθιτον ὕδωρ                                                             805
ὠγύγιον, τὸ δ᾽ ἵησι καταστυφέλου διὰ χώρου.
[Ἔνθα δὲ γῆς δνοφερῆς καὶ Ταρτάρου ἠερόεντος
πόντου τ᾽ ἀτρυγέτοιο καὶ οὐρανοῦ ἀστερόεντος
ἑξείης πάντων πηγαὶ καὶ πείρατ᾽ ἔασιν
ἀργαλέ᾽ εὐρώεντα, τά τε στυγέουσι θεοί περ.                                                                        810
Ἔνθα δὲ μαρμάρεαί τε πύλαι καὶ χάλκεος οὐδὸς
ἀστεμφής, ῥίζῃσι διηνεκέεσσιν ἀρηρώς,
αὐτοφυής· πρόσθεν δὲ θεῶν ἔκτοσθεν ἁπάντων
Τιτῆνες ναίουσι, πέρην Χάεος ζοφεροῖο.
Αὐτὰρ ἐρισμαράγοιο Διὸς κλειτοὶ ἐπίκουροι                                                                         815
δώματα ναιετάουσιν ἐπ᾽ Ὠκεανοῖο θεμέθλοις,
Κόττος τ᾽ ἠδὲ Γύης· Βριάρεών γε μὲν ἠὺν ἐόντα
γαμβρὸν ἑὸν ποίησε βαρύκτυπος Ἐννοσίγαιος,
δῶκε δὲ Κυμοπόλειαν ὀπυίειν, θυγατέρα ἥν.]
Αὐτὰρ ἐπεὶ Τιτῆνας ἀπ᾽ οὐρανοῦ ἐξέλασεν Ζεύς,                                                             820
ὁπλότατον τέκε παῖδα Τυφωέα Γαῖα πελώρη
Ταρτάρου ἐν φιλότητι διὰ χρυσέην Ἀφροδίτην·
οὗ χεῖρες μὲν ἔασιν ἐπ᾽ ἰσχύι, ἔργματ᾽ ἔχουσαι,
καὶ πόδες ἀκάματοι κρατεροῦ θεοῦ· ἐκ δέ οἱ ὤμων
ἣν ἑκατὸν κεφαλαὶ ὄφιος, δεινοῖο δράκοντος,                                                                       825
γλώσσῃσιν δνοφερῇσι λελιχμότες, ἐκ δέ οἱ ὄσσων
θεσπεσίῃς κεφαλῇσιν ὑπ᾽ ὀφρύσι πῦρ ἀμάρυσσεν·
[πασέων δ᾽ ἐκ κεφαλέων πῦρ καίετο δερκομένοιο·]
φωναὶ δ᾽ ἐν πάσῃσιν ἔσαν δεινῇς κεφαλῇσι
παντοίην ὄπ᾽ ἰεῖσαι ἀθέσφατον· ἄλλοτε μὲν γὰρ                                                                 830
φθέγγονθ᾽ ὥστε θεοῖσι συνιέμεν, ἄλλοτε δ᾽ αὖτε
ταύρου ἐριβρύχεω, μένος ἀσχέτου, ὄσσαν ἀγαύρου,
ἄλλοτε δ᾽ αὖτε λέοντος ἀναιδέα θυμὸν ἔχοντος,
ἄλλοτε δ᾽ αὖ σκυλάκεσσιν ἐοικότα, θαύματ᾽ ἀκοῦσαι,
ἄλλοτε δ᾽ αὖ ῥοίζεσχ᾽, ὑπὸ δ᾽ ἤχεεν οὔρεα μακρά.                                                                835
Καί νύ κεν ἔπλετο ἔργον ἀμήχανον ἤματι κείνῳ
καί κεν ὅ γε θνητοῖσι καὶ ἀθανάτοισιν ἄναξεν,
εἰ μὴ ἄρ᾽ ὀξὺ νόησε πατὴρ ἀνδρῶν τε θεῶν τε.
Σκληρὸν δ᾽ ἐβρόντησε καὶ ὄβριμον, ἀμφὶ δὲ γαῖα
σμερδαλέον κονάβησε καὶ οὐρανὸς εὐρὺς ὕπερθε                                                               840
πόντος τ᾽ Ὠκεανοῦ τε ῥοαὶ καὶ Τάρταρα γαίης.
Ποσσὶ δ᾽ ὕπ᾽ ἀθανάτοισι μέγας πελεμίζετ᾽ Ὄλυμπος
ὀρνυμένοιο ἄνακτος· ἐπεστενάχιζε δὲ γαῖα.
Καῦμα δ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ἀμφοτέρων κάτεχεν ἰοειδέα πόντον
βροντῆς τε στεροπῆς τε, πυρός τ᾽ ἀπὸ τοῖο πελώρου,                                                            845
[πρηστήρων ἀνέμων τε κεραυνοῦ τε φλεγέθοντος.]
ἔζεε δὲ χθὼν πᾶσα καὶ οὐρανὸς ἠδὲ θάλασσα·
θυῖε δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἀμφ᾽ ἀκτὰς περί τ᾽ ἀμφί τε κύματα μακρὰ
ῥιπῇ ὕπ᾽ ἀθανάτων, ἔνοσις δ᾽ ἄσβεστος ὀρώρει·
τρέε δ᾽ Ἀίδης, ἐνέροισι καταφθιμένοισιν ἀνάσσων,                                                            850
Τιτῆνές θ᾽ ὑποταρτάριοι, Κρόνον ἀμφὶς ἐόντες,
[ἀσβέστου κελάδοιο καὶ αἰνῆς δηιοτῆτος.]
Ζεὺς δ᾽ ἐπεὶ οὖν κόρθυνεν ἑὸν μένος, εἵλετο δ᾽ ὅπλα,
βροντήν τε στεροπήν τε καὶ αἰθαλόεντα κεραυνόν,
πλῆξεν ἀπ᾽ Οὐλύμποιο ἐπάλμενος· ἀμφὶ δὲ πάσας                                                             855
ἔπρεσε θεσπεσίας κεφαλὰς δεινοῖο πελώρου.
Αὐτὰρ ἐπεὶ δή μιν δάμασεν πληγῇσιν ἱμάσσας,
ἤριπε γυιωθείς, στενάχιζε δὲ γαῖα πελώρη.
Φλὸξ δὲ κεραυνωθέντος ἀπέσσυτο τοῖο ἄνακτος
οὔρεος ἐν βήσσῃσιν Ἀίτνης παιπαλοέσσῃς,                                                                            860
πληγέντος. Πολλὴ δὲ πελώρη καίετο γαῖα
ἀτμῇ θεσπεσίῃ καὶ ἐτήκετο κασσίτερος ὣς
τέχνῃ ὕπ᾽ αἰζηῶν ἐν ἐυτρήτοις χοάνοισι
θαλφθείς, ἠὲ σίδηρος, ὅ περ κρατερώτατός ἐστιν,
οὔρεος ἐν βήσσῃσι δαμαζόμενος πυρὶ κηλέῳ                                                                         865
τήκεται ἐν χθονὶ δίῃ ὑφ᾽ Ἡφαιστου παλάμῃσιν.
Ὥς ἄρα τήκετο γαῖα σέλαι πυρὸς αἰθομένοιο.
Ῥῖψε δέ μιν θυμῷ ἀκαχὼν ἐς Τάρταρον εὐρύν.
Ἐκ δὲ Τυφωέος ἔστ᾽ ἀνέμων μένος ὑγρὸν ἀέντων,
νόσφι Νότου Βορέωτε καὶ ἀργέστεω Ζεφύροιο·                                                                     870
οἵ γε μὲν ἐκ θεόφιν γενεή, θνητοῖς μέγ᾽ ὄνειαρ·
Οἱ δ᾽ ἄλλοι μαψαῦραι ἐπιπνείουσι θάλασσαν·
αἳ δή τοι πίπτουσαι ἐς ἠεροειδέα πόντον,
πῆμα μέγα θνητοῖσι, κακῇ θυίουσιν ἀέλλῃ·
ἄλλοτε δ᾽ ἄλλαι ἄεισι διασκιδνᾶσί τε νῆας                                                                           875
ναύτας τε φθείρουσι· κακοῦ δ᾽ οὐ γίγνεται ἀλκὴ
ἀνδράσιν, οἳ κείνῃσι συνάντωνται κατὰ πόντον·
αἳ δ᾽ αὖ καὶ κατὰ γαῖαν ἀπείριτον ἀνθεμόεσσαν
ἔργ᾽ ἐρατὰ φθείρουσι χαμαιγενέων ἀνθρώπων
πιμπλεῖσαι κόνιός τε καὶ ἀργαλέου κολοσυρτοῦ.                                                                880
Αὐτὰρ ἐπεί ῥα πόνον μάκαρες θεοὶ ἐξετέλεσσαν,
Τιτήνεσσι δὲ τιμάων κρίναντο βίηφι,
δή ῥα τότ᾽ ὤτρυνον βασιλευέμεν ἠδὲ ἀνάσσειν
Γαίης φραδμοσύνῃσιν Ὀλύμπιον εὐρύοπα Ζῆν
ἀθανάτων· ὃ δὲ τοῖσιν ἑὰς διεδάσσατο τιμάς.                                                                        885
Ζεὺς δὲ θεῶν βασιλεὺς πρώτην ἄλοχον θέτο Μῆτιν
πλεῖστα τε ἰδυῖαν ἰδὲ θνητῶν ἀνθρώπων.
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε δὴ ἄρ᾽ ἔμελλε θεὰν γλαυκῶπιν Ἀθήνην
τέξεσθαι, τότ᾽ ἔπειτα δόλῳ φρένας ἐξαπατήσας
αἱμυλίοισι λόγοισιν ἑὴν ἐσκάτθετο νηδὺν                                                                              890
Γαίης φραδμοσύνῃσι καὶ Οὐρανοῦ ἀστερόεντος.
τὼς γάρ οἱ φρασάτην, ἵνα μὴ βασιληίδα τιμὴν
ἄλλος ἔχοι Διὸς ἀντὶ θεῶν αἰειγενετάων.
Ἐκ γὰρ τῆς εἵμαρτο περίφρονα τέκνα γενέσθαι·
πρώτην μὲν κούρην γλαυκώπιδα Τριτογένειαν                                                                    895
ἶσον ἔχουσαν πατρὶ μένος καὶ ἐπίφρονα βουλήν.
αὐτὰρ ἔπειτ᾽ ἄρα παῖδα θεῶν βασιλῆα καὶ ἀνδρῶν
ἤμελλεν τέξεσθαι, ὑπέρβιον ἦτορ ἔχοντα·
ἀλλ᾽ ἄρα μιν Ζεὺς πρόσθεν ἑὴν ἐσκάτθετο νηδύν,
ὡς δή οἱ φράσσαιτο θεὰ ἀγαθόν τε κακόν τε.                                                                        900
Δεύτερον ἠγάγετο λιπαρὴν Θέμιν, ἣ τέκεν Ὥρας,
Εὐνουμίην τε Δίκην τε καὶ Εἰρήνην τεθαλυῖαν,
αἳ ἔργ᾽ ὠρεύουσι καταθνητοῖσι βροτοῖσι,
Μοίρας θ᾽, ᾗ πλείστην τιμὴν πόρε μητίετα Ζεύς,
Κλωθώ τε Λάχεσίν τε καὶ Ἄτροπον, αἵτε διδοῦσι                                                                  905
θνητοῖς ἀνθρώποισιν ἔχειν ἀγαθόν τε κακόν τε.
Τρεῖς δέ οἱ Εὐρυνόμη Χάριτας τέκε καλλιπαρῄους,
Ὠκεανοῦ κούρη, πολυήρατον εἶδος ἔχουσα,
Ἀγλαΐην τε καὶ Εὐφροσύνην Θαλίην τ᾽ ἐρατεινήν·
[τῶν καὶ ἀπὸ βλεφάρων ἔρος εἴβετο δερκομενάων                                                              910
λυσιμελής· καλὸν δέ θ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ὀφρύσι δερκιόωνται.]
Αὐτὰρ ὁ Δήμητρος πολυφόρβης ἐς λέχος ἦλθεν,
ἣ τέκε Περσεφόνην λευκώλενον, ἣν Ἀιδωνεὺς
ἥρπασε ἧς παρὰ μητρός· ἔδωκε δὲ μητίετα Ζεύς.
Μνημοσύνης δ᾽ ἐξαῦτις ἐράσσατο καλλικόμοιο,                                                              915
ἐξ ἧς οἱ Μοῦσαι χρυσάμπυκες ἐξεγένοντο
ἐννέα, τῇσιν ἅδον θαλίαι καὶ τέρψις ἀοιδῆς.
Λητὼ δ᾽ Ἀπόλλωνα καὶ Ἄρτεμιν ἰοχέαιραν,
ἱμερόεντα γόνον περὶ πάντων Οὐρανιώνων,
γείνατο, αἰγιόχοιο Διὸς φιλότητι μιγεῖσα.                                                                              920
Λοισθοτάτην δ᾽ Ἥρην θαλερὴν ποιήσατ᾽ ἄκοιτιν·
ἣ δ᾽ Ἥβην καὶ Ἄρηα καὶ Εἰλείθυιαν ἔτικτε
μιχθεῖσ᾽ ἐν φιλότητι θεῶν βασιλῆι καὶ ἀνδρῶν.
Αὐτὸς δ᾽ ἐκ κεφαλῆς γλαυκώπιδα Τριτογένειαν
δεινὴν ἐγρεκύδοιμον ἀγέστρατον ἀτρυτώνην                                                                        925
πότνιαν, ᾗ κέλαδοί τε ἅδον πόλεμοί τε μάχαι τε,
Ἥρη δ᾽ Ἥφαιστον κλυτὸν οὐ φιλότητι μιγεῖσα                                                                    925
γείνατο, καὶ ζαμένησε καὶ ἤρισε ᾧ παρακοίτῃ,
ἐκ πάντων τέχνῃσι κεκασμένον Οὐρανιώνων.
(σημείωση)
Ἐκ δ᾽ Ἀμφιτρίτης καὶ ἐρικτύπου Ἐννοσιγαίου                                                                      930
Τρίτων εὐρυβίης γένετο μέγας, ὅστε θαλάσσης
πυθμέν᾽ ἔχων παρὰ μητρὶ φίλῃ καὶ πατρὶ ἄνακτι
ναίει χρύσεα δῶ, δεινὸς θεός. αὐτὰρ Ἄρηι
ῥινοτόρῳ Κυθέρεια Φόβον καὶ Δεῖμον ἔτικτε
δεινούς, οἵτ᾽ ἀνδρῶν πυκινὰς κλονέουσι φάλαγγας                                                          935
ἐν πολέμῳ κρυόεντι σὺν Ἄρηι πτολιπόρθῳ,
Ἁρμονίην θ᾽, ἣν Κάδμος ὑπέρθυμος θέτ᾽ ἄκοιτιν.
Ζηνὶ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ Ἀτλαντὶς Μαίη τέκε κύδιμον Ἑρμῆν,
κήρυκ᾽ ἀθανάτων, ἱερὸν λέχος εἰσαναβᾶσα.
Καδμείη δ᾽ ἄρα οἱ Σεμέλη τέκε φαίδιμον υἱὸν                                                                   940
μιχθεῖσ᾽ ἐν φιλότητι, Διώνυσον πολυγηθέα,
ἀθάνατον θνητή· νῦν δ᾽ ἀμφότεροι θεοί εἰσιν.
Ἀλκμήνη δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἔτικτε βίην Ἡρακληείην
μιχθεῖσ᾽ ἐν φιλότητι Διὸς νεφεληγερέταο.
Ἀγλαΐην δ᾽ Ἥφαιστος, ἀγακλυτὸς ἀμφιγυήεις,                                                               945
ὁπλοτάτην Χαρίτων θαλερὴν ποιήσατ᾽ ἄκοιτιν.
Χρυσοκόμης δὲ Διώνυσος ξανθὴν Ἀριάδνην,
κούρην Μίνωος, θαλερὴν ποιήσατ᾽ ἄκοιτιν.
Τὴν δέ οἱ ἀθάνατον καὶ ἀγήρω θῆκε Κρονίων.
Ἥβην δ᾽ Ἀλκμήνης καλλισφύρου ἄλκιμος υἱός,                                                              950
ἲς Ἡρακλῆος, τελέσας στονόεντας ἀέθλους,
παῖδα Διὸς μεγάλοιο καὶ Ἥρης χρυσοπεδίλου,
αἰδοίην θέτ᾽ ἄκοιτιν ἐν Οὐλύμπῳ νιφόεντι,
ὄλβιος, ὃς μέγα ἔργον ἐν ἀθανάτοισιν ἀνύσσας
ναίει ἀπήμαντος καὶ ἀγήραος ἤματα πάντα.                                                                        955
Ἠελίῳ δ᾽ ἀκάμαντι τέκεν κλυτὸς Ὠκεανίνη
Περσηὶς Κίρκην τε καὶ Αἰήτην βασιλῆα.
Αἰήτης δ᾽ υἱὸς φαεσιμβρότου Ἠελίοιο
κούρην Ὠκεανοῖο τελήεντος ποταμοῖο
γῆμε θεῶν βουλῇσι, Ἰδυῖαν καλλιπάρῃον.                                                                             960
ἣ δέ οἱ Μήδειαν ἐύσφυρον ἐν φιλότητι
γείναθ᾽ ὑποδμηθεῖσα διὰ χρυσέην Ἀφροδίτην.
Ἡμεῖς μὲν νῦν χαίρετ᾽, Ὀλύμπια δώματ᾽ ἔχοντες,
νῆσοί τ᾽ ἤπειροί τε καὶ ἁλμυρὸς ἔνδοθι πόντος.
Νῦν δὲ θεάων φῦλον ἀείσατε, ἡδυέπειαι                                                                                965
Μοῦσαι Ὀλυμπιάδες, κοῦραι Διὸς αἰγιόχοιο,
ὅσσαι δὴ θνητοῖσι παρ᾽ ἀνδράσιν εὐνηθεῖσαι
ἀθάναται γείναντο θεοῖς ἐπιείκελα τέκνα.
Δημήτηρ μὲν Πλοῦτον ἐγείνατο, δῖα θεάων,
Ἰασίων᾽ ἥρωι μιγεῖσ᾽ ἐρατῇ φιλότητι                                                                                        970
νειῷ ἔνι τριπόλῳ, Κρήτης ἐν πίονι δήμῳ,
ἐσθλόν, ὃς εἶσ᾽ ἐπὶ γῆν τε καὶ εὐρέα νῶτα θαλάσσης
πάντη· τῷ δὲ τυχόντι καὶ οὗ κ᾽ ἐς χεῖρας ἵκηται,
τὸν δ᾽ ἀφνειὸν ἔθηκε, πολὺν δέ οἱ ὤπασεν ὄλβον.
Κάδμῳ δ᾽ Ἁρμονίη, θυγάτηρ χρυσέης Ἀφροδιτης,                                                            975
Ἰνὼ καὶ Σεμέλην καὶ Ἀγαυὴν καλλιπάρῃον
Αὐτονόην θ᾽, ἣν γῆμεν Ἀρισταῖος βαθυχαίτης,
γείνατο καὶ Πολύδωρον ἐυστεφάνῳ ἐνὶ Θήβῃ.
[Κούρη δ᾽ Ὠκεανοῦ, Χρυσάορι καρτεροθύμῳ
μιχθεῖσ᾽ ἐν φιλότητι πολυχρύσου Ἀφροδίτης,                                                                       980
Καλλιρόη τέκε παῖδα βροτῶν κάρτιστον ἁπάντων,
Γηρυονέα, τὸν κτεῖνε βίη Ἡρακληείη
βοῶν ἕνεκ᾽ εἰλιπόδων ἀμφιρρύτῳ εἰν Ἐρυθείῃ.]
Τιθωνῷ δ᾽ Ἠὼς τέκε Μέμνονα χαλκοκορυστήν,
Αἰθιόπων βασιλῆα, καὶ Ἠμαθίωνα ἄνακτα.                                                                        985
Αὐτὰρ ὑπαὶ Κεφάλῳ φιτύσατο φαίδιμον υἱόν,
ἴφθιμον Φαέθοντα, θεοῖς ἐπιείκελον ἄνδρα.
Τόν ῥα νέον τέρεν ἄνθος ἔχοντ᾽ ἐρικυδέος ἥβης
παῖδ᾽ ἀταλὰ φρονέοντα φιλομμειδὴς Ἀφροδίτη
ὦρτ᾽ ἀναρεψαμένη, καί μιν ζαθέοις ἐνὶ νηοῖς                                                                        990
νηοπόλον νύχιον ποιήσατο, δαίμονα δῖον.
Κούρην δ᾽ Αἰήταο διοτρεφέος βασιλῆος
Αἰσονίδης βουλῇσι θεῶν αἰειγενετάων
ἦγε παρ᾽ Αἰήτεω, τελέσας στονόεντας ἀέθλους,
τοὺς πολλοὺς ἐπέτελλε μέγας βασιλεὺς ὑπερήνωρ,                                                            995
ὑβριστὴς Πελίης καὶ ἀτάσθαλος, ὀβριμοεργός.
τοὺς τελέσας Ἰαωλκὸν ἀφίκετο, πολλὰ μογήσας,
ὠκείης ἐπὶ νηὸς ἄγων ἑλικώπιδα κούρην
Αἰσονίδης, καί μιν θαλερὴν ποιήσατ᾽ ἄκοιτιν.
Καί ῥ᾽ ἥ γε δμηθεῖσ᾽ ὑπ᾽ Ἰήσονι, ποιμένι λαῶν,                                                                     1000
Μήδειον τέκε παῖδα, τὸν οὔρεσιν ἔτρεφε Χείρων
Φιλυρίδης· μεγάλου δὲ Διὸς νόος ἐξετελεῖτο.
Αὐτὰρ Νηρῆος κοῦραι, ἁλίοιο γέροντος,
ἦ τοι μὲν Φῶκον Ψαμάθη τέκε δῖα θεάων
Αἰακοῦ ἐν φιλότητι διὰ χρυσέην Ἀφροδίτην,                                                                         1005
Πηλέι δὲ δμηθεῖσα θεὰ Θέτις ἀργυρόπεζα
γείνατ᾽ Ἀχιλλῆα ῥηξήνορα θυμολέοντα.
Αἰνείαν δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἔτικτεν ἐυστέφανος Κυθέρεια
Ἀγχίσῃ ἥρωι μιγεῖσ᾽ ἐρατῇ φιλότητι
Ἴδης ἐν κορυφῇσι πολυπτύχου ὑληέσσης.                                                                               1010
Κίρκη δ᾽, Ἠελίου θυγάτηρ Ὑπεριονίδαο,
γείνατ᾽ Ὀδυσσῆος ταλασίφρονος ἐν φιλότητι
Ἄγριον ἠδὲ Λατῖνον ἀμύμονά τε κρατερόν τε·
[Τηλέγονον δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἔτικτε διὰ χρυσέην Ἀφροδίτην. ]
οἳ δή τοι μάλα τῆλε μυχῷ νήσων ἱεράων                                                                                  1015
πᾶσιν Τυρσηνοῖσιν ἀγακλειτοῖσιν ἄνασσον.
Ναυσίθοον δ᾽ Ὀδυσῆι Καλυψὼ δῖα θεάων
γείνατο Ναυσίνοόν τε μιγεῖσ᾽ ἐρατῇ φιλότητι.
Αὗται μὲν θνητοῖσι παρ᾽ ἀνδράσιν εὐνηθεῖσαι
ἀθάναται γείναντο θεοῖς ἐπιείκελα τέκνα.                                                                            1020
Νῦν δὲ γυναικῶν φῦλον ἀείσατε, ἡδυέπειαι
Μοῦσαι Ὀλυμπιάδες, κοῦραι Διὸς αἰγιόχοιο.
------------
Βάσει τῶν:
Rzach,
Hesiodi Carmina,
Lps 1913, [BT] minor
P. Mazon,
Hesiode,
Collection des Universites de France, 1928
δὲς π.χ. Π. Λεκατσᾶς,
Ἡσίοδος
, Ἰ. Ζαχαρόπουλος, Ἀθήνα 1941
------------
Σημείωση
Σὲ ἄλλες ἐκδόσεις περιλαμβάνονται ἐπίσης οἱ στίχοι:
<Ἥρη δὲ ζαμένησε καὶ ἤρισε ᾧ παρακοίτῃ.                                                                            929a
ἐκ ταύτης δ᾽ ἔριδος ἣ μὲν τέκε φαίδιμον υἱὸν                                                                          929b
Ἥφαιστον, φιλότητος ἄτερ Διὸς αἰγιόχοιο,                                                                            929c
ἐκ πάντων παλάμῃσι κεκασμένον Οὐρανιώνων·                                                                  929d
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ Ὠκεανοῦ καὶ Τηθύος ἠυκόμοιο                                                                              929e
κούρῃ νόσφ᾽ Ἥρης παρελέξατο καλλιπαρήῳ,                                                                       929f
...
ἐξαπαφὼν Μῆτιν καίπερ πολυδήνε᾽ ἐοῦσαν.                                                                         929g
συμμάρψας δ᾽ ὅ γε χερσὶν ἑὴν ἐγκάτθετο νηδὺν                                                                    929h
δείσας, μὴ τέξῃ κρατερώτερον ἄλλο κεραυνοῦ.                                                                     929i
τοὔνεκά μιν Κρονίδης ὑψίζυγος αἰθέρι ναίων                                                                       929j
κάππιεν ἐξαπίνης· ἣ δ᾽ αὐτίκα Παλλάδ᾽ Ἀθήνην                                                                929k
κύσατο· τὴν μὲν ἔτικτε πατὴρ ἀνδρῶν τε θεῶν τε                                                                  929l
πὰρ κορυφὴν Τρίτωνος ἐπ᾽ ὄχθῃσιν ποταμοῖο.                                                                      929m
Μῆτις δ᾽ αὖτε Ζηνὸς ὑπὸ σπλάγχνοις λελαθυῖα                                                                  929n
ἧστο, Ἀθηναίης μήτηρ, τέκταινα δικαίων                                                                               929o
πλεῖστα θεῶν τε ἰδυῖα καταθνητῶν τ᾽ ἀνθρώπων,                                                             929p
ἔνθα θεὰ παρέδεκτο ὅθεν παλάμαις περὶ πάντων                                                              929q
ἀθανάτων ἐκέκασθ᾽ οἳ Ὀλύμπια δώματ᾽ ἔχουσιν,                                                              929r
[αἰγίδα ποιήσασα φοβέστρατον ἔντος Ἀθήνης·]                                        
