=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
MOSES RECEIVED THE TORAH AT SINAI. Rav explains “at Sinai” as really meaning “from the one who was revealed at Sinai,” i.e., G-d. And when G-d revealed Himself there, Moses received the Torah, down to its particulars and subtleties, and he did not bring forth any new laws himself, as per the Sifri that Rashi quotes in his Torah commentary to parashat Behar (Leviticus 25:1). To make this point, the mishna says “at Sinai.” This is not without purpose, as it points to the truth of the religion. “It is unique unto its mother”—that being the nation of Israel, who received it, “and it is the choicest of the one who birthed it”—the students, who are children of G-d.3Based on Song of Songs, 6:9. Moses received everything, even the novel interpretations of a seasoned scholar, at Sinai, as per the verse (Deuteronomy 9:10), “And G-d gave me the two stone tablets, inscribed by the finger of the Lord, and (what was written) upon them was as all the things God had said to you on the mountain out of the fire on the day of assembly,” which the Sages expounded in Megillah 19b as follows: This teaches that G-d showed Moses even the most subtle points of the Torah [Heb. dikdukei Torah] and of the Sofrim [Heb. dikdukei Sofrim].I explain in my introduction to the Mishna that the dikdukei Sofrim were indeed only “shown” to Moshe.4And not “given” or “taught” to him, which TYT understands to mean that Moses did not acquire that knowledge the same way he acquired the main body of the Torah but was given some kind of lesser familiarity with it. As such, the word “received” here must refer only to the greater part of the material. In the introduction to his commentary on the Torah, Ramban similarly explains the word “created” in the phrase “fifty levels of understanding were created in the word” as referring to most but not all of those levels, as the fiftieth was not created.
AND TRANSMITTED IT TO JOSHUA. All that he received, he transmitted to Joshua. But it cannot be said that G-d transmitted the Torah in its entirety to Moses, because not the entire Torah that G-d possessed was transmitted to him, as the fiftieth gate was not transmitted to him,5Transmission here is understood to mean giving all that one has. as the Sages expounded (Rosh HaShanah 21b) on the verse (Psalms 8:6) “And you have made him only slightly less than the Lord.” Therefore, in speaking of Moses the mishnah says that he “received” it, i.e. whatever he could receive, he received at Sinai. Thus do the commentaries explain it.
AND THE PROPHETS TRANSMITTED IT TO THE MEN OF THE GREAT ASSEMBLY. This is to point out that although not all the members of the Great Assembly were prophets, the entire Torah was transmitted to them as it was transmitted to their predecessors. From hereon, however, the generations waned and the entire Torah could not be transmitted to them; rather, each one received as much as he was able. Even so, what Torah he did acquire was part of the tradition, having passed sage from sage and going back to Moses at Sinai.
THE GREAT ASSEMBLY. Rav writes that they were called this because they “returned the crown to its former glory… Jeremiah and Daniel came, and did not say ‘the mighty and awesome one’ (Yoma 69b).” Jeremiah said, “The great and mighty one, whose name is Lord of Hosts (Jeremiah 32:18)”, but did not say “awesome”. Daniel said, “The great and awesome one (Daniel 9:4 ),” but did not say “mighty.”
THEY SAID THREE THINGS. Rav writes that of their many sayings, these three were the ones touching on the continuity of Torah. Later in Avot, 2:10, where the mishna also says “they said three things,” Rav offers as an alternate explanation that these were the dicta they constantly emphasized, as he writes on Avot 1:2.
AND YOU SHOULD TRAIN [lit. stand them up] MANY STUDENTS. They used the word ha`amidu, whose root `amad means “to stand,” because from the time of Moses until the time of Rabban Gamliel the students would stand during their studies (Megillah 21a) [as Rav writes on Sotah 9:16], while the master would sit on a chair—so Midrash Shmuel, in the name of R. Yosef ibn Nahamias. While this is a good derivation of the term ha`amidu, it does not convey the thrust of the mishna, which is not that the students should stand or sit, but that they should study. So why doesn’t the mishna, in accordance with its primary intent, simply use the verb “teach”?It seems that the mishna uses this verb, ha`amidu, to emphasize that one ought to stand them up on their feet to the point that they don’t falter, i.e. to stand them on their feet in truly understanding Torah. This is called “standing” and “enduring” [kiyum, related to Heb. kam, “arose”], just as the Rabbinic expression says of a lie that it “has no legs on which to stand,” and as the Poet says, “My feet had nearly faltered” (Psalms, 73:2). And it is because the mishna dictated that one train many students that it had to use ha`amidu, to emphasize that although one ought to train many students, their studies should still be such that they should stand upon their own feet and reach truth in their learning. Anything else cannot properly be called ha`amadah, training a student and standing him upon his feet; such students rather “lie in slumber” (Isaiah 56:10), in the sleep of foolishness.The upshot of all this is that we do not fulfill this dictum unless we teach truth and righteousness and nothing else. Cf. my comments on mishna 6.
