=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
בשלשה מקומות הכהנים שומרים בבית המקדש – because of the honor, and it is greatness to the Temple that it should not be without guards/watchmen, and three places we derive as it is written (Numbers 3:38): “Those who were to camp before the Tabernacle, in front, before the Tent of Meeting, on the east – were Moses and Aaron and his sons, attending to the duties of the sanctuary, as a duty on behalf of the Israelites...],” those who guard from one watch to another, which is a hint to three divisions of duty for priests [and Levites] in three places, but just as we find in the Tabernacle that the Kohanim, Aaron and his sons were guarding in it in three places, even so too in the Temple.
בית אבטינס ובית הניצוץ היו עליות – [According to the Jerusalem Talmud, Tractate Yoma, Chapter 1, Halakhah 5, the chamber of the House of Avtinas (see also Tractate Shekalim, Chapter 5, Mishnah 1 and Tractate Yoma, Chapter 1, Mishnah 5 concerning facts about this clan) was in the southern part of the Temple courtyard by the side of the Water Gate – which was the gate where they would enter on the holiday of Sukkot with a flask of water that was drawn from the Shiloah spring fo the libations on the altar, but according to the Talmud, Tractate Yoma 19a, there were doubts as to where this chamber was – in the south or in the north, which is the preference of this commentary to the Mishnah] – that were built on the side of the gates of the Temple courtyard.
והרובין (young priests, or possibly “archers”) – children; the Aramaic Targum/translation is רביא /child. Another explanation: הרובין/ those who shoot arrows with bows, from the language of {Genesis 21:20): “[God was with the boy (i.e., Ishmael) and he grew up; he dwelt in the wildeness] and became a bowman.”
בית המוקד כפה – there was nothing over the bulding of the House of the Hearth other than a [round] arch, AREUVLETU in the foreign language, made m the earth.
והיה מוקף רובדים של אבן (was surrounded with stone pavements) – colonnades/porticos surrounding, [made] of hewn stones that were sunk in the wall and came out from the wall into the House of the Hearth/בית המוקד – to the side of the ground, and on top of them were other stones, shorter than them that also came out from the wall. And they were similar to steps one on top of the other.
וזקני בית אב – the division for duty of priests and Levites/guard that was divided into seven priest’s divisions corresponding to the days of the week, each one serves on his day, and the elders of the priest’s division of that day would sleep there on those paved level spaces between steps in the Temple hall.
ופרחי כהונה (fledgling priests) – young boys whose hair begins to sprout, and they were guards.
כסתו – the language of pillows and cushions.
איש כסתו בארץ – there were not able to lie down there on the beds but rather on the ground in the manner of those who guard the courtyards of the kings.
ומניחים אותן תחת ראשיהן – corresponding to their heads, but not actually under their heads, because there are the clothes of the Kohen that have in them Kilayim/mixture of linen and wool, as for example, the belt, and it is not permitted to use them other than at the time of [Divine] service.
ומתכסים בכסות עצמן – in weekday clothing.
במסבה (winding staircase)- in a cavity/cave that goes underneath the Temple, for the cavity was underneath the Sanctuary, and the entire Sanctuary is called בירה /the chosen Divine residence/the Temple, as it is written (I Chronicles 29:19 – the verse is slightly misquoted by Rabbi Obadiah of Bertinoro in the printed editions: He writes: אל הבירה אשר הכינותי – whereas the correct quote is:לבנות הבירה אשר הכינותי ): “and to build this temple for which I have made provision.” But because he was one to whom a nocturnal emission/pollution had occurred, he would not walk on the path of the Temple courtyard, but rather on he path of the cavities/caves, for he holds that these cavities were not sanctified.
והנרות היו דולקים – in the cavity/cave from this side and that side.
ומדורה היה שם – hat the Kohen would warm himself in it after he immersed [in a ritual bath].
וזה היה כבודו – that no person who enter in it ever all the while that his fellow was there.
מצאו נעול – this is his sign that there is a person there, and he would not enter.
נסתפג – wiped off the water that was on his skin.
בא וישב לו – in the house of the Hearth.
עד שהשערים נפתחים – he would leave and go outside, because one who has immersed [in a Mikveh] must wait for sunset to be perfectly clean – see Leviticus 22:7) is sent off outside of the Temple courtyard, as we stated in these matters that every person who had a flux, including one with a nocturnal emission.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
ראוהו אחיו – to him that removed the ashes on the altar.
שירד – from the a;tar amd [it the coals on the eastern side.
והם רצו וכו' וקדשו ידיהם ורגליהם – in order to perform the Divine Service.
סונקים (press them) – remove them, from the language of shaking and moving about. And similarly, like a stuffed goat {Tractate Pesahim 3b], a goat that is tired as a result of the shaking and the goring that they gore one another, even here, they stuff/choke from the movements and they turn them over in the water pipes to the sides of the altar.
בסובב על הכבש (on the circuit by the ramp) – meaning to say on the ramp, that is opposite the circuit (i.e., a sort of gallery around the altar for the Kohen to walk on).

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
אמר להם הממונה בואו והפיסו – take an allotment [by counting out a certain number on the raised fingers of those among whom a decision is to be made]. This is the lottery that is explained in chapter 2 of [Tractate] Yoma [Mishnah 2].
מי שוחט – even though ritual slaughtering is ritually permitted by a non-Kohen (literally, “foreigner”), for it is the beginning of the Divine Service of the daily offering and is beloved to them, for if they don’t take an allotment, they will come to quarrel about it and they will come to danger (i.e., loss of life).
מי זורק – who receives the blood, he is the one who sprinkles, for the essence of the sacrifice is the sprinkling, and for that reason, it (i.e., the Mishnah) took it.
מי מדשן מזבח הפנימי – the person who clears the ashes from the inner court is he one who offers the incense. And since the removal of the ashes is the beginning of the Divine Service of incense, it (i.e., the Mishnah) took it. And similarly, the removal of ashes from the Menorah/candelabrum is the beginning of the kindling [of the Menorah]. And the removal of the ashes of the inner altar and the Menorah would precede the slaughtering of the daily offering. But that it (i.e., the Mishnah) mentions in the order of the allotment – the slaughtering and sprinkling at the opening clause is beause they are the essence of the Divine Service.
העוקץ – the tail.
החזה – all [the permitted fat] that sees the ground.
והגרה – the place where it ruminates/chews the cud, is [in] the neck, and through it, the windpipe is attached with the liver and the heart.
זכה מי שזכה – he who won the allotment sprinkles the blood and the one nearest him slaughters. But even though the slaughtering precedes the reception of the blood, nevertheless, because the Divine Service of the sprinkling is greater than the slaughtering, for the slaughtering is ritually permitted by a non-Kohen (literally, “foreigner”), which is not the case regarding the sprinkling, therefore, the one who is first found worthy (i.e., “the winner”), when the allotment arrives to him in sprinkling, and he second nearest him in slaughtering, and the third who removes the ashes from inner altaer and offers the incense, and the fourth removes the ashes of he candelabrum and kindles the lights, and the fifth raises up the head and leg for the lamb, and the sixth the two hands, and the seventh, the tail, which are the tail and the foot, and eighth is the breast and the chewing of the cud/ruminant, and the ninth – the two walls, and the tenth, the insides, and the eleventh, the fine flour of the meal offering of the libations, which is offered with the daily offering, and the twelfth are the sort of cakes of the High Priest, and the thirteenth is the wine of libations. All of these thirteen Kohanim leave with one allotment that is described in chapter two of Tractate Yoma (Mishnah 2).

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
לא היו כופתין אותו (they did not twist/tie together the four feet of the lamb) – of the daily offering with two front hands to themselves or the two legs to themselves, in order that he should not act like the religious practices of the heathens, for such they would do when they performed slaughtering for idolatry (see Talmud Tamid 31b).
אלא מעקידין אותו – the hand with the foot, like the Binding of Isaac.
ראשו לדרום – it was slaughtered on the north side of the altar (see Leviticus 1:11) , according to the law of the burnt-offering, and he would turn its head to the south, and its face to the west, so that if it would sprinkle excrement, it would not be adjacent to the altar.
של שחר – the daily-offering sacrifice was slaughtered on the northwestern corner, because in the morning, the sun is in the east and shines opposite it to the west, and the Biblical verse states (Numbers 28:3): “as a regular burnt offering every day, two yearling lambs without blemish” corresponding to the day for the day (שנים ליום), meaning to say, corresponding to the sun, for the sun is called daylight.
ושל בין הערבים – that the sun is in the west and shines opposite the east, it was slaughtered on the northeastern corner.
בטבעת שניה – far from the altar, because the altar was high and would obscure everything. But Yohanan the High Priest established six orders of rings, in each order, four rings, for twenty-four priestly divisions, and they were established on the floor and made like a bow, and since they would not tie together the daily offering, as it is taught at the beginning of our chapter, they would bring in the neck of the animal in those rings at the time of the ritual slaughtering and would wedge in the head of the ring in the ground.
ונותן מזרחית צפונית – first. After he slaughtered the morning burnt-offering in the northwest corner, he would go to the eastern side and stand on the ground and sprinkle the blood in the utensil below from the SIKRA/red paint and place two gifts which are four, one which is like two on the northeastern corner, and he would go to the southwestern corner and place one which is like two on the southwestern corner.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
אמר להם הממנונה וכו' – in the first chapter of [Tractate] Berakhot [11b], it is defined/explained that it is “Ahavah Rabbah”/”With great love.” But after the breaking forth of daylight and the shining of the sun, we recite [the blessing] “Yotzer Or”/”Who created light.” And the order of the blessings is not indispensable.
קראו עשרת הדברים – because they are the essence of the Torah. But it was by law that they would read them every day, even in the country (i.e., outside of the Temple/Jerusalem), but they (i.e., the Rabbis) abolished them because of the seditious talk of the sectarians/heretics who would say that only these alone were given at Sini and not the rest of the orah (see Tractate Berakhot 12a).
והם ברכו שלשה ברכות – And which are these three blessings? “Emet V’Yatziv”/”True and Enduring,” and the Divine Worship (see the seventeenth blessing of the weekday Amidah – which is also the fifth blessing of the Amidah for Sabbaths and Festivals), and the Blessing of the Priests through only the reading of the [Biblical] verses, but not the raising of the hands to pronounce the Priestly Blessing, other than after the offering up of the daily offering and the incense, as we have stated in this chapter (see Tractate Berakhot 11b in the Tosafot, s.v. וברכת כהנים), but today, they don’t make these blessings other than in order that the daily offering will be accepted with favor, and they do not take leave from the Shemoneh Esreh prayer with this.
מוסיפין ברכה אחד – when the division of duty of Priests and Levites that is departing says to the division of duty that is entering (see Talmud Berakhot 12a): “May He who caused His name to dwell in this house, let dwell among you love and brotherhood, peace and friendship,” for on every Sabbath day, one division of duty would enter for Divine Serveice and the past division of duty would leave.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
החלו – those who won the spoon of the incense and the coal pan of the coals to ascend on the steps of the hall leading to the interior of the Temple, for there were twelve steps to the hall. But in front of them, they would go first [to ascend]: whomever won the cleansing of the inner altar in order to to take the basket that was placed there, after it was needed to place the ashes near the eastern altar like the Menorah, he would wait until after the sprinkling of the daily offering, for the person who won the cleansing of the Menorah/candelabrum would make the preparations of the two lamps/candles/lights and finish the completion of the cleansing of the Menorah, and then both of them would remove – this one the basket and that one the oil vessel (in the shape of a large wine cup) and they would pour the ashes in one place near the altar eastward.
והשתחוה ויצא – for now the Mitzvah had been completed.
מצאו שכבה – as for example, after Shimon the Righteous had died, there was no miracle, whether it (i.e., the lamp) went out now after the slaughtering of the daily offering, or whether they found that it had gone out prior to the slaughtering of the daily offering, and they kindled, as we stated above in the first “The Superintendent said to them” (Tractate Tamid, Chapter 3, Mishnah 9), even though that now they found that it was still burning/flickering, since there was no miracle existing, they would put it out and clean its ashes in order to finish the preparation of the two lamps/candles/lights together.
ומדליקו מעל מזבח העולה – for they would not kindle the western lamp/candle/light ever other than from the fire of the altar of the burnt offering, as it is written (Leviticus 6:6): “A perpetual fire shall be kept burning on the altar [not to go out],” and it is written (Leviticus 24:2): “for kindling lamps regularly”, above the outer altar it was kindled.
ממעלה שניה – of three steps that were before the Menorah/candelabrum.
והשתחוה ויצא – for his Mitzvah was completed.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
בזמן שכהן גדול נכנס להשתוות – in the great room with the golden altar, but we don’t call it coming in without need.
באבנים טובות – that are the shoulders of the Ephod.
הגביה לו את הפרוכת – that is hanging/suspended from the opening of the hall [leading to the interior of the Temple], for there weren’t doors at the opening of the hall, like the other openings in the Temple, but rather only a curtain.
