=== 1 | Start Reading ===
Maya Hieroglyphic Writing (excerpts)
, by J. Eric S. Thompson, [1950], at sacred-texts.com
6
The Long Count
. . . and the days of eternity, who shall number? The height of the heaven, and the breadth of the earth, and the deep, and wisdom, who shall search them out?
—ECCLESIASTICUS, 1:2-3
IN THE MAYA SCHEME the road over which time had marched stretched into a past so distant that the mind of man cannot comprehend its remoteness. Yet the Maya undauntedly retrod that road, seeking its starting point. A fresh view, leading farther backward, unfolded at the end of each stage; the mellowed centuries blended into millennia, and they into tens of thousands of years as those tireless inquirers pushed deeper and still deeper into the eternity of the past. For them time receded in endless vistas of hundreds of thousands of years; the resting places, those annual stages of the bearers of time, mounted to millions and even scores of millions. Theirs was an appraisal of the ages which would have been utterly inconceivable to us, had not our minds been gradually conditioned to that vastness by the writings of astronomers and geologists during the past century.
Time, in the Maya concept, leads into the future, too, with the endlessness of the straight roads of France. When Alfred sat in exile by the rude hearth of tradition, Maya astronomers at Palenque were recording calculations which sweep more than 1,250,000 years into the past, and then forward to dates over four millennia in the future. At about the same time, in another Maya city, there was recorded a computation which in all probability spans over 400,000,000 years. The brain reels at such astronomical figures, yet these calculations were of sufficient frequency and importance to require special glyphs for their transcription, and they were made some 10 centuries before Archbishop Ussher had placed the creation of the world at 4004 B.C.
THE TUN AS BASIS OF MAYA CALCULATIONS
For the manipulation of these calculations into past and future the Maya used the tun (approximate year of 360 days) and its multiples in the vigesimal system, just as we use the year and its multiples in the decimal system. Fractions of a tun were expressed in terms of uinals (20-day periods) and kins (single days).
Students of Maya epigraphy have been divided on the question of what is the Maya chronological unit. Some writers (e.g. Spinden, 1924, pp. 8-9; Morley, 1915, p. 37, and 1937-38, 5:274) consider that the unit of Maya time was the day; others (Goodman, Gates, Teeple, and Thompson) have expressed the view that the unit was the tun, and that the uinals and kins are merely fractions of the lowest unit, just as our periods are reckoned in multiples of years with the months and days as fractions thereof.
Evidence in support of the second view is, I think, overwhelming:
1. In the various books of Chilam Balam the lapse of time is invariably expressed in tuns or haabs (another name for the period of 360 days used under certain conditions) and is never expressed in days unless the interval is less than a tun in length. Thus we find constantly statements such as: "during threescore and fifteen katuns (they [the mounds] were constructed),"
oxkal katun . . . catac holhunpiz katun
(Chumayel, p. 15); "eighty-one haab had passed since their departure,"
cankal haab catac hun
[
p
]
pel haab
(Mani Chronicle); "six hundred and seventy-five haab after Chichen Itza was depopulated,"
lahu ca bak haab catac holhu cankal haab
(Chumayel, p. 85).
2. The symbolic forms of the glyphs for all periods above the tun have as their principal element or elements one of the two main signs for the 360-day period, either the tun sign or the cauac symbol; the kin (day) glyph is a component of none of them.
3. The main element of the IS
[Initial Series—JBH]
introductory glyph is the tun sign, a pair of duplicate affixes being symbols for counting. Thus these two elements mean a count of the tuns, with no suggestion of a count of days.
4. The sentences which precede the chronological tables in various books of Chilam Balam are:
u tzolan katun
, "the order of the katuns," or
u kahlay u xocan katunob
, "the record of the count of the katuns," or
u kahlay katunob
, "the record of the katuns." These sentences appear to correspond in part to the IS introductory glyph. There is no mention of a reckoning by days.
5. The only name of a period higher than the tun which is beyond question is that of the katun. This is probably an elided form of
kaltun
(20 tuns), and makes no reference to the kin.
6. Were the Maya count to have been based on the single day, it would be logical to expect a straightforward
vigesimal system with a year of 400 days, such as was used by the Cakchiquel.
GLYPHS AND NAMES OF PERIODS
KIN
This word means day or sun, and also time in a general sense, e.g.
u kin oczah
, "sowing time." The symbolic form of its glyph is the main element of the glyph of the sun god (fig. 26,
49-57
). It also appears frequently as an identifying attribute on the forehead, the earplug, or the headdress of that deity, and it is also the principal element of the month sign Yaxkin (fig. 17,
1-13
).
The glyph resembles, and in all probability represents, a four-petaled flower. It seems very probable that this is a conventionalized picture of some species of plumeria. The plumeria is a symbol of procreation (Roys, 1933, pp. 104, 121; Thompson, 1939, pp. 138-40), and there are some grounds for believing that it may have been a name for the sun. At any rate the sun and moon are closely connected with the plumeria, presumably because they were the first people to cohabit. The five petals of the plumeria were probably reduced to four because four is the number over which the sun god rules. In Chumayel there is an account of the wooing of the moon by the sun couched in esoteric language. The moon is described as the five-petaled flower; the sun is said to have been set in the center of a flower—"Four-fold [or four-branched] was the plate of the flower, and Ah Kin Xocbiltun [i.e. the sun god] was set in the center." In support of this identification, it should be noted that the Mexican equivalent of Ahau, the day of the sun god, is Xochitl, which both means and represents "flower." Furthermore, in the list of interpretations of Quiche day names recorded by Ximenez, the Quiche equivalent of Ahau is given the meaning of "flower." The value of this as independent evidence, however, is reduced by the strong possibility that such an identification may have resulted from Mexican influences in late times, perhaps even at the start of the colonial period.
This kin element has a postfix a streamerlike arrangement, which it has been suggested is the beard of the sun god and which is sometimes called the tail. The Motul dictionary gives two expressions for the sun's ray:
mex kin
, "the sun's beard," and
u tab kin
, "the cords of the sun." In Chol we find
u halal cin
(
kin
), "the arrow-shafts of the sun." Since these streamers do not usually issue from the god's chin, it would seem more probable that they represent the sun's cords. The word kin with mutations (e.g. highland
kih
) means sun in most Maya languages and dialects save Tzeltal, Tzotzil, and Chicomuceltec, where the word
kakal
(fiery?) replaces it, and
kin
is used as the equivalent of festival.
Hun kak
(one fire) is a Lacandon name for the sun, although kin is in common use.
In the IS there are no less than three head forms for the kin, and there are others (pp. 167-75) which are used only in distance numbers and which will not be discussed here.
The most easily recognized and perhaps the commonest variant of the head form is that of the sun god himself (figs. 27,
58-63
,
65
,
66
; 29,
5
,
7
,
9
). The characteristic features of the sun god are: a squarish eye with squarish pupil in the top inner corner and with a loop, often with two or three circlets attached, which encloses the eye on the sides and bottom; a prominent Roman nose; the central incisors of the upper jaw filed to the shape of a squat tau; often a fang projecting from the corner of the mouth; and a hollow on the top of the head. In the glyphs the kin tail is usually present beside or below the head.
The second variant of the head is that of an animal (figs. 27,
55
-
57
; 29,
6
). The nose becomes a snout, often with a small scroll on it. The eye is still squarish, but the pupil moves to the center of the eye and becomes a short crescent, the ends of which are sometimes joined across the top by a straight line. A shell pendant hangs from the earplug, and on the cheek there is frequently an irregular crescent, the Horns of which point toward the ears (Bowditch, 1910, pl. 14,
9
,
10
,
21
,
22
). A banded headdress is often shown. On the temple or the side of the face there are visible on most well-preserved examples two circles within an oval, although for lack of space they are frequently reduced to semicircles.
The presence of these two circlets within an oval is of prime importance, since there can be little doubt that they are the symbol for black. In the codices the symbol for black is distinguished from that for white usually by a black circular edging around the two (or more) circlets which constitute the main element of the sign (fig. 20,
1-5
). However, in the sculptured texts (and occasionally in the codices; fig. 20,
6,7
) the black is omitted. In sculpture black is generally shown by hachuring (fig. 20,
8,9
). When the area involved is quite small and the text no longer retains its full clarity of detail, the crosshatched lines may no longer be visible. This weathering doubtlessly accounts for the absence of the symbol for black in some cases, but in others it is quite plain that the symbol never was present. Beyer (1925 and 1929) has discussed this matter at length and concludes that the surrounding black paint or hachure was often omitted when there was no doubt as to the meaning of the glyph.
The symbol for black is used in two ways: to denote that color, if one may so term it, and to represent the night, the interior of the earth, and death. Thus we find
the symbol for black attached to a glyph of a skull, perhaps that of Multun-Tzek, presumably because the skull has a natural association with the dark underworld (fig. 20,
4-6
).
I hesitate in making a definite identification of this animal with the black infix which serves as a kin sign. It is most probably either a dog or a jaguar. Note the resemblances on the one hand to heads for Oc and Xul, which are definitely pictures of dogs; on the other hand, to the head in the introductory glyph of Copan P, which is that of the jaguar god (fig. 22,
2,3
). Both animals may wear the symbol of black, and both animals can wear it because they have much black in their natural coloring (dogs in the Maya codices are almost always painted black and white) and because both are connected with the underworld. Furthermore, both animals are intimately associated with the sun, particularly in connection with his nocturnal journey to the underworld and his passage through its shadowed recesses (pp. 78, 114). I slightly favor the identification of this creature as a dog since we shall later encounter yet another variant which is probably a jaguar (p. 173).
Sometimes a monkey serves as the symbol of the sun (fig. 27,
53
); a particularly fine example is to be seen in the full-figure variant on Yaxchilan L 48 (fig. 29,
10
). For a connection between monkey and sun we must turn to Mexico. In Mexico the sun god as patron of the arts of singing, music, and entertainment was Xochipilli ("Flower Prince"), and one of his guises was that of the monkey. Furthermore, the day Ozomatli, "Monkey," is under his rule. In the Maya area the sun god was also patron of poetry and music, and was likewise connected with flowers (the plumeria, symbol of procreation). The monkey also symbolized the arts and crafts as well as licentiousness and the act of procreation, but the sun god was the first person to cohabit. With these various threads forming a definite warp and woof, it is entirely appropriate that the monkey should substitute for the more usual representations of the sun.
Thus kin might be represented by the flower symbol, by the portrait of the sun god himself, by the monkey, or by another animal, probably the dog or the jaguar. These variant forms well illustrate how deeply the hieroglyphs are rooted in mythology.
UINAL
The derivation of the Yucatec name for the period of 20 days is uncertain. As already noted (p. 51) a fairly general term for 20 in many Maya languages and dialects is man (
uinic
and
uinac
respectively in lowland and highland stocks), the assumption being that this derives from the count of fingers and toes. Yucatec and Chol, however, usually employ the word
kal
for 20 and its multiples, whereas Jacalteca, Chuh, Pokomchi, Uspanteca, Quiche, etc. use both terms, one for 20, the other for some multiple thereof. Uinic, the Yucatec word for man, in some cases can have the meaning of 20 in that language, for it is the term used for 20
kaan
(a cord-length used in measuring milpas), but it should be noted that because of confusion in the various dictionaries, it is uncertain whether
uinic
and
uinac
were used for counts of days or for listing such items as bales of cotton or pods of cacao, or for both categories. We do know, at least, that uinac meant 20 days in Cakchiquel and Pokoman. The problem is to decide whether uinal derives from
uinic
, "man."
We shall see (p. 167) that a period of 20 days was often expressed by means of the moon glyph. In that connection it may be significant that the Motul dictionary lists the word
uen
with the meaning of a matter of a month or months, with examples given as
hun uen ual
, "my [her] child is one month old,"
ho uen in paalil
, "my child is five months old." The word uen appears to be connected with the moon, for uen uinic is an albino, and albinos are associated with eclipses. Nonetheless, as Gates has pointed out, it is impossible to derive uinal directly from u, moon. Gates (1931, p. 90) seems to suggest that uinal is a contraction of
uinicil
or
uinical
, "manhood," but the trouble there is that
uinal
is a Yucatec word, whereas
uinical
is highland.
Furthermore
, as we have seen,
uinic
survives in Yucatec for a count of 20 cords. That being the case, it is most improbable that it would be changed to
uinal
to denote 20 days. It seems much more probable, therefore, that
uinal
is the Yucatec word for month (of 20 days?) with the termination
al
, which functions very vaguely to show an association, in many cases not apparent (e.g.
eb
and
ebal
, both meaning staircase;
cayom
and
ah cayomal
, both meaning fisherman but perhaps the former, a casual fisher, the latter a professional).
There is evidence that in some parts of the Maya area the 20-day period is named for the moon, for among the Jacalteca it is called
xahau
, "Lady," that is to say, the moon, but that term is applied by the uninitiated to the month of 30 days (La Farge and Byers, 1931, p. 157).
Finally, to terminate this tiresome subject, the fact that man is in no way connected with the glyphs for 20 days, whereas the moon glyph has that function, is fair evidence for accepting a derivation of uinal from
uen
, "month," and assuming that the word formerly referred to the period of 20 days, not to the month of 29 or 30 days.
The symbolic form of the uinal is too simple to give any good clue as to what it represents (fig. 26,
41-48
). The
resemblance to the day sign Chuen has been remarked, but this may be fortuitous. The uinal sign not infrequently takes the bundle postfix, like the months Uo and Zip, and the glyphs of certain deities. The meaning of this postfix is uncertain (figs. 26,
47,48;
27,
46
).
The personified form of the uinal is that of a frog, very clearly represented in several full-figure glyphs (figs. 27,
40-52
; 29,
1-4
). There seems little reason to doubt that this is the
uo
, a small black frog with a yellow stripe down its back, which has burrowing habits. The
uo
is the musician of the Chacs, the gods of rain, in Maya legend and folklore (Thompson, 1941, p. 104). The reason why the picture of the
uo
may have been used to designate the period of 20 days has already been set forth (p. 47). The evidence is not beyond question but does suggest an example of rebus writing. The scroll emerging from the corner of the mouth, the serrated teeth, the peculiar form of the snout, the forehead ornament with its circle of beads, the eyelid covering half the eye, and finally the shield with its three circles, are characteristics which together clearly differentiate this head from those of other period glyphs. None is essential, but most are usually present. The three circles on the shield (Maudslay's drawing of the uinal head with four circles, on Copan B, appears to be incorrect) might conceivably represent warts, or might possibly be the symbol for fire, the three hearthstones (Thompson, 1930, pp. 93, 111), although a connection between the
uo
frog and fire is not apparent. However, in all probability these three dots refer to the god of number 3, who is a rain deity (pp. 132, 277), for the frog is closely associated with the rains and their patrons.
TUN
The name for the approximate year of 360 days means in Yucatec "precious stone." It is almost certain that the word was primarily used for jades and various green stones. According to the Relación of Campocolche and Chochola, the Maya made offerings in time of hunger of "green stones which they call tun." The Yucatec word for stone in general is
tunich
, which becomes tun in compounds. In the Manche Chol dictionary of Moran
tun
is given as stone and
yax tun
as blue beads, although
yax
means both green and blue. Precious stone is listed as
sitzil ton
and
ghayalton
in the large Tzotzil dictionary. The first term suggests a meaning of cold stone, one of the properties of jade being its coldness to the touch.
Ton
,
tun
, and
tuun
have the general meaning of stone in Tzeltal, Yocotan, and western Chol respectively. It is therefore apparent that tun meant stone in general and precious stone in particular, although in Yucatec it had lost its general meaning except in compounds.
The symbolic form of the tun as used in IS almost surely contains the sign for jade, which, as already noted, is either a circle set on a larger disk or the same with the addition of two beads on the perimeter. As such it is the main element of the glyphs for Muluc and Mol (figs. 8,
1-16;
17,
14-22
), where it signifies not jade as such, but water, the ritualistic name for which was "precious stone, jade." It will be noted that the lower part of the tun sign contains the circle set on a larger disk. The upper part of the glyph is rounded, as in the extension of the jade sign, but differs from the latter in the presence of two vertical bars which are usually filled with crosshatching in the sculptured examples (to represent black) and with black paint in the codices (fig. 26,
33-40
). Beyer (1927) considers the two bars to represent the number 10 and to be a symbol of fire, but I do not regard his arguments as acceptable, since several of the examples he cites are late forms from the codices. These are clearly simplified versions of more complex originals, which have become pairs of straight lines because they could be painted that way with greater rapidity. Furthermore, the number so is associated with death, not with fire.
It seems possible that the two vertical bars might represent the element yax. In the forms of Yax and Yaxkin in the codices the principal feature of the prefix comprises two vertical bars painted black (fig. 17,
11,12,45,46
). In the corresponding elements in representations of Yax and Yaxkin in sculpture the two bars are usually set diagonally in the center of the prefix but two vertical bars or pairs of vertical lines often appear in its upper part (fig. 17,
2-4,6,9,38,40
). Yax signifies green or blue, and also is associated with the Chicchan deities, the celestial snakes who guard the rain (p. 135). If this identification is correct—and it must be admitted that a plausible case could be made for a quite different interpretation—the whole glyph would read "green precious stone," or "precious water of the celestial Chicchans."
The reasons for believing that this identification is correct are that the cauac glyph, which under certain conditions replaces the regular tun glyphs, undoubtedly means rainstorm (p. 87); and the word
haab
, which also signifies a period of 360 days, is almost certainly connected with
ha
, "water." Thus if our identification is correct, both the two glyph forms and the two names signify rain.
The original of the commonest personified form of the tun glyph will not be found in any picture book of Central American fauna, but is the product of a vivid imagination. Its most outstanding feature, and the one by which it can be most surely identified, is the bared jawbone which replaces the lower jaw (fig. 27,
34,36-39
). The beak is generally rather sharp. In nearly all cases
there is a projection in front of the forehead, and a corresponding area at the back of the head. These are usually represented as partly black by the addition of areas of crosshatching; the absence of hachure is probably due to weathering. I think that these two projections can be identified with some assurance as the tufted horns of the Yucatecan screech owl. These tufts are always prominently displayed in representations of owls in the codices, and always have black markings (fig. 20,
13,14,19,20,23
).
We have already seen that there are excellent reasons for identifying the Yucatecan screech owl with the Moan bird (p. 114). The Moan bird, when it serves as the glyph of the month Muan and when it appears in sculpture, lacks a lower jaw. The absence of the lower jaw and its replacement by the bared jawbone have apparently the same symbolic value. Accordingly, the fact that the tun bird has a bared jawbone, whereas the Moan bird has no lower jaw at all in its glyphic form, is not an argument against the identification of both birds as screech owls.
It has been pointed out that the Moan bird is connected with rain, and that the word
muan
itself means shower. The identification of this head form of the tun glyph as the rain bird brings the head variant, too, into agreement with the other variants and the names of the period, all of which, as we have seen, have a pluvial connotation.
There is another personified form of the tun, the head of a long-nosed being, of either ophidian or saurian origin, which lacks a lower jaw, indicating a connection with the earth. Often this creature wears the tun headdress, although in early texts the headdress is of the voluted form much favored in the first half of Cycle 9 (fig. 27, 28,
30-33,35
). In two full-figure representations of the tun this head, with tun headdress, is attached to the body of a snake (fig. 28,
16,17
), and the same is true of the example on the Leiden plaque (fig. 27,
28
). This snake is also the deity of number 13, god of the day Muluc, "water," and as such is intimately associated with water (p. 135; fig. 28,
15
). The absence of the lower jaw and the presence of the tun headdress, which is often decked with vegetation, also worn by the Mam, god of the interior of the earth (p. 133) greaten the possibility that this is the snake or crocodile monster which supports the earth. In any case, as god of the number 13, this creature represents rain, and so once again the tun is portrayed by the glyph of a being connected with rain.
In three full-figure representations of the tun at Quirigua a creature which one can tentatively identify as a crab is substituted for the Moan bird or the snake (fig. 28,
12,13,15
). The identification of this as a crustacean rests on the portrayal, on the murals of Bonampak, of an impersonator of a crab god, who is a member of the group of impersonators of terrestrial gods, including the Mam, all of whom are decked with water lilies to emphasize their connection with the earth. At El Baul there was a strong cult of the crab god, from whose body vegetation grows (Thompson, 1948, p. 20). The crab god, therefore, is a god of the earth and of fertility; his aquatic environment is obvious. Here, too, is another aquatic personification of the tun.
The glyphs for the 360-day year therefore stand, respectively, for jade, that is to say, precious water; rainstorm (cauac variant); the Moan bird (rains and showers); god of number 13 and the day Muluc; a serpent god of water; and, probably, the crab god, a deity with vegetal and aquatic associations. All have pluvial or aquatic associations, as do haab and tun, the names for the period. It is interesting to note that
xiuitl
, the Mexican name for the year, also meant turquoise and, by extension, rain, both because of its color, which is that of the Tlalocs, and because both turquoise and rain were precious things. Furthermore, the trapezoidal ornament usually worn by the Tlalocs is the sign for year in Mexican texts, and there are good reasons for identifying the head of Cocijo, the Zapotec rain god, as the year symbol in the glyphic writings of that people (Caso, 1928, pp. 45-64). The symbolic form is the kan cross which was an aquatic symbol for both the Maya and the Mexicans (p. 275). Thus the same association of the year with water, "the precious substance," holds good for Maya, Zapotec, and Mexicans.
KATUN (20 TUNS)
It has been rather generally supposed that
katun
is a contraction of
kal
, "twenty," and
tun
. The name is found constantly in the various books of Chilam Balam; an entry in the San Francisco dictionary reads: "It is said that the Indians counted their years in pairs, and when one reached twenty years, there they said
hun p’el katun
[one katun]."
In discussing the possibility that katun is derived from
kaltun
(20 tuns), Roys writes:
A good, but not incontrovertible, case can be made out for the contraction. The principal argument is the weakness of the
l
in Yucatec. Sometimes this is lost at the end of a syllable. An example of this is the numerical classifier
p’el
, which has become
p’e
, e.g.
hunp’el
,
cap’el
or
hunp’e
,
cap’e
. A village elder at Yaxuna chid me for speaking of Cetelac instead of Ceteac. The first is the Chumayel form; the second the present-day pronunciation, and presumably the spelling, for my brother Lawrence had Cetelac typed in a list of sites, and his spelling was pronounced wrong by his informants at Yaxuna, only 2 km. from the site. Thus it is apparently not a case of an
l
which is so lightly pronounced that we do not recognize it, but it has actually been lost in modern times. The only case I recall in which the Motul dictionary implies
that an
l
has been lost, occurs with
bal
,
balx
, and
bax
, which are assigned the same meaning. However, those early lexicographers always had in mind the derivations of words, and I suspect they may have sometimes inserted an unpronounced
l
when they believed that it belonged there. An example of a contraction of
lt
to
t
is supplied by
beeltah
, as written in the Motul and San Francisco dictionaries, and
betah
, which we find in the Ticul dictionary. Another example is
ciioltzil
, listed in the Motul dictionary with the meaning of a happy or delectable thing; on Chumayel, p. 103, it is twice given as
ciotzil
, and I have seen that same contraction elsewhere. Similarly, the Motul dictionary gives
talzah
, whereas Pio Perez lists that word both as
talzah
and as
tazah
; the latter is the way it is pronounced at the present time.
Another example of the disappearance of
l
before
t
is supplied by
cutal
as in
u cutal Pop
, "the seating of Pop," which derives from the stem
cul
as in the verb
cultah
, "to be seated." All things considered, it is probable that katun is a contraction of kaltun.
Terms employed for the period of 20 years have not been preserved in most Maya languages and dialects. According to Friar Pedro Moran, that period was called
may
in Pokoman.
Mai
means tobacco or powdered tobacco, among other things, in some Maya languages. It has the meaning of 20 also in Kekchi, because, it is said, tobacco leaves are tied in bundles of 20.
The symbolic variant of the katun sign consists of the tun sign with a small cauac glyph, flanked by combs, as a prefix. The cauac sign has the same value as the tun glyph; the flanking combs usually denote "count." It has been suggested that the cauac here is to be taken as an example of rebus writing,
ca
, the first syllable representing the
ka
of katun, but Long (1935, p. 27) has called attention to the fact that
c
and
k
are two entirely different sounds in Maya, and it is therefore extremely improbable that the Maya would use a
ca
element to represent the glottalized
ka
. Apart from that, it seems unlikely that the Maya would take one syllable of a word in that way were it not the root of the word. Actually there appears to be no such root. That interpretation must, therefore, be discarded. Similarly, the comb element, to which Landa assigns the sound
ca
, presumably because that is the first syllable of
cai
, "fish," cannot stand for
ka
.
It will be noticed that all symbolic glyphs for multiples of the tun sign are composed of two glyphs for the 360-day period plus additional affixes. In the case of the katun sign the cauac glyph is combined with the tun sign; in all others the cauac glyph is doubled. In a rare variant of the baktun sign two cauacs appear above a tun sign (fig. 26,
19,22
). There is also a glyph, which may have the value of baktun, composed of three cauac signs arranged as a pyramid (fig. 33,
57-60
). It is tempting to assign the added meaning of 20 to the cauac sign; attached to the katun sign it would mean 20 tuns, doubled it would signify 400 tuns, one baktun. The hand, as we shall see, also stands for the baktun (400 tuns) and the hand over the doubled cauac represents the calabtun (400 × 400 tuns), and, with another affix, the kinchiltun (400 × 8000 tuns). It must be admitted, however, that no evidence in support of this possibility has been uncovered in other passages.
The head variant for the katun is a birdlike creature (fig. 27,
15-27
). In most cases it resembles rather closely the head form for the tun save that the lower jaw does not show the bone; there is, in addition, a hollow area in the top of the head, such as occurs in the heads of several deities, and is most familiar to us in representations of the long-nosed god of the sculptured monuments.
In the full-figure text of Copan D and Quirigua Alt O the creature has a head which with its rapacious jaws suggests a bird of prey, perhaps a hawk, an eagle, or a vulture. Black markings on the wings rule out parrots and macaws (fig. 28,
8,10
). Sometimes the fore and aft ornaments of the tun sign which seem to represent the horns of the screech owl are present. In other texts there is on the top of the head a peculiar ornament, which looks like a tight-fitting cap, but also resembles closely the Imix sign (cf. fig. 55,
1
, Gl
[Glyph—JBH]
B2). Identification of this design, either as an attempt to show some feature of the bird's head or as a glyphic element with symbolic value, would doubtlessly solve the identity of this bird.
In a few cases the prefix of the symbolic form of the katun appears over a head which in most cases seems to be the usual katun head, but in one text (Copan 1) it is definitely the tun head with bared jawbone. This last is what one would expect, for if the prefix raises the value of the tun 20 times, one would suppose that the head beneath would correspond to the tun, not to the katun.
In view of the impossibility of identifying the katun bird, any attempt to find the meaning of the glyph is futile. It may be worth noting, however, that the Moan is not the only bird associated with celestial bands and, what is perhaps more probable, that there were four Moan birds, one for each world direction. On the front of Naranjo 32 a personage, now almost entirely obliterated, appears (seated?) above a mass composed of three, perhaps four, planetary bands. One must assume that the scene represents some deity in his celestial abode. The ends of each of three planetary bands in the lower parts terminate in heads which are clearly those of birds with prominent beaks (fig. 20,
15
). On the top of each head is the same element, vaguely resembling Imix, to
which attention has already been directed. There can be little doubt, I think, that these heads represent the same bird as does the head variant of the katun.
It is well known that birds were associated with world directions. Although these fowl of the air are individually named in Chumayel, it is possible that they were known collectively as the Moan birds, although each had its characteristics. Hence, one type may have been used to illustrate the tun, another the katun, and a third the baktun. Naturally, since they were mythical creatures, primarily birds but with a dash of alligator and a strain of snake in their ancestry, their characteristics were no more constant than were those of the celestial dragons or the terrestrial alligator. They had this in common, however: all were associated with the celestial dragons, the rain-sending Itzamnas, and therefore could symbolize the haab or tun, "the rain," with complete propriety.
BAKTUN (400 TUNS)
The Maya terms for this and all higher periods are not surely known. They have been formed by modern investigators by prefixing the Yucatec terms for 400, 8000, 160,000, and 3,200,000 to the tun, on the logical assumption that katun is a contraction of kaltun and that its multiples are formed in the same manner. There is some support for the term baktun since the expression
bakhaab
, "400 haab," occurs in Chumayel. Haab and tun are synonymous, although their use depends on the texts. Previously, the terms cycle, great cycle, and great-great cycle were employed. Pseudo-Maya terms are to be eschewed, but in these cases I have retained them because cycle is an overworked word.
The symbolic variant of the baktun consists of two cauac signs to which is often added, as a postfix, a knotted piece of textile or similar material. A rare and apparently late variant has the double cauac over the normal tun sign. Should the cauac element have the value of 20, as is possible although hardly probable (p. 146), the one would multiply the other to produce the required 400. Against this should be set the established fact that the doubling of an affix makes no difference as to the meaning (p. 41; fig. 26,
15-23
).
The head variant is again a bird (figs. 27,3-14; 28,1-5). Tozzer and Allen (1910, p. 334) tentatively accept the full-figure variant of this on Copan D as the zopilote, the black vulture. The heads do not differ greatly from those of the katun, except for a hand covering the lower jaw; as in the head for completion (or zero?). I think there is in this symbol, and in the repetition of the main element of the baktun in higher periods, a little evidence that the Maya considered the baktun somewhat in the light of a basic unit, and that the pictun (8000 tuns) was also regarded as 20 baktuns. This would roughly parallel our own custom of saying either one thousand nine hundred or nineteen hundred. The Maya did the same thing, for in Chumayel occurs the expression 8000 katuns, whereas one might have expected this number to have been expressed as one calabtun, or, perhaps, 400 baktuns.
PICTUN (8000 TUNS)
The symbolic variant of this sign is the baktun element, the doubled cauac, rarely with the postfix (fig. 3,
12
), but with an essential prefix, which consists of an oval outlined with dots and containing a double flare (fig. 26,
8-14
). This double-flare element is a matter of some confusion, since it closely resembles the conventionalized symbol for maize as worn by a number of terrestrial deities. The maize symbol is usually distinguished by the addition of circles (grains of maize?), but these are not infrequently omitted. In the codices, however, these two designs are more clearly distinguished. A cauac sign with the
te
(1) affix and with the flare (definitely not the maize element) as prefix occurs 13 times in the codices. Twice it appears with the dog who carries flaming torches and who has been generally accepted as a symbol of lightning; twice with God B, on one occasion when he carries a lighted torch, on the other when he lacks the torch. On six occasions the glyph follows that of the sun god, and in three of these the pair stands above the picture of the sun god. Once it is above the goddess who is probably the moon and who has the fire symbol on the load on her back. Once it is associated with the so-called Mars beast. The thirteenth appearance of this glyph is on a page in which picture and context are obliterated (fig. 43,
65-67
).
The cauac symbol is without doubt the sign for rain and storm. When, therefore, we find it with the flare prefix above a god of the rain and storms who carries a lighted torch, we can feel fairly certain that the picture represents a lightning storm. The dog was recognized many years ago by Seler as the lightning beast, and Gates (1931b, p. 33) has pointed out that there is linguistic evidence in Pokomchi for associating the dog with lightning or thunderbolts. The reason for linking this cauac glyph with its flame prefix to the sun god is not clear unless one turns to the language. The name for the rain god of the modern Maya who causes the lightning is Ah Lelem-Caan-Chaac, "the Chac who makes brilliant the sky" (Redfield and Villa, 1934, p. 115).
Lelem
means not only lightning but also brilliant light;
lelem caanil
denotes thunderhead, the storms of much cloud but little rain, and the term is used, as well, to describe the brilliant light of the sun, as
lelemac kin
, "the brilliant sun." The cauac sign, as already noted, is derived from a section
of the body of one of the celestial dragons which form one of the layers of the sky and send the rains to earth. The glyph, therefore, has the general meaning of rain, but it could presumably be used to indicate the layer of heaven. The combination of this glyph and that of the sun god must mean "Kinich Ahau [the sun god] who fills the heavens with his brilliance" or words to that effect. In that sense it is also applicable to the moon goddess. In the section of the so-called Mars beast of Dresden (fig. 64,
2-4
), glyphs of light and darkness, of darkened skies, and of drought are prominent, and therefore the cauac with flames symbolizing an electric storm is not out of place. Indeed, this almanac probably indicates days when rain, drought, and storms might be expected (p. 258).
As used in the pictun glyph, the flames are enclosed in an oval of small circles or dots, similar to that which surrounds the glyph for Mol. The latter, it has been shown (p. 110), symbolizes the rain clouds, and the circles or dots probably represent raindrops. The prefix of the pictun, therefore, in all probability is yet another symbol for storm—the lightning flash and rain.
The head variant is the bird with hand across lower jaw which is the sign for the baktun. Above this stands the same prefix as found with the symbolic form of this glyph (fig. 27,
1,2
).
CALABTUN (160,000 TUNS)
The term
calab
with the meaning of 160,000 appears in the Yucatec list of Beltran and also in Kaua (Berendt edition, p. 79). As
calab
, it is given by Burkitt (1902) as the Kekchi term for the same number.
The symbolic variant of the glyph has again as its main element the doubled cauac (fig. 26,
1-3
). The prefix is an outstretched hand, which often holds a rod or has some other minor embellishment. It will be recalled that the head variant of the baktun of 400 tuns has as its main characteristic a hand; now we find the hand with this period, which is 400 baktuns.
The head variant is some indeterminate species of bird with the same hand superfix, but in the best-preserved examples (Copan C) the hand is visible on the lower jaw converting the head into that of the baktun (fig. 26,
4-6
).
KINCHILTUN (3,200,000 TUNS)
Only three examples of this period glyph occur in IS or distance numbers, where its numerical value can be demonstrated by its position in the sequence. Two are symbolic variants (Tikal 10, Coba 1); the other is a personified form, on the stone of Chiapa. In all three cases the main element is either the symbolic or personified form found in the baktun, pictun, and calabtun. Clearly, then, the kinchiltun is differentiated from the other higher period glyphs by its affixes, which, unfortunately, are not well preserved in any of these three cases. Luckily, there are two examples, at Quirigua, in near mint condition, of what calculations show to have been the symbolic form of the kinchiltun (App. IV; figs. 26,
7;
33,
48,49
). In each case the glyph is similar to the calabtun except for the addition of a prefix, which resembles somewhat the number 8, but with the greater part of each
o
filled with a crosshatched circle. The left edge of the prefix of the Tikal example of the kinchiltun is broken, but one can see a circle, and, on the right edge of that, an interior circle with crosshatching is plainly visible in the photograph (Maler, 1911, pl. 21), although only one
o
of the 8, together with a looping element, is present. The hand affix is placed above the glyph. So far as one can make out, this same 8-shaped prefix is attached to the kinchiltun glyphs on Coba 1 and on the Chiapa stone, but it is highly doubtful that the hand prefix is also present. We can, therefore, make the tentative deduction that the essential determinant of this glyph is this 8-shaped affix, and that the hand may, perhaps, be omitted. To the best of my knowledge, no one has previously attempted to distinguish this glyph from those of the other high periods.
ALAUTUN (64,000,000 TUNS) AND HIGHER PERIODS
Only one example of the alautun and yet higher periods may exist. On Coba 1 there are a number of glyphs preceding the record of 13 kinchiltuns, and each of these has a coefficient of 13. It is possible that one or more of these represents higher periods in the vigesimal system. The glyph preceding 13 kinchiltuns appears to have the tun sign as its main element, and this is surmounted by an effaced prefix. It may well represent 13 alautuns. In passages dealing with reckonings of millions of years into the past at Quirigua there are a couple of glyphs which have the tun as their main element, and which may represent the alautun or even higher periods, but their identification must remain unsolved for the present.
These, then, are the periods of Maya time: the tun (unit of 360 days), the katun (20 tuns), the baktun (400 tuns), the pictun (8000 tuns), the calabtun (160,000 tuns), the kinchiltun (3,200,000 tuns), and the alautun (64,000,000 tuns). Perhaps even higher multiples existed. The manipulation of these highest periods is discussed in Appendix IV. This was the count of the tuns, as the IS introductory glyph records; the uinals, 18 of which made a tun, and the kins, 20 of which made a uinal, were fractions of the tun. The system is a strictly vigesimal count of tuns.
STARTING POINTS OF THE LONG COUNT
The reckoning of the tuns and the multiples of the tun in the vigesimal system was usually made from a date which was nearly 4000 years in the past at the height of the Initial Series Period. Almost all IS contemporaneous with the monuments on which they are carved fall in Baktun 9, although a few of the earliest belong to the last third of Baktun 8, and the group of latest IS fall in the first three katuns of Baktun 10. It should be remembered that when we speak of a date, such as 9.15.10.0.0, belonging to, or falling in, Baktun 9, we are, almost without doubt, committing an error, for Baktun 9 had been completed over 300 years before that date, and the count was already more than three-quarters of the way through Baktun 10. However, as the Maya did not record a baktun or any other period before it was completed, it has become customary among specialists on the Maya to speak of a date belonging to the baktun which had expired. It is as though one referred to 1920, 1948, and 1965 as dates in the nineteenth century. Nevertheless, the custom of referring to such dates as 9.15.10.0.0 as falling in Baktun 9 is so firmly established, not only among epigraphers, but among students of all branches of Maya archaeology, that to start speaking of such dates as falling in Baktun 10 would cause inextricable confusion; the correction of the error would cause more harm than its perpetuation.
The base from which 9.15.10.0.0 and almost all other Maya dates are reckoned is 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku. This was not the true starting point of the calendar, since 13 baktuns had already elapsed, for this position of 4 Ahau 8 Cumku is written as the completion of 13 baktuns (fig. 32,
1
). Moreover, some calculations deal with dates before 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku. For example, the Tablet of the Cross, Palenque, has an IS 12.19.13.4.0 8 Ahau 18 Zec, which precedes 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku and is linked with it (fig. 53,
1
). This is reckoned from a base 13 baktuns before 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku, but there is no valid reason for supposing that this, either, was the true starting point of the Maya calendar. In fact, I feel confident that there was no such thing as an initial point of departure for the Maya calendar, but, rather, time was conceived of as without beginning or end, and therefore one could project one's calculations farther and farther into the past without ever reaching a starting point. Apart from that concept, it is to be doubted that zero as nothing could be expressed in glyphs.
For the sake of convenience, the Maya chose the point 4 Ahau 8 Cumku, completion of 13 baktuns, from which ordinarily to reckon the LC
[Long Count—JBH]
. Our typical date, 9.15.10.0.0, therefore was 9 baktuns, 15 katuns, and 10 tuns after this point of departure for the reckoning. It is not improbable, although the matter is not susceptible of proof, that 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku was regarded as the date on which the world was recreated, perhaps for the fifth and last time. The LC was presumably invented in Baktun 7 or 8 of the current count, and an interval of that number of baktuns, and perhaps some katuns as well, was set aside to mark the time which was imagined to have elapsed since an event, which, if my supposition is correct, was regarded as the last creation of the world. Groups of 13 baktuns preceding that base would, perhaps, have been allowed for the earlier "suns" (p. 10).
When the LC was born, the highest period seems to have been the baktun. Baktuns were grouped in reentering cycles of 13, after which a baktun would end with the same day Ahau; these cycles probably had no starting point, a Baktun 1 following a Baktun 13 in endless succession. Later, with progress in astronomy and growing skill in computation, the Maya priests burst the bounds of the baktun, and roamed farther into the past: they probed with their calculations outermost time, as modern astronomers with giant telescopes penetrate to the recesses of the universe. The re-entering cycles of 13 baktuns were unsuitable for such calculations, for they could be distinguished from one another only by a cumbersome system of nomenclature. The remedy was simple: baktuns were grouped in 20's to form a higher unit in the vigesimal count, the pictun; and the Baktun 13 of 4 Ahau 8 Cumku became Baktun 0 for purposes of calculation, although the old designation of Baktun 13 was retained for everyday usage.
Perhaps at the same time, perhaps later, periods higher than the pictun were invented, and the calabtun, kinchiltun, and alautun came into existence, each with its distinguishing glyphs. The date when the count was extended backward is not known; the earliest record of it is on Tikal so, erected some time before 9.10.0.0.0. Around 9.13.0.0.0 the Maya priests were much interested in the backward projection of time, and not a few calculations millions of years into the past were made. These are discussed at length in Appendix IV. Suffice it here to say that there are good grounds for believing that in the extended LC our typical date, 9.15.10.0.0, held the position 1.13.0.9.15.10.0.0 3 Ahau 3 Mol. That is to say, there had elapsed 1 kinchiltun, 13 calabtuns, 0 pictuns, 9 baktuns, 15 katuns, 10 tuns, and no extra uinals or kins from the extended point of reckoning. This, however, was not the true zero date, for calculations at Quirigua carry the count very much farther into the past, and, to reiterate, there almost certainly was no such thing as a zero date.
Such calculations were, so to speak, for the senior
wranglers among the Maya priest-astronomers; for all practical purposes they can be ignored, and we can concentrate on the regular LC reckoned from the base 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku. There is, of course, complete arithmetical evidence that all run-of-the-mill IS are computed from that base, and there are many ways of proving the sum. The most obvious, but not the quickest, method is to reduce all the orders of an IS to days and divide the total by 260 and 365, respectively, to obtain the number of days and position in the year of 365 days to be added to 4 Ahau 8 Cumku. Thus Piedras Negras 3 has the IS 9.12.2.0.16 5 Cib 14 Yaxkin (fig. 50,
1
). In terms of days the interval which has elapsed is:
9
×
144000
1296000
(baktuns)
12
×
7200
86400
(katuns)
2
×
360
720
(tuns)
0
×
20
0
(uinals)
16
×
1
16
(kins)
Total of days
1383136
1383136 ÷ 260, remainder 196; 4 Ahau + 196 = 5 Cib.
1383136 = 365, remainder 151; 8 Cumku + 151 = 14 Yaxkin.
Various methods for calculating Maya dates have been evolved by modern students, but as there is little evidence that any of them was used by the Maya priests, I shall not discuss them here; we are interested in Maya ingenuity, not that of the modern student. One may presume that the Maya priest-astronomer knew by heart the dates on which the various katuns and half-katuns of Baktun 9 ended, and merely checked his calculations from those points. Thus in the case of the date just discussed, the Maya priest must have known that 9.12.0.0.0 ended on 10 Ahau 8 Yaxkin. He could calculate in his head that 9.12.2.0.0. fell on 2 Ahau 18 Xul (p. 247) and an addition of 16 days would lead to 5 Cib 14 Yaxkin.
All sculptured IS were carved between the second half of Baktun 8 and the first quarter of Baktun 10 (the extremes contemporaneous with the carvings on which they occur are: 8.14.3.1.12 1 Eb 0 Yaxkin [Leiden plaque] and 10.3.0.0.0 1 Ahau 3 Yaxkin [Xultun 10 and La Muñeca 1]), and every legible IS on the monuments which carries a baktun coefficient of 8, 9, or to is calculated from 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku. All the IS in Dresden which do not involve orders higher than the baktun are calculated from 4 Ahau 8 Cumku or bases very close thereto, and all record dates in Baktuns 8, 9, and 10. Altogether some 445 IS have been reported from the Maya area, all of which, with the exceptions noted above, have 4 Ahau 8 Cumku as their point of departure. The various dates and distance numbers which extend into pictuns and higher orders are discussed in Appendix IV.
THE INAUGURATION OF THE LONG COUNT
The date of the inauguration of the LC, and the reasons which led to the choice of the starting point have given rise to much speculation. In the absence of any authentic facts on that distant matter, one must regard the subject as ideal for the exercise of that joyous pastime, the building of theoretical castles on sand.
Conjectures as to the length of time necessary for the construction of the calendar vary from the adult life of one man (Spinden, 1924, pp. 157-58) to a span of 500 years for gathering only the data which enabled the length of the year to be calculated as approximately 365 days (Morley, 1937-38, 4: 271). I cannot believe that the whole Maya calendar was the work of one man, or that about half a millennium of research was necessary to fix the year as 365 days. Observation extending over many years surely would not have been necessary for a people as intelligent as the members of the Maya hierarchy. Merrill (1945), who made a series of experiments, reports that the length of the solar year to the nearest day is easily determined at the equinoxes and at the passage of the sun across the zenith. Once the idea of a line of sight is developed or it is decided to mark the shadows cast through the year by an upright pole, the approximate length of the year will soon be established. Merrill notes that observations at sunset are better than those at sunrise, and the equinoxes more sharply defined than the solstices.
I should regard the cycle of 260 days as being of considerably greater age than the completed calendar. It is very widely distributed in Central America, and in most areas it has more mythological and ritualistic association than the year of 365 days. Extent of diffusion and aggregation of mythological and ritualistic associations are not by themselves certain indications of antiquity, but taken together they tend to substantiate it. The year of 365 days also would seem to be of very considerable age. I should suppose that those two elements of the calendar functioned side by side for a long time before the evolution of the LC, and probably for some time before the CR
[Calendar Round—JBH]
came into existence.
There is no direct evidence for this last supposition, but this is one line of reasoning which leads to it: it would have been natural to make the vague year of 365 days start with Imix, so that every fourth vague year would be an Imix year (as 365 divided by 20 has a remainder of 5, the first days of the vague years would be Imix, Cimi, Chuen, Cib, Imix, etc.). Inasmuch as Imix is the starting point of the 20-day period, it would be logical, and in keeping with their constant desire to bring into harmony the various cycles of time, for the Maya to have
arranged the contact in such a way that Imix fell on the first day of the vague year; it is reasonable to assume that they once did that. If, however, the relationship was at the beginning somewhat indefinite, it could well be that the starting point of the vague year was shifted by the intercalation of days to keep associations with stations of the solar year. Had such intercalation taken place at a time when the CR date was not firmly fixed, Imix would have lost its contact with the start of the year. Intercalation of days was absolutely against the Maya philosophy of time because the addition of leap days would have thrown the whole delicate system of the calendar awry, but shifts could easily have occurred before the CR system was firmly established without interfering with the mechanism of the calendar because that mechanism had not then been evolved. From this very indirect evidence of the noncoincidence of Imix with the start of the year I think one may tentatively assume that after the invention of the 260-day cycle and the recognition of the vague year of 365 days there was an interval of some duration before the two were engaged to form the CR.
The construction of the LC would appear to be a still later stage in the building of the complex calendar. Much speculation has centered on the reason for the choice of an approximate year of 360 days: it has been suggested that the round of 360 days represents an early attempt to guess the length of the solar year, but from what has been said above, I consider that extremely unlikely. Observation of only two succeeding spring or fall equinoxes or of northward or southward passages of the sun across the zenith would show the Maya that the year was of longer duration than 360 days.
I am inclined to think that the period of 360 days was chosen because the Maya desired a formal year which would invariably start with Imix and end with Ahau. To fulfill that condition, 360 days was the logical choice, for 380 days (it had to be a number divisible by 20) are nearly 15 days beyond the true length of the year. Furthermore, with an approximate year of 360 days the same lord of the night always governs the same nights in each tun. Moreover, at the moment the sum of tuns reaches the sacred figure of 13, 18 (twice the important number 9) sacred almanacs are completed, 4680 being the lowest common multiple of 360 and 260 (13 × 360 or 18 × 260 = 4680).
The only good alternative to a year of 360 days is one of 400, such as was used by the Cakchiquel and possibly, too, by the people of La Venta (Thompson, 1941a, pp. 15-16; 1943, pp. 108-09). Such an arrangement has the advantage of conforming to the vigesimal count, and making the 400-day and 260-day cycles coincide after 13 "years" of 400 days, but with that system each "year" does not start with the same lord of the night, nor is there a reasonably close relationship with the true year. In seeking the date when the LC was inaugurated one must assume that the choice of the starting point was governed by ritualistic or astronomical considerations, or perhaps a combination of both. From what we know of the Maya we can, perhaps, suppose that the start of the year of 365 days would have coincided with some significant point in the tropical year, but I doubt that that was the case at the time the LC was inaugurated, for even should the assumption be correct that the length of the vague year was corrected with occasional additions of days while it was still unrelated to any other count, intercalation would hardly have been permissible once the CR came into being. Intercalation would have upset the relationship between the two counts or broken the unending succession of the days and their bearers. Thus, if the further assumption that there was an interval of some duration between the development of the CR and the inauguration of the LC be justified—and I feel strongly that it is—then there would be no grounds for supposing that the start of the year was at some significant point when the LC came into being. It would have slipped, the gap depending on the length of the period between the invention of the CR and the inception of the LC.
Accordingly, it is logical to suppose that in the choice of a starting point for the LC the placement of first of Pop at some significant point in the solar year was not a factor. That matter would have been beyond control, since, on the assumption made above, the vague year was already in being and could not be changed. Had first of Pop coincided with, for example, the autumnal equinox at the time the year of 365 days was launched, it might have fallen in mid-June by the time the IS was devised, the distance from the autumnal equinox depending, of course, on the number of years that elapsed between the inception of the CR and the birth of the LC. Only if one assumes with Spinden that the whole Maya calendar emerged fully developed from the womb of time can one expect first of Pop then to have coincided with a significant station in the tropical year.
On the other hand, the start of the count of the tuns might have been arranged in such a way that the first day of the tun fell on that same point of the tropical year, although by then the position in the Maya vague year might have been 18 Uo or 13 Zec or somewhere else, depending on the interval that had elapsed between the inception of the CR and the inauguration of the LC. It would also be natural to assume that the first day of the LC would fall on 1 Imix. In seeking the starting point of the LC, therefore, one would expect to find 13 Ahau coinciding with an important point in the tropical year.
More complications ensue. Can one be certain that the correlation of the Maya and European calendars used in this book is correct? What point in the tropical year would have had most significance for the Maya? There are sundry possibilities: vernal and autumnal equinoxes, the winter solstice, the northward and southward passages of the sun across the zenith, the start or end of the rainy season, and the start of the agricultural year. This last in turn could be reckoned as either when clearance of the land starts or when the seed is sown, and the dates for those two activities vary from one part of the Maya area to another. There are too many possibilities.
The earliest object with a contemporaneous date yet found in the Maya area is the Leiden plaque which has the IS 8.14.3.1.12 1 Eb 0 Yaxkin. By that time the IS was fully developed; the inscription gives the name of the current lord of the night, and may have a rudimentary record of the lunar count (Nottebohm, 1944). It is possible that there has survived a calculation of still earlier date, for it is highly probable that most of the IS in Dresden are records of actual observations of celestial phenomena, the earlier ones having been copied from previous editions of Dresden. Seven of these IS fall in Cycle 8, occupying positions slightly later than the IS of the Leiden plaque; two of them are earlier. These last record respectively the dates 8.6.16.7.14 9 Ix 7 Mac and 8.11.7.13.5 3 Chicchan 8 Kankin. It is, I think, a fair assumption that these dates represent ancient records handed down from the times when they were current observations. In that case the LC was established before 8.6.16.7.14.
At one time and another 7.1.13.15.12 8 Eb 0 Pop (Spinden, 1924, pp. 552-55), 7.6.0.0.0. (Teeple quoted in Thompson, 1932, p. 370), and 7.13.0.0.0 (Thompson, 1927, p. 12) have been advanced as dates for the inauguration of the LC. I now think that the reasoning which led to these several choices is in each case defective.
On the assumption that the Maya, between the inception of the CR system and that of the LC, kept a record of the number of CR's and odd years that had passed, it is logical to suppose that they would fix the date of the inception of the CR as the end of a baktun or of a katun, and from that point allow so many baktuns or katuns for the period prior to the inception of the CR and add to that the number of years that had elapsed since that event (bringing the figure perhaps to an even katun) so as to obtain a LC position in the following way:
A
13.0.0.0.0
Base. Last   creation of world?
B
7.0.0.0.0
Theoretical passage   of time.
C
7.0.0.0.0
Inauguration of   CR.
D
5.0.0.0
Time elapsed   between
inauguration
of CR and IS.
E
7.5.0.0.0
Inauguration of   LC.
Since there is no evidence at present for the lengths of B and D, it is impossible to make a fair guess as to the true position in the LC of C and E. The date given above is, I think, the very earliest at which the LC could have been inaugurated; 8.5.0.0.0 is probably about the latest. I would rather expect the figure to be closer to the latter position than to the former. In the hieroglyphic texts as now deciphered there is no definite evidence that the Maya paid attention to the date when the LC was inaugurated. There are a handful of references to dates in Baktun 7 and the first half of Baktun 8, but not one is repeated elsewhere. According to the various assumptions already set forth, Date E should fall on 13 Ahau but would no longer have any significance in the solar year. Theoretically at Date C the start of the vague year should occupy a position of significance in the solar year, but if Interval D is a poor approximation to that which actually elapsed between the inauguration of the CR and the birth of the IS, the relationship of first of Pop with the solar year would be in error according to how far Date E, the reconstructed date, is distant from the actual date of the inauguration of the CR. At Date C minus an unknown quantity 1 Imix probably fell on first of Pop.
Whether 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku has any solar associations depends on the accuracy of the Maya calculations as to the length of the solar year at the time of the inauguration of the LC; I doubt that they were then capable of estimating it much better than as 365.25 days. According to the correlation followed in this hook, 53.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku fell on August 10, on which date the sun crosses the zenith somewhat north of Quirigua and Copan. This, however, I believe is merely coincidence because of the probable inaccuracy of Maya computations at the time the LC was launched, and because there is no valid reason for assuming that any part of the calendar originated in that latitude.
According to the Spinden correlation of Maya and Christian dates, a lunar eclipse occurred on 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku, and, moreover, several planetary events of note took place on and around that date. This has been cited as evidence for the correctness of the correlation in question. However, when Maya astronomy was at its peak of perfection, the priests were unable to calculate lunations over thousands of years without an error of several days, and so it is certain that at the time of the inauguration of the calendar they could not have correctly deduced a lunar eclipse some 3000 years in the past. Indeed, according to their best lunar calculations, the moon age at 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku was 22-24 days, not a full moon. Such evidence merely serves as a warning that the path to the secrets of Maya astronomy is liberally sown with pitfalls of coincidence.
After much argument we go out by that same door through which we entered, still empty-handed but with the satisfaction of knowing that some possible solutions have been eliminated, and some conditions which the true solution must meet have been outlined.
The LC presumably came into being to meet two needs: with the general development of the concept of the eternity of time which was to become the supreme mystery of Maya religion, some greater and handier unit than the CR was a necessity; with an awakening interest in astronomy and a desire, withal, to reduce all time counts to cycles in harmonious relationship with one another, a count by CR alone did not suffice. For example, it is possible that the relationship between the CR and the synodical revolutions of Venus had been solved at a somewhat early date (65×584, 104×365, 146×260). The Maya priest may have desired to bring the moon into harmony with the other factors. Multiples of CR's would have been necessary, but there was no way of distinguishing one CR from another. All started and ended with the same day and month positions. A LC was practically essential for computations of that nature.
INITIAL SERIES INTRODUCTORY GLYPH
An integral part of the IS on the monuments is the IS introductory glyph which stands at the head of the inscription. The variable element in the center of the prefix is the glyph of the deity who rules or is closely associated with the month in which the IS falls (p. 105; figs. 22; 23). One of the IS on Coba 1 lacks this introductory glyph, and the glyph very rarely (Copan 4) stands above a distance number. In a few texts at Copan, notably those of Stelae P and 7, the IS introductory glyph which is above the IS on one side of the monument, is repeated on other sides, although the glyphs which it heads do not comprise an IS. Here the repetitions probably respond to aesthetic considerations.
Copan C has an IS introductory glyph on each face, but these are not followed by IS. Instead there are in each case declarations of 11, 12, or 13 calabtuns followed by dates but without any record of the intervening periods (p. 315). Similarly Copan F has an IS introductory glyph followed by a declaration of "5 Ahau 3 Mac, half period," without the requisite IS, 9.14.10.0.0. The inscription on the lower step of Mound 2, Copan, also has an IS introductory glyph but lacks an IS. Such presentation is highly irregular. For long it has been believed on stylistic grounds that Stelae F, C, and 4, which do not carry IS but have IS introductory glyphs, form with Stela H a group of monuments erected at almost the same time (circa 9.15.0.0.0?).
The constant elements of the IS introductory glyph are the tun sign, the upper prefix, and the pair of lateral elements of the lower prefix. These last are formed of the so-called comb symbol, which in a few inscriptions is replaced by pairs of fishes (fig. 23,
37,39
). It has been suggested (Thompson, 1944) that since the fish and comb signs represent the word "count," the whole glyph, less the variable element and the first prefix, has the meaning of "the count of the tuns" (
u xocan
[or
xocol
]
tunob
), and is comparable to the words "the record of the count of the katuns" (
u kahlay u xocan katunob
) which stand at the head of the first chronicle of Chumayel. In Tizimin and Mani the equivalent expression is
u tzolan katun
, "the arrangement in order of the katuns." Allowing for the fact that in the hieroglyphic texts the count is of tuns, whereas in the books of Chilam Balam it is of katuns, the correspondence is close. In the various chronicles there is no mention of the deity of the month, but that is natural since there follows a sequence of katuns, not a specific date.
An IS which we write 9.15.0.0.0 4 Ahau 13 Yax actually reads, so far as we can now tell: "The count of the tuns. The planet Venus [is the patron]. Nine baktuns, fifteen katuns, the tuns complete, the uinals complete, the kins complete [since 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku]. 4 Ahau [the day on] 13th of Yax." Matter in brackets is understood.
A full-figure IS which we would write 9.15.5.0.0 10 Ahau 8 Ch’en, the Maya would interpret with the aid of the pictorial grouping of the signs somewhat as follows: "The count of the tuns. The moon goddess [is the patroness]. The Chicchan god bears the burden of the baktun. The earth god of the realm of the dead bears the katun. The earth god carries the weight of the tun. The deity who symbolizes completion doffs the burden of the uinal, and has run his course with the kin. The god of the dead rests from carrying the day Ahau, and our divine youth of the maize likewise has reached the end of his stage with Ch’en upon his back" (fig. 60 and frontispiece).
INITIAL SERIES OF CODEX DRESDEN
The IS of Dresden (figs. 46,
17
; 64,
2
) differ in three respects from the kind usually inscribed on the stone monuments. (1) They lack period glyphs, being formed of bars and dots arranged in vertical columns, true positional notation. (2) They lack IS introductory glyphs. Morley (1937-38 4:315) claims that five have this glyph, but it is the common "Men variant" with an unusual prefix. (3) A number of them depart from bases shortly anterior to 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku. In such cases the interval between the bases and 4 Ahau 8 Cumku is expressed
by means of a distance number the kin coefficient of which is enclosed within a ring. Thus on page 70 of the codex there are no less than six IS. The first two read 9.13.12.10.0 9 Ix and 9.19.11.13.0 9 Ix. Under them are the numbers 1.12.6 and 4.10.6, the six kins in both cases being enclosed within a ring which has a knot at the top. Beneath each ringed number is the date 4 Ahau 8 Cumku. If these two IS are counted from 4 Ahau 8 Cumku they will not reach 9 Ix. That is obvious because the coefficient of the kin in each case is 0, and 0 kins added to Ahau reaches Ahau. If the ringed numbers are first subtracted from 4 Ahau 8 Cumku and the IS then added, the required day position is reached:
(13. 0. 0. 0. 0)
4 Ahau 8 Cumku
1.12. 6
subtract
(12.19.18. 5.14
9 Ix 7 Xul)
9.13.12.10. 0
add
(9.13.10.15.14)
9 Ix (12 Muan)
13. 0. 0. 0. 0
4 Ahau 8 Cumku
4.10.   6
subtract
(12.19.15. 7.14
9 Ix 2 Ch’en)
9.19.11.13. 0
add
(9.19. 7. 2.14
9 Ix (17 Ch’en)
It is clear that in these two examples, bases before 4 Ahau 8 Cumku were chosen so that the IS might be multiples of 260 days. Matter in parentheses does not appear in Dresden. Other IS with ring numbers are shown in figure 46,
17
and translated in the caption.
Ix is often difficult when treating of Dresden to draw the line between IS and distance numbers, since both are arranged in descending order and both lack IS introductory glyphs. Period glyphs, however, do occur in Dresden (p. 140; figs. 26,
13,14,32,40,48,57;
42,
43-53
).
IS without period glyphs are not confined to Dresden, for one IS of this type is sculptured in stone (Pestac 1) and records the date 9.11.12.9.0 1 Ahau 8 Cumku. Why this single example of an IS without period glyphs should have been sculptured it is difficult to say. Pestac is an outlying part of the important site of Tonina, the other surviving IS of which are of normal type. Unfortunately a number of the IS at Tonina have been destroyed, for they were on the backs of the heads of statues since decapitated. Their former existence is assured by the pattern of glyphs which remain. Tonina is not far from the western boundary of the Maya area, and it is possible that foreign contacts may have led to this unusual presentation, so far as stone sculpture is concerned. On the other hand it is probable that the original from which Dresden derives also employed positional notation for the presentation of IS, and therefore the idea was not unknown to the Maya of that earlier period.
IS or inscriptions resembling IS, also without period glyphs, are found in sites of La Venta culture, generally attributed to the Olmec, and also occur on the Pacific slope of the Guatemalan highlands. To the culture of La Venta can certainly be attributed the famous Tuxtla statuette, for many years regarded as bearing the earliest known Maya inscription. A discussion of La Venta hieroglyphs and the calendar of that people is outside the scope of this book. Suffice it to say that there is no conclusive evidence that these bar-and-dot inscriptions served as IS, and still less grounds for assuming that they should be reckoned from 4 Ahau 8 Cumku (Thompson, 1941a).
POSITION AND FUNCTION OF THE INITIAL SERIES
The Initial Series was thus named by Maudslay because it stands, with very rare exceptions, at the start of a text (i.e. the top left corner). Usually there is only one IS on each monument, but in some cases there are two. There are two monuments with three IS (Uxul Alt 2, Lacanha 7) and one with four (Coba 1). Commonly, the second IS, if present, occurs on a different face of the monument. An IS is a LC plus required CR date.
The IS usually serves one of two purposes: it may declare the date which the monument was erected to commemorate, usually either the end of a katun, the completion of a half-katun, or the end of one quarter (5 tuns) or three quarters (15 tuns) of a katun (figs. 47,
3;
48,
1;
53,
2
); alternatively it records a date not ending on a tun, which, almost without exception, is prior to the dedicatory date (figs. 50,
1,2;
53,
1,3
). There are good grounds for believing that an IS which does not fall at the close of a period was in almost all cases chosen because the date it carries was connected with the dedicatory date of the monument or the end of the current katun, usually declaring the correct position in the solar year of the date in question or recording a position of lunar importance. The latter may or may not be directly related to the dedicatory date. There is not at present evidence that all IS which do not declare the end of a period fall into this category, but I believe that future research will reveal a relationship of some kind between nearly all IS and the dedicatory date of the monument or the katun current at the time of its erection.
On the other hand, there are a few IS (e.g. Quirigua F, Copan T 11) which repeat dates recorded on earlier monuments, or give their anniversaries in the LC, as in the case of Piedras Negras L 3 (fig. 57,
1
). Such dates, being of outstanding importance for sundry reasons, were repeated on more than one occasion. Somewhat rarely a date was recorded as an IS apparently because of its ritualistic importance. Thus, we find some emphasis
placed on the date 9.4.0.0.0 13 Ahau 18 Yax as a starting point for calculations in the past, presumably because 13 Ahau ends the round of 13 katuns, as noted above; the IS 9.9.9.9.18 9 Etz’nab 16 Zac (Uxul Alt 2) was probably chosen because of. the profusion of "lucky" nines.
When the IS is not the dedicatory date of the monument, one or more distance numbers carry the reckoning forward to the PE
[Period Ending—JBH]
which the monument commemorates. There are some texts, however, notably at Yaxchilan, which, so far as they can be deciphered, do not record a PE, but I am not sure that these are exceptions to the rule, for the information may be given in a way we do not understand (the "Ben-Ich" katuns?), or the count may have been carried forward to altars or lintels no longer existing.
It has been held by some that Maya dates recorded on stelae may refer to historical events or even recount the deeds of individuals; to me such a possibility is well-nigh inconceivable. The dates on stelae surely narrate the stages of the journey of time with a reverence befitting such a solemn theme. I conceive the endless progress of time as the supreme mystery of Maya religion, a subject which pervaded Maya thought to an extent without parallel in the history of mankind. In such a setting there was no place for personal records, for, in relation to the vastness of time, man and his doings shrink to insignificance. To add details of war or peace, of marriage or giving in marriage, to the solemn roll call of the periods of time is as though a tourist were to carve his initials on Donatello's David. Stelae and other monuments chimed the passing hours; they were dedicated to mark the passage of time, that is to say, its arrival at the major
lub
of the katun, or those wayside halts which are the half- and quarter-katuns. Cities which had a highly developed stela cult erected a monument every quarter-katun; those less religiously inclined or less wealthy consecrated a monument every katun.
Some writers have compared the IS to a counting machine of boundless accuracy. Tosh! Accuracy does not enter when it is a question of counting years and days one by one: the IS was a sublime poetic concept; to regard it as a machine is on a par with discussing fan vaulting only as a problem in engineering.
Of the sculptured legible IS, approximating 340, some 230 record the ends of baktuns, katuns, half-katuns, or quarter-katuns. None of the IS of Dresden fall into this category.
DEDICATORY DATES OF MONUMENTS
There are no foolproof rules for determining the commemorative date of a monument, but one is fairly safe in assuming that the latest period ending recorded is that of the monument's dedication, particularly if that is given at the close of the text, although there are exceptions. For instance, Copan S has an IS 9.15.0.0.0, which is followed by a period ending 10.0.0.0.0, but there is good evidence that the latter was not the dedicatory date of the altar but was probably inserted because 9.15.0.0.0 marked the completion of three-quarters of Baktun 9 (more correctly 10). The glyphs lack late features (the tun with horizontal lines, and the St. Andrew's cross as a numerical filler are absent; the Ahau with its crescentic eyes is a type in use around 9.16.0.0.0, but not two katuns later). Furthermore, Copan had abandoned the use of IS by 9.18.0.0.0, and without much doubt had ceased to erect hieroglyphic monuments before 10.0.0.0.0.
Style of the glyphs, detailed treatment of elements of costume and attributes of personages (Proskouriakoff, MS.), location of the monument (not infrequently monuments which follow in a sequence of erection are grouped in a single court), methods of recording lunar data, and length of text and its subject matter (late monuments tend to have abbreviated texts which ignore problems to the fore in earlier times) are all helpful in deciding on the dedicatory date of a monument, if that is in doubt.
Generally speaking, the dedicatory date of a monument is posterior to any non-tun ending date recorded in the text, but, here again, there are exceptions which prove the rule: Los Higos 1 has an IS 9.17.10.7.0 9 Ahau 3 Zec, but a distance number of 7 uinals followed by the anterior date indicator leads back to 9.17.10.0.0 12 Ahau 8 Pax. This is probably the dedicatory date, although on the opposite side there is what may be the start of a distance number (0 kins, 0 uinals), which might have been 10.0.0, and, therefore, carried the count forward to 9.18.0.0.0.
THE GRANDEUR OF THE INITIAL SERIES
As will be set forth in Chapter 7, dates were recorded by other methods which to all intents and purposes are just as good as the IS. For example, a statement "1 Ahau 8 Kayab, end of a katun" fixes the position of a date in a period of 949 katuns. Only after that interval of over 18,000 years will 1 Ahau 8 Kayab again mark the end of a katun, and it will be 18,980 katuns, over of a third of a million years, before 1 Ahau 8 Kayab can once more be the closing day of a Katun 10. Such accuracy should have satisfied the Maya. That statement requires three glyphs; the IS, eight.
There is little doubt in my mind that the IS was carved because its majesty and rhythm did justice to the honor in which time was held. The roll call of the periods has a grand cadence when spoken, and is a panorama of
harmonious glyphs when written; an IS is in itself a prayer and a noble offering to the divine powers. Because it embodied a living creed and a philosophy which was the core of Maya character, it was carved with the same faith, humility, and loving patience as guided the hands that embroidered the magnificent vestments of mediaeval Christendom; the bewildering intricacies of the full-figure IS, veritable pageants in stone, have a deep religious emotionalism comparable to that which inspired the best carving in Gothic—not only of reredos but also of hidden misericord.
Dull pages of dull discussion about the identity of this god or of that, or why jade is an element in one glyph, or why the Moan bird is the form of another, have led us into the swamps of minutiae. If we lift our eyes thence to the heights we may perceive dimly the sublime poetry of time into which the tools of the graver and the legends and myths of the storyteller have transmuted its periods. It is not given to us to see it in the whole clarity of its beauty nor fully to share the exhilaration of its poetry, for differences in mentality and in outlook on life, as well as unperfected knowledge, are veils before our eyes. Yet what we can perceive fills us with reverent wonder at this sublime achievement of the Maya. In truth, the Initial Series, that opening movement of the symphony of time, is a shining nobility, a treasure in history's store of beauty.

=== 2 | Title Page ===
Maya Hieroglyphic Writing (excerpts)
, by J. Eric S. Thompson, [1950], at sacred-texts.com
MAYA HIEROGLYPHIC WRITING
J. Eric S. Thompson
Publication 589
CARNEGIE INSTITUTION OF WASHINGTON
WASHINGTON, D.C.
[1950]
Scanned at sacred-texts.com, July 2007. Proofed and Formatted by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion as required by law at the time. These files may be used for any non-commercial purpose, provided this notice of attribution is left intact in all copies.

=== 3 | Appendix I. Divinatory Almanacs in the Books of Chilam Balam ===
Maya Hieroglyphic Writing (excerpts)
, by J. Eric S. Thompson, [1950], at sacred-texts.com
APPENDIX I
Divinatory Almanacs in the Books of Chilam Balam
Noble stock was graft with crab-tree slip.
—SHAKESPEARE,
Henry VI
, Pt. 2, Act 3, Scene 2
IN SEVERAL of the books of Chilam Balam and in Perez are the sorry remnants of the old art of prognostication of the days of the sacred almanac. These fall into three groups. Two examples (Perez 1 and Kaua 1) of days with their prognostications fitted to uinals of the old Maya calendar form the first, and least European, group; in Perez 1 degenerate examples of the day glyphs are given, but in no other case are any glyphs present. In the second group (Tizimin, Kaua 2, Ixil, Perez 2-4) the days are fitted to the Christian year starting with January 1, and there is varying emphasis on festivals of the Roman Catholic Church. Tizimin, for example, has few ecclesiastical notations; Kaua 2 has saints' names for practically all the days of the year. The names of the Maya months are given, with start of Pop correlated with July 16. Maya influence is even less apparent in almanacs of the third group (Nah and Tekax). Prognostications are confined to a bald statement whether the day is good or had and even that is found with only the first three months; Maya day names are given, but the corresponding numerals are omitted. Maya month names are inserted.
All these almanacs appear to be traceable to two sources, or perhaps even to a single source. Perez 1 and Kaua 1 derive from an almanac fitted to a year 5 Kan. This could have been that of the years 1585, 1637, or 1689. I am inclined to think it may have been a sixteenth-century original. All the remaining almanacs must stem from a single source, for all start with 10 Oc on January 1, and have 11 Cimi as the year bearer on first of Pop. This is, of course, an impossible combination by orthodox Maya standards, and surely reflects the degeneracy of the calendar in colonial times. One explanation of its origin is given below. However, apart from the fact that a Cimi could not be the year bearer, it is inconceivable that compilers of six different almanacs should have independently chosen a year with 11 Cimi on first of Pop when there were fifty-one other choices. Furthermore, Kaua 2 and Perez 2 both pass from 6 Manik to 8 Lamat, and continue 9 Muluc, 10 Oc, 11 Chuen, 12 Eb, etc.; Kaua 1 jumps from to Chuen to 12 Eb, and that suggests strongly that the compiler of Kaua 1 was copying the day list from Kaua 2 or Perez 2 or a common ancestor, and corrected his transcription to conform to the mistake in the original four places further down the list. Furthermore, the sequence of good and bad days and the entries of "warnings and portents and evils imminent" agree so closely that there can be little doubt as to their common source.
PEREZ 1 (MANI)
Perez 1 (pages 96-99) once was part of Mani. It is a fragment consisting of a sequence of 80 days (one is accidentally omitted) which starts with 5 Kan and ends with 6 Akbal. As the starting point 5 Kan is said to be the year bearer, one can assume that the entries correspond to the uinals Pop, Uo, Zip, and Zotz’, although there is no mention of those names. At the end of 20, 40, and 60 days are the phrases: "It turns back a second time," "It turns back a third time," and "It turns back a fourth time." As these entries precede what would be the starting points of the second, third, and fourth uinals, they serve to confirm the arrangement by uinals. On the left of each page are the day glyphs, woefully degenerate and, for the most part, unrecognizable. Each is enclosed within a square; coefficients are lacking. To the right of each glyph its name and number is written in European script, together with the luck of the day and sometimes a more specific divination. For example:
Uaxac Manik utz ma kazi utzul haab lae
, "8 Manik, Good, not evil. Good rain there."
An outline of the aspects of the days is given in Table 20. For the translation of the entries, not only of this almanac but of the rest of the series, I am indebted to Ralph L. Roys. Some of the passages are corrupt; others are in archaic language. All are abbreviated. These factors have made good translations difficult, and the absence of context is a serious drawback, for often more than one translation is possible. As an illustration of the difficulties, one might cite two entries which are of frequent occurrence. The first is the expression
balam haab
, which literally means balam (or jaguar) year. It seems unlikely that the expression can have this meaning here because it is referable to individual days.
Haab
, however, has the meaning of rain in several Maya languages and dialects, and it is therefore logical to apply that meaning to these
entries, particularly since so many deal with rains and planting. This suggestion is largely confirmed by an entry in Kaua 1 where
balam hail
and
balam hab
occur together and seem to refer to the same thing.
Balam hail
is balam rain (or water).
We have no exact information as to what a balam rain may be. The balams are the guardians of the villages and milpas in the beliefs of the Yucatec Maya of the present day and are closely associated with the winds, but as they are coupled with the usual rain gods in prayers, almost as though
balam
and
chac
were synonymous, it is not unreasonable to suppose that a balam rain was one sent by the balams, but balam rains may be unfortunate, and in that case a different derivation is probable. Note jaguar glyphs in phrase at Yaxchilan which often contains the supposed glyph for rainy sky (fig. 46,
10-14,16
).
The second expression which can be translated in more ways than one is
u sian
or
u siyan
, which is often linked to the words
chaac
or
ku
.
Sian
can mean birth, or enchantment, or conjuring in witchcraft, or gift. The various contexts reveal that the meaning which will best fit all the entries is that of
birth
or beginning. This expression has already been fully discussed (p. 259). In the tabulation the comments have been made even briefer than in the originals.
The entries in Perez 1 are entirely of an agricultural nature with the possible exception of a notation to the effect that 10 Men is the day of the burner (p. 99); there are no social entries as in the Tizimin group of almanacs, and the sequence of good and bad days also is quite different from that of the almanacs composing that group.
Perez 1 is probably the most authentic source we now possess for sundry reasons. It is the only almanac which gives the glyphs. Perez 1 and Kaua 1 are the only two which correlate the almanac with the Maya year, and alone fail to list any Christian festivals. Perez 1 is much more reliable than Kaua 1 for reasons which will shortly appear. Nevertheless, I am suspicious of the value of the entries, for I should not be surprised to learn that they had been shifted from a year with a bearer of different name and number.
KAUA 1
Kaua 1 is a section of only 40 days correlated with two Maya uinals, the first entry, the day 9 Kan, being recorded as a year bearer. It is therefore clear that Kaua 1 seeks to correlate the sacred almanac with a Maya year.
The prognostications in Kaua 1, unfortunately, are nearly worthless, for if they are compared with the sequence in Perez 1 they will he found to be about the same. That is to say, Kaua 1 has the same entries for 9 Kan, 10 Chicchan, 11 Cimi etc. as Perez 1 has for 5 Kan, 6 Chicchan, 7 Cimi etc. Clearly, the compiler of Kaua 1 took the entries for a year with 5 Kan as the year bearer, and used them for a year 9 Kan, presumably under the impression that the luck of the day depended on its position not in the 260-day almanac, but in the months.
That the entries for a year 5 Kan were applied to a year 9 Kan and not vice versa is proved by internal evidence. Perez 1 correctly gives one entry concerning the burners, for the day 10 Men is said to be a burner's day. Kaua 1 lists as burner days: 2 Oc, 4 Chicchan, 9 Oc, and 1 Men (corrected from 2 Men) and perhaps 6 Ix. Of these only 4 Chicchan is correct. However, if the year 9 Kan had been formed from the entries for a year 5 Kan, 2 Oc and 1 Men would have been a Oc and so Men respectively in a year 5 Kan and those are true days of the burner (p. 99). On the supposition that 6 Ix was a slip for the following day, 7 Men, its equivalent in a year 5 Kan would have been 3 Men, which is in fact a burner day. 9 Oc is not a burner day either in a year 9 Kan or in a year 5 Kan. It is therefore clear that the author of Kaua 1 copied from the prototype of Perez 1 the entries for Pop and Uo, but changed the day sequence from 5 Kan 6 Cimi, etc., to 9 Kan 10 Cimi, etc., without realizing that thereby he made nonsense of all the entries. That Kaua 1 was not copied directly from Perez 1 is evident from the fact that there are details in the former which do not occur in the latter.
On the other hand, the resemblances between Perez 1 and Kaua 1 are so close, extending even to the same introductory paragraph, and to the same notes that the reckoning turns back at the end of 20 days, that it is apparent that there once existed two almanacs correlated with a year 9 Kan, or perhaps with a Christian year. One had what were probably correct entries; the other jumped the coefficient one place between 6 Manik and 12 Eb. The author of Kaua 1 copied the list of days from the latter, but set against them the entries from Perez 1. I am even inclined to believe that this may have been a piece of conscious antiquarianism, and that the author may have converted entries correlated with a Christian year back to a Maya year. The error in Kaua 2 suggests that that was the source of the day list of Kaua 1 if the latter is conscious antiquarianism. Whether that be the case or not, it is clear that the digits of the entries in Kaua 1 should be reduced by four (for those entries subsequent to so Chuen by five) places to obtain the correct prognostications.
TIZIMIN GROUP
The prognostications in Tizimin, Kaua 2, Ixil, and Perez 2-4, as already noted, are correlated with a Christian year. That the entries derive from a sacred almanac is
abundantly clear. Items assigned to Maya days early in the year usually are associated with its second appearance, 260 days later. Thus January 13 and September 30 carry the same entry,
U kukum tok ch’apahal yani
, "Parade of the Warriors (?), there is sickness," in Tizimin and Perez 4, because 9 Ik falls on both positions. Other dates which carry the same prognostication for both appearances include 11 Kan, 13 Cimi, 1 Manik, 6 Eb, 12 Etz’nab, 1 Ahau, 7 Cimi, 12 Chuen, 1 Ben, 11 Akbal, 12 Kan, 4 Muluc, and 6 Chuen.
The entries in all cases start with 10 Oc on January 1. Maya month names are added, the seating of Pop occurring on 11 Cimi, July 16. This is an impossible situation, for the year bearer must be Kan, Muluc, Ix, or Cauac, and the seating of Pop should, if our theory be correct (p. 127), fall on Akbal, Lamat, Ben, or Etz’nab.
It cannot be coincidence that 9 Kan, which as we saw was the year bearer in Kaua 1, falls on July 14 in all the calendars of the Tizimin group. I suggest that the almanac was adjusted to a Maya year soon after the Spanish conquest when the year bearer fell on July 14. That would have been 1556 to 1560, a time at which the old calendar system was starting to decline, but before July 16 had been accepted as the permanent equivalent of first of Pop. With such a calendar Cimi would have corresponded to July 16. The author of the much later adjustment to a year starting with January 1 made 11 Cimi the year bearer because he had believed (most erroneously) that the Maya equivalent of July 16 was always first of Pop. He must have known that Kan, Muluc, Ix, and Cauac were the year bearers because the Tizimin almanac carries notations to the effect that 5 Ix and 6 Cauac (could) fall on first of Pop, but these entries are opposite the occurrences of those days, respectively, in June and September.
The arrangement of the prognostications, as they now stand, is at variance with what we know of the luck of the days. They are listed below in the order of their favorability, the numbers representing respectively good, bad, and uncertain days: Cimi (9, 3, 1); Oc and Etz’nab (8, 5, 0); Chicchan (7, 5, 1); Caban, Cauac, and Ahau (7, 6, 0); Cib (6, 6, 1); Men (6, 7, 0); Manik (5, 5, 3); Muluc (5, 8, 0); Imix and Eb (4, 8, 1); Ik, Akbal, Lamat, Chuen, and Ben (3, 10, 0); Kan (3, 9, 1); and Ix (2, 11, 0).
Cimi, day of death, and presumably a day of dire misfortune, stands at the head of the list! Most amazingly it is associated with rain. Oc and Etz’nab follow, yet both have low ratings on the monuments. Imix, which was second on the monuments, occupies twelfth place, and Kan, day of maize, is nineteenth on the list!
The luck of the day frequently disagrees with the activity for that day: 1 Kan, 2 Eb, 9 Imix, 12 Men, and 13 Etz’nab are listed as bad, yet they are days for planting; rain is usually welcome in Yucatan, yet days of rain are often listed as evil in these almanacs; clever men are born on 9 Ik and 12 Ik, but these are bad days. r Manik is a good day, but it brings punishment of boys and sickness. In our culture corporal chastisement of little wanton boys might well convert an indifferent day into one distinctly beneficial to the community, but one can be fairly certain that the prognostication refers to divine punishment, a far more serious matter. Indeed, it is not improbable that the entries concerning castigation of sundry groups (nobles, priests, officials, craftsmen, and boys) reflect the last stage of degeneration from the pattern of punishment inflicted by Venus at heliacal rising.
The whole scheme of prognostication is so mangled and so full of errors that it is next door to meaningless. There are many obvious errors and many more which one can infer. One almanac places an event on one day, another places it a day before or after; events that fall on days that repeat in the last 105 days of the year may recur after 259 or 261 days instead of 260. Obvious mistakes in spelling and mutilated and meaningless words and sentences are frequent in all but the simplest entries, and it is clear that the copyists had no idea of what they were copying in the more involved sentences.
One feels like averting one's face at the spectacle of this sad degeneracy. Can any good be gained by examining these monstrous abnormalities? The attempt has been worth while, for it has shown how little faith one can place in the historical reliability of compilers of the chronicles in view of their sorry efforts with the prognostics.
Even this Sodom and this Gomorrah have their Lot: one interesting set of entries, found with the days 1 Ahau, 6 Ahau, and 8 Lamat, surely refer, although in a sadly garbled way, to the Venus cult. The day 8 Lamat is said to be "the jaguar-faced 1 Ahau with the protruding teeth." 1 Ahau is the day of Venus, and undoubtedly serves also as a name for the Venus god at the moment of heliacal rising, when he emerges from the underworld, for 1 Ahau is the
lub
of the Venus cycle. We have seen that Lahun-Chan, who was the god of the planet Venus, had protruding teeth, and there are references to his jaguar features (pp. 77, 218). This passage, therefore, serves to confirm our deductions as to the nature of the Venus god, and at the same time indicates a weak tradition of the old cult which survived the many transcriptions of these 260-day almanacs. Lamat is the day of the planet Venus, although I know of no particular reason for expecting a coefficient of 8 except that it recalls the eight days of invisibility of the planet at inferior conjunction. For 1 Ahau, the day of Venus, we find in these almanacs the entry: "there comes forth a great
putrescence from the underworld by day and night. Sudden death." I recall no direct connection between Venus and putrescence, but the underworld, the land of death, might well have such an association, and Cizin's name may derive from
ciz
, which has a parallel connotation of offensive odor. This prognostic, I should judge, must again refer to Venus at the moment of leaving the underworld at the end of the eight days of invisibility at inferior conjunction; sudden death would denote the death which Venus was believed to deal at the moment of heliacal rising. There is no known connection between Venus and the day 6 Ahau, yet monuments dedicated at 9.14.0.0.0 6 Ahau 13 Muan tend to be decorated with Venus symbols, so 6 Ahau may have been a Venus day of importance.
Notations of the days of the burner period are made in the various almanacs; the survival of this period long after the ceremonies connected therewith had fallen into desuetude bears witness to the former importance of this cycle of ceremonies. The
sian chac
entries seem to be entirely mixed up, but their presence, in however garbled form, testifies to the former prominence of that cycle.
The copyist responsible for Perez 3 is the most careless, for he has many entries a day before or after they should occur. Perez 2 advances the day coefficients by one place on jumping from 6 Manik to 8 Lamat on August 7, but corrects the error on September 18. The same jump occurs on October 5, where the count goes from 13 Cimi to 2 Manik, and again on November 15 where 5 Muluc follows 3 Manik. As a result, day coefficients are two places too great from November 15 to the end of the year. Such mistakes, and they occur in other almanacs on a smaller scale, indicate that the scribes no longer related the prophecies to the Maya number and name combination, but to positions in the Christian year. In Table 20 I have made allowances for these errors, entering the items under their correct days. I have omitted Kaua 1 from the tabulation because of the certainty that all the entries are those for a year 5 Kan changed to a year 9 Kan, and entries concerning the burners and the days on which Maya months were seated have likewise been excluded. I have somewhat simplified the translations and have read garbled words as though they were correctly given. I have also suppressed all entries concerning festivals of the Roman Catholic Church, although these are not without interest in revealing successive steps of degeneration in Maya wit and wisdom accompanied by an increasing interest in church festivals. The last stage in this unhappy descent from the Maya Helicon is reached in the almanacs of Nah and Tekax. In these the Maya day names without their numbers (as useful as a telephone number without the exchange name) are listed,
TABLE 20—PROGNOSTICATIONS FOR DAYS IN ALMANACS
Day Number
Day Name
Good or Bad
Event and Almanac in   which recorded
9
Imix
B
Day of maize,   P1
11
B
For Batabs, T,   P4
1
Ik
G For nobles,   T, P2, P4
3
B
Strong wind, P2
4
B
Day of rain, P2;   fish spawn, Ix
5
B
Strong wind, P2
6
B
Day of rain,   K2, P2
9
B
Warriors   parade, T, T,* P4; sickness, T,* K2, P2, P4; clever men born, P3 (twice)
11
G
Wind comes from   the conch, T, K2, P2-4 (twice each); day of rain, T, K2, P4 (twice)
12
B
Clever men   born, T, Ix, K2. P2-4
1
Akbal
B
Vigil, Ix
3
G
Heavy rains, T,   T,† P4
5
B
Day of rain, P2
11
G
Ah kulel punished   for sins, T, Ix, P2 (twice), P4 (twice)
12
G
Storm, rainy   day, P3
13
B
Vigil, T, Ix,   P2-4
1
Kan
B
Sultry weather,   T, P2, P4; storm, P2; plant, T
4
G
Heavy rain, T,   P4
6
G
Start of rains,   T, Ix, K2,† P2-4 (last, twice); day of rain, P2†
9
G
Gifts, T, Ix,   P3, P4. (twice); plant jicama, T
10
B
Vigil, Ix
11
G
Day of storm,   P2; start of storm, P4; rain falls, T, P2, P3*; end of rainfall, T, Ix, P3
12
B
Lords punished   for sins, T, Ix, K2, P4 (twice); lords die, T, Ix, K2, P2 (twice)
13
B
Day of fasting   for god, T, Ix, P2 (twice), P3,† P4
6
Chicchan
B
Smoky sky, K2,   P2
7
G
Rain, P2
1
Cimi
B
Cizin and death,   K2, P2; deer pestilence, P1
4
G
Start of storm,   T, Ix; birth of god (same?), P3, P4; rainy day, P2
6
G
Storm, K2, P2;   birth of god, T, P4
7
G
Rain, T, P1,   P3, P4; start of storm, T, P1, P3, P4; storm, P3, P4
8
G
Start of storm,   heavy rains, P1
9
G
Strong wind, P2
13
G
Start of storm,   T, Ix, P2-4 (last two, twice)
1
Manik
G
Boys punished,   T (twice), K2, Ix, P2-4 (all twice); sickness, T, P3
8
G
Rain, P1, P4; for   miserable ones, P2
12
G
For planting,   T, Ix, K2, P2, P4
1
Lamat
B
Adhesion of leg   of jaguar (?), T, P2, P4
3
B
Day for beans,   limas, jicamas, P1
4
G
Water falls,   very hard, Ix, P3, P4
6
B
Vigil, abundance,   Ix; kills crops, P1
8
B
Jaguar-faced 1   Ahau with protruding teeth, T, Ix, P2-4
9
B
Milpa matters,   P1
10
Lamat
B
Jicamas, P1
12
B
Encounter with   Cizin, K2, P2
1
Muluc
G
Calm for   planting, T, P3, P4
4
G
Thunder, T   (twice), K2, P2, P4 (last two, twice), P3; clouds wander, P4
5
B
Brings a rainy   day, Ix, P2-4
6
G
Count of   sunsets, T, Ix, P2, P4; day of heavy rain, P3
8
B
Close of vigil,   T, Ix, P3, P4; calm sky, P3
12
B
Penance, 3   nights of vigil, T, Ix, K2, P2-4; encounter with Cizin, K2, P2
1
Oc
G
Great rain, Ix,   K2, P3, P4; great storm, T, P2
3
B
Jaguar year   (rain), P3; wind, T
7
B
Thunder, P2
12
B
Thunder in   west, Ix, K2, P2-4
13
G
Day of rain, T,   K2, P2-4
1
Chuen
B
Perhaps rain in   east, K2, P2
6
B
Conch closed, T   (twice), Ix, P2, P4 (last two, twice), P3* 10.
10
B
Start of sudden   death, strong winds, T; sudden death, 5 days, K2, P2†; start of sudden death,   5 days, Ix, P3,† P4
12
G?
Punishment for   sins of priests, vigil, T, Ix, P2-4 (all twice)
13
B
If rain falls,   sun, P1
2
Eb
B
Plant crops, T
4
G
For deer   hunters, T, Ix, P2, P3,† P4
6
G
For deer   hunting, T, Ix, K2, P2-4
7
B
Wind, flooding   rains, P1
11
B
Sudden death,   for 5 days, K2, P2, P3 (see under 10 Chuen, 13 Ix, 1 Men)
13
B
Day of vigil, T,   P4; sickness, K2
1
Ben
B
Sickness, T   (twice), Ix, K2, K2,† P2, P2,† P3, P3,* 134
3
B
Hunting, T, K2,   P2-4
5
G?
Strong wind for   sowing, P3; shortness of breath, stabbing pain, T, Ix, P2, P4
1
Ix
B
Men die, T; end   of men dying, Ix, P3, P4; birth of lords, T, K2, P2, P3,† P4
4
B
Sins adhere to   chiefs, T, Ix, K2, P2-4
6
B
Vigil, Ix
9
B
Sun also, P1
12
G
Jaguar rains,   T, K2, P2-4
13
B
Sudden death,   P2
1
Men
B
End of sudden   death, T, Ix, K2, P2-4
4
G
Drought, P1
6
B
Rabbit rains,   P4
7
G
Great   thunderstorm, Ix
10
G
Thunderstorm,   Ix, K2, P2, P2,* P4; sun, its burden, P1
12
B
Great storm, planting,   Ix; heavy rain, planting, P2-4
13
G
Fortunate for   traders, T, P3, P4; vigil, T, P2-4
2
Cib
G?
Birth of god   (Chac?), P4
3
G
Bees hived, T,   Ix, K2,† P2 (twice), P3, P3,† P4 (twice)
4
Cib
B
Vigil, T (twice),   K2, P2 (twice), P4
5
G
Jaguar rains,   P1; planting, P3
6
B
Travel in woods   (hunting?), T, Ix, K2, P2-4; call deer, T,† Ix,† P2,† P3, P4†
7
B
Continuous   rain, K2, P4
13
G
Clouds scurry,   K2, P2
5
Caban
B
Sins of nobles   (or craftsmen) punished, T, T,* Ix, P2, P2,* P3, P3,* P4, P4*; sickness, K2
10
G
Birth of Ahaus,   T, P2-4
12
B
Storm in west,   T; bees, wild animals, P1
13
G
Beekeeping, K2,   P2
2
Etz’nab
G
Make settlements,   T, P2
3
G
Banquets,   gifts, T, P4
6
B
Sickness, K2*?,   P2
7
G
Plant, T, Ix,   P2, P3,* P4; plant
noh uah
, T; day   of
noh uah
, P2; perhaps (rain) will   fall, P2; beginning of storm, good rain, P1
8
B
Holy men, T,   Ix, K2, P2, P3,* P4
12
B
Closing passage   of conch (?), Ix, P2, P3, P3,* P4 (twice); sickness, T; death, K2, P2-4
13
G
Plant, T   (twice), Ix, P2 (twice), P3,* P4; rain, T, P2, P3,* P4; perhaps rain, P2; storm   in west, P2, P4; thunder and rain, K2
1
Cauac
B
Cold, T, Ix,   K2, P2, P4 (twice); storm, K2
3
G
Day of rain,   K2, P2; start of rain, P3, P4
5
B
Great wind, T
8
G
Plant
noh uah
, T
9
G
For rulers of hives   (?), T, P2, P4
1
Ahau
B
Comes forth a   great putrescence, T (twice), P2, P3,* P4 (last two, twice); from hell by day   and night, P2, P3,* P4; sudden death, Ix, P3,* P4; fever, Ix
2
B
Cold, T, Ix,   K2, P2; great cold, P4
6
B
There comes   forth a great hellish putrescence, T, P4; great hellish fever from Metnal,   K2; death, P2
8
B
Encounter with   Cisin, T, Ix, K2, P2 (all except T, twice); sudden death, P2; vigil, K2
9
G
Getting ready of   the god, T, P2, P4 (each twice), P3; the birth of the god, P3
10
B
Day of rain,   P3, P4
12
G
Wise men born,   T, K2, P2, P3,† P4; writers born, P2
13
G
Wind, T
* Listed one day early (e.g. 13 Cauac instead of 1 Ahau).
† Listed one day late (e.g. 13 Imix instead of 12 Ahau). Ix, Ixil; K, Kaua; P, Perez; T, Tizimin.
starting with Oc (10 Oc as in the Tizimin group?) on January `. The good or bad luck of the days in a sequence similar to that of the Tizimin group is noted for the first three months of the year; from April on, even that feature is omitted. There are no prognostications; the spaces they should occupy are devoted to the saints and festivals of the Roman Catholic church.
Max Beerbohm writes of "that quality of pathos which makes even unlovely relics dear to us—that piteousness which Time gives even to things robbed of their meaning and their use." It would not be just, but it would be charitable, to ascribe those qualities to these pitiful heirs of a great tradition.

=== 4 | Appendix II. The Correlation Question ===
Maya Hieroglyphic Writing (excerpts)
, by J. Eric S. Thompson, [1950], at sacred-texts.com
APPENDIX II
The Correlation Question
Who can direct, when all pretend to know?
—GOLDSMITH,
The Traveller
IN A PREVIOUS publication (Thompson, 1935) I have reviewed the pros and cons of the various correlations which have been propounded. I have no desire to cross that swamp again, for I still adhere to the conclusion which I then reached, namely, that the 11.16.0.0.0 correlation is the most acceptable; but I still feel that the evidence in its favor is not irrefutable. Accordingly the discussion will be confined to examination of such new evidence as has accumulated in the past 14 years and of the new correlations proposed during that time.
All dates not otherwise specified are in the Gregorian calendar or, in the case of those prior to 1582, have been converted to that system from the Julian or old style reckoning by the addition of the requisite 10 days.
THE 260-DAY COUNT
Lincoln (1942) has investigated the calendar of the present-day Ixil Maya of the northwestern part of the highlands of Guatemala. The year bearers are I’k, Tche E, and Noh, corresponding to the Ik-Manik series. The year bearer 6 Noh (6 Caban) ran from sunset on March 10, 1940, or from midnight, six hours later, until sunset or midnight of March 11, 1940. This is not directly stated in the text, but the date can be recovered from the information that 6 Noh returned at sunset or at midnight of November 25, 1940, and continued through the day of November 26, 1940. The interval from March 10 to November 25 is 260. This is in exact agreement with La Farge's data from Jacaltenango, where a year bearer 7 Ah (Ben) entered at sunset of March 15, 1927, and ran through the day of March 16. The interval from that date to 6 Noh, sunset of March 10, 1940, is 4744, which is the distance from 7 Ah to 6 Noh (64 days and 18 × 260). It is also in agreement with La Farge's data from Santa Eulalia, where a year bearer 12 Chinax (Etz’nab) entered on the evening of March 13, 1932, and continued till sunset of March 14.
As this double dating is confusing, and as, moreover, it seems not impossible that the highland days actually are counted from midnight to midnight or perhaps from dawn to dawn, and may appear to start at sunset because of the guest system (p. 102), I shall not refer in future to the positions in our calendar on which a day may have entered, but that on which it was current. That is to say 6 Noh
entered
at sunset on November 25, 1940, but was
current
on November 26.
There has been some confusion in the discussion of the correlation of Aztec and Maya days of the 260-day period. The best Aztec-European double date is that of 1 Couatl for the surrender of Cuauhtemoc on August 23, 1521 (August 13 O.S.), because this is given by several sources. The distance from July 26, 1553, is 11,660 days. If those are subtracted from 13 Chicchan, the equivalent of July 26, 1553, according to the present-day calendars of Guatemala, the position 1 Chicchan is reached, and that is the Maya equivalent of 1 Couatl.
Sources disagree on the Aztec date for the entrance of the Spaniards in Tenochtitlan on November 18, 1519. Sahagun says it fell on 1 Eecatl on the eve of 10 Quecholli; Chimalpahin gives the position 8 Eecatl 9 Quecholli. Sahagun is surely wrong in giving the Aztec day as r Eecatl because the position 8 Eecatl for November 18, 1519, leads forward to 1 Miquiztli (Cimi) on July 26, 1553. To conform to the 1 Couatl and 13 Chicchan placements, 7 Cipactli must fall on November 18, 1519, and 8 Eecatl on November 19. These two dates have been fully discussed by Seler (1902-23, 1:177-83) and Caso (1939), both of whom conclude that November 18 should correspond to 7 Cipactli.
Spinden (1924, p. 100) calls attention to two other cases of double dating in the Annals of Tecamachalco. The equivalent of September 14, 1575, was a day Itzcuintli three days before 2 Acatl, and which must be 12 Itzcuintli; the second double dating gives February 11, 1576, as corresponding to 4 Tecpatl.
The first of these dates, projected backward, leads to 13 Couatl (Chicchan) on July 26, 1553; the second is not in agreement with the first. The interval in Aztec positions is 148 days; in the European calendar it is 150. Therefore, according to the first entry 4 Tecpatl would have to correspond to February 9. Should the second entry be the correct one, the equivalent of July 26, 1553, would be 2 Mazatl (Manik).
We have therefore four entries from Aztec records. The 1 Couatl date, given by three independent native sources, leads to 13 Couatl (13 Chicchan) on July 26, 1553; the
first entry in the Annals of Tecamachalco does likewise. The second entry in the Annals of Tecamachalco leads to 2 Mazatl (Manik) on July 26, 1553; the better of two contradictory statements on the entry of the Spaniards into Tenochtitlan leads to 1 Miquiztli as the equivalent of the same Gregorian date.
This is pretty good evidence that the Aztec almanac was in line with those still functioning in the highlands of Guatemala, and that therefore Landa was probably wrong in placing 12 Kan 1 Pop on July 26, 1553. He should, I think, as La Farge has previously pointed out, have equated 12 Kan with July 25 and 13 Chicchan with July 26. Indirect support of this is perhaps deducible from evidence on the Chol calendar presented below.
There is a possible explanation of this one-day difference: Landa reached Yucatan in 1549; his calendar is securely dated as 1553, but it is extremely doubtful that Landa's native informant had enough knowledge of the European calendar to make the correlation of the two systems. It is possible, or even probable, that Landa had acquired sometime before 1553 the information that the year bearers fell on July 16 (O.S.), and when he came to set his Maya data against the European calendar, he utilized the information that he had gathered two or three years earlier, unaware of the fact that, because of the leap day in 1552, the position 1 Pop had moved from July 16 (O.S.) to July 15. It had stood at July 16 (O.S.) from 1548 to 1551. He might well have picked up the July 16 equation in 1550 or 1551, for at that time Christianity had made little impression in Yucatan (human sacrifice was still rampant 10 years later), and there is no reason why Landa should not have witnessed the year-bearer celebrations in some heathen community in 1550 or 1551, or casually heard of it from one of his colleagues, and made a note of the date in the European calendar. Probably at that time the complete integration of the Maya calendar with paganism was hardly apprehended, and therefore it had not yet been deemed a work of the devil meriting extirpation.
As we shall see in discussing the LC, there is indirect evidence which might support the above explanation of the apparent error of one day in Landa's correlation.
THE 365-DAY COUNT
In the annual report of the Division of Historical Research, Carnegie Institution of Washington, for 1945-46, F. V. Scholes gives advance notice of a hitherto unknown manuscript on the Manche Chol. This is Martin A. de Tovilla's
Relación histórica dyscreptiva de las provincias de la de Verapaz y de la del Manché de el Reyno de Guatemala
. Scholes presents an extract dealing with the Chol calendar from the manuscript, which is dated May 17, 1635. Tovilla states that the 360-day period ended June 28 and was followed by "the five days of great fast," which ended July 3. "Thus on July 4th begins the first day of the year according to their account."
It appears probable that this account was obtained from the Indians in the period 1631-33. If the latter date, 20 leap days had caused a backward slip in the Chol calendar of that amount, and new year in 1553 would have corresponded to July 24. This is one day before our corrected equation of 12 Kan 1 Pop = July 25, 1553. It will be remembered that Tovilla's dates are in Gregorian and that a leap day was intercalated in A.D. 1600. We do not know what set of year bearers the Manche Chol favored. If they used the Akbal-Lamat set that would account for the one-day discrepancy from the Yucatan position. That they so did is probable since the Kan-Muluc set stems from a Campeche-Yucatan innovation, and no other part of the Maya area, so far as we know, adopted the new system. In that case Chol 12 Kan 2 Pop would have fallen on July 25, 1553, and 11 Akbal 1 Pop would have been the year bearer on July 24, in agreement with our deduction.
It is probably more than a coincidence that the Chol calendar from the Alta Verapaz (Thompson, 1932) starts the year on July 14. If this is assumed to be Old Style dating, it would mean that the calendar had been frozen into the European between 1548 and 1555, depending on whether the Yucatec year started on July 15 or 16 (O.S.) in 1553 and on which set of year bearers the Chol used. The reductions in the Alta Verapaz culminated in the year 1549.
SHIFTS IN YEAR BEARERS
It has now been established fairly satisfactorily that the shift which caused, for example, the second, seventh, twelfth, and seventeenth positions in a month to coincide with Ahau, rather than the third, eighth, thirteenth, and eighteenth positions, took place at least as early as the middle of Cycle 9, in Campeche, and that it had no effect on the LC, for Etzna 18 and 19 give IS 9.12.0.0.0 10 Ahau 7 Yaxkin and 9.13.0.0.0 8 Ahau 7 Uo. Furthermore, a date 9 Ahau 17 Mol, which is followed by a head and then the katun sign with bracket, occurs on Stela 9 at that same site (fig. 35,
9-11
), and this almost surely corresponds to 9.19.0.0.0 9 Ahau 7 (8) Mol (Proskouriakoff and Thompson, 1947). None of these readings is absolutely certain, but they are all highly probable and, taken together, make a very strong case for this shift having occurred about the middle of the Classical or Initial Series Period.
The IS at Xcalumkin reads 9.15.12.6.9 7 Muluc (1 Kankin). Following Glyph A of the lunar series there is an unknown glyph with coefficient of 1. It is logical to
assume that this is a head variant of Kankin, and that the coefficient of 1, accordingly, is evidence that by that date the shift had been adopted at that site (fig. 35,
8
). Miss Proskouriakoff has also noted a date 5 Ahau 2 Kayab, surely corresponding to 10.1.0.0.0 on Oxkintok 3 (fig. 35,
15
).
There are also two stelae (nos. 18 and 20) at Yaxchilan which record respectively 3 Eb 14 Mol and 6 Ix 16 Kankin, both of which are in the new system. Miss Proskouriakoff points out that these two stelae belong to a group of monuments at Yaxchilan which has stylistic affinities with the Puuc (fig. 35,
12,13
).
Lunar data from Etzna confirm that there was no break in the LC. Etzna 19 has a lunar series perhaps recording a moon age of 25 days, whereas one would expect about 27-28 days. The reading of 25 days is a little open to question. Both D and E are present. The former, of course, is without coefficient; the latter has an irregular bar in front of it, to the left of which there are two or three dots, probably weathering in the frame. The Xcalumkin IS conforms to the calculated moon age of that date. The date of Etzna 18 was chosen partly because the recorded moon age agreed with 9.13.0.0.0, but stylistic considerations (Stelae 19 and 18 are very similar in design) confirm the choice. The lunar series on this stela, accordingly, can also be used as evidence against a break in the LC.
The data from Etzna show clearly that the shift in month positions had no effect on the LC. It is necessary, therefore, to discard the possibility that this shift may have been accompanied by a break in the katun count, as Weitzel (1947) has supposed. Similarly, the one-day break which I had postulated at the time of the shift (Thompson, 1935) cannot have taken place. I think, therefore, that in view of the probability that Landa was one day off in placing 12 Kan on July 16 (O.S.), and the virtual certainty that there never was a break of one day in the LC, my original Ahau equation of 584,285 must be reduced to 584,283, making it two days greater than the Martinez-Hernandez equation.
LONG COUNT
No new information of a direct nature bearing on the engagement of tuns or katuns in the LC is forthcoming. It does seem almost certain that the author of the series of prophecies for the years in a Katun 5 Ahau which is given in Tizimin and Mani had access to the list of tun endings which was utilized by Don Juan Xiu when he made the entries on the famous page 66 of the Chronicle of Oxkutzcab. It would appear that the unknown author took the entry of a tun ending on 5 Ahau 17 Zec in a year 13 Kan beginning in 1541 and made it the start of a katun in 1593 by adding one CR. There seems to have been some doubt about the month position. Don Juan Xiu writes 5 Ahau 16 Zec; the Tizimin and Mani versions have 5 Ahau 15 Zec; it should be 5 Ahau 17 Zec. Later, the author inserts material which indicates that the katun ended on 5 Ahau in 1613, and it is obvious that he was not at all well acquainted with the workings of, the katun count. The important point, however, is that he almost certainly had before him the sequence of tuns utilized by Juan Xiu, and therefore that series was an important source of material, and may have been in existence a long while before Juan Xiu copied it in A.D. 1685. We can be certain, however, that the statement that the series of prophecies was written in European script in Chetumal in 5544 is a falsification. Obviously no Maya could have written in European characters as early as 1544, a year before the arrival of the first Franciscan friars in Yucatan.
A puzzling feature in Landa's typical year is that the prophecies for the year were read on what would appear to have been 5 Zip, and this was followed in succession by the feasts of the doctors, hunters, and fishers, respectively, on 6, 7, and 8 Zip. One wonders why the prophecies for the year were read in Zip, rather than at the beginning of Pop, and why these other important festivals should have followed in quick succession. It struck me as possible that these entries refer to celebrations for the new tun rather than for the new year. Indeed, one gets the impression from Landa's account that the question of the prophecies for the year was settled during the ceremonies which began in Uayeb.
According to the 11.16.0.0.0 correlation (equation 584,283), tun endings between 1551 and 1553 were:
(11.16. 12.0.0)
4
Ahau
7
Zip
August 31, 1551   (O.S.)
(11.16.13.0.0)
13
Ahau
2
Zip
August 25, 1552   (O.S.)
(11.16.14.0.0)
9
Ahau
17
Uo
August 20, 1553   (O.S.)
The festivals described by Landa were:
Prophecies for   year
5 Zip
August 29   (O.S.)
Doctors’ feast
6 Zip
August 30   (O.S.)
Hunters’ feast
7 Zip
August 31   (O.S.)
Fishers’ feast
8 Zip
September 1   (O.S.)
Plausibly, although one cannot be more positive than that, Landa collected data on these festivals in 1551, just as he may have obtained the 1 Pop = July 16 equation at that time, or perhaps in 1552. In the one case the festivals would have clustered about the new tun; in the other, they would have fallen in the first days of the new tun.
CERAMIC EVIDENCE
The evidence of pottery, I think, still continues to disbar the Spinden correlation and also any correlation that makes any position in the Maya LC prior to 11.0.0.0.0
coincide with the Spanish conquest. To discuss the matter at great length would not be advisable at this time, but one or two outstanding points can be reviewed.
In the Maya area plumbate pottery of the effigy type appears after the Initial Series Period, for it has been found in tombs at Copan built in refuse of buildings of the Great Period, and is nowhere found with deposits of that period in the Peten. It is absent from the Puuc except for one sherd at Uxmal (Brainerd, 1941), but it is associated with buildings of the Mexican Period at Chichen Itza and, on the evidence of one vessel purposely deposited in the debris of the Caracol, it was still in use when that city was abandoned. Apparently, it had disappeared by the time Mayapan had established itself firmly as the chief city of United Yucatan.
In the Valley of Mexico and surrounding areas plum-bate occurs in the Mazapan Period, but it is wanting from Aztec II-IV, and from ceramic deposits earlier than Mazapan. Vaillant (1941) places the start of Aztec II around A.D. 1300; Caso (1941) has the same horizon commencing at approximately A.D. 1225. I am inclined to favor the Caso dating, but let us split the difference and consider A.D. 1260 as the inception of Aztec II.
The best reconstructions of Yucatecan history (Roys, 1933; Thompson, 1941b) place the abandonment of Chichen Itza in the last decade of the twelfth century. This, it will be seen, agrees well with information from central Mexico, for plumbate continued for a short while after the conquest of Chichen Itza, say until A.D. 1225, whereas it had disappeared in central Mexico before A.D. 1260.
The Mexican Period is said to have lasted 220 years and certainly started after 10.3.0.0.0, because hieroglyphic stone lintels at Chichen Itza belong to the pre-Mexican Period. We have therefore:
End of Initial   Series Period
10. 3.0.0.0
220 years of   Mexican Period
11.0.0.0
10.14.0.0.0
Mayapan   dominant 260 years
13.0.0.0
11. 7.0.0.0
Post-Mayapan   Period 80 years
4.0.0.0
Spanish   conquest of Yucatan
11.11.0.0.0
This scheme, of course, is a rough one. If a hundred years on either side is allowed, the range of dates in the LC corresponding to the katun of the Spanish conquest would be from 11.6.0.0.0 to 11.16.0.0.0. Actually, there is some evidence that the Mexican conquest of Chichen Itza was not in 10.3.0.0.0, but in 10.8.0.0.0, and in that case the final date becomes 11.16.0.0.0. Adjustments might shorten these periods sufficiently to lead to an 11.3.0.0.0 correlation, but the periods can hardly be expanded to agree with the 12.9.0.0.0 correlation, for there is then a displacement of plumbate or a gap of some 350 years between the end of the Initial Series Period and the appearance of effigy plumbate. Such a gap can hardly have existed in view of the certainty that the appearance of simple plumbate can not be set long after the close of the Initial Series Period; it may, in fact, be coeval with the final stages of that period (Thompson, 1948), and effigy plumbate probably followed close on simple plumbate.
The 12.9.0.0.0 correlation is clearly too long; is the 11.3.0.0.0 correlation too short? That depends on the estimated length of the Mexican Period at Chichen Itza. The end of plumbate (c. A.D. 1260), which we have seen was shortly after the fall of Chichen Itza, becomes 10.8.15.0.0 in that correlation; the start of the Mexican Period can not be earlier than 10.3.0.0.0 because at that date pre-Mexican buildings and hieroglyphic lintels were still being erected. At the outside, then, there are about 110 years into which to fit the Mexican Period, probably nearer 80 years, for one must allow some 20 years for the partial collapse of the Caracol after the abandonment of the site and before the deposit of the plumbate jar in its collapsed masonry, and the introducers of Mexican influences can hardly have walked into Chichen Itza the day after 10.3.0.0.0 was completed. The architects must tell us whether it is reasonable to suppose that the great mass of Mexican buildings could have been erected in that time, and, furthermore, whether or not at least three distinct styles or phases (Early Castillo, Warriors, and that group of late degenerate structures of which the Temple of the Initial Series, House of the Grinding Stones, Temple of the Interior Atlantean Columns, and the Casa Redonda are examples) could be compressed into a period of 80-110 years. Perhaps this ceramic and architectural frame can be garbed in the 11.3.0.0.0 correlation, but I fear the fit will be a bit tight around the hips and quite a lot of ankle may show.
THE MAKEMSON CORRELATION
The ingenious thesis of Dr. Makemson (1946) is that Landa never attempted a day-for-day correlation, but that the July 16 = 1 Pop equation was the work of a later copyist. Why Landa should have gone to the considerable trouble of placing the calendar for 1553 against the Maya year without attempting to correlate the two is hard to explain, but Dr. Makemson supposes that he did this. She further supposes that a copyist noted Landa's entry against 1 Imix 18 Yax, "Here begins the count of the calendar of the Indians, saying in their tongues 1 Imix," and that the copyist noted that this entry occurred opposite July 17; further, that the copyist supposed that the day began on sunset on July 16 and ran through July 17. She next
assumes that the copyist, in view of the above entry, rearranged the whole calendar to make 12 Kan 1 Pop coincide with July 16. To those suppositions yet others must be added. We must assume that only this copy or others made from it was available in Yucatan, that the Maya were so ignorant of their calendar that they accepted its start on July 16, in midsummer at a time when the maize was about a foot high, whereas they had known, according to the Makemson thesis, that new year fell late in the fall, long after the maize had been harvested. We must also suppose that the scribe—a member of a class of notorious hack writers—knew what no one else has ever reported from Yucatan, namely, that the Maya day ran from sunset to sunset, and that he corrected Landa in that respect. On the other hand, we must assume that he was so ignorant of the Maya calendar that he did not know that 1 Imix was the start of the 260-day almanac, although he had read it in Landa's manuscript, in the sentence before the place where he is supposed to have inserted the statement that 1 Pop was always on July 16.
Mrs. Makemson's idea that the Maya were so ignorant of their calendar that they accepted Landa's scribe's version of it is contradicted by Sanchez de Aguilar's statement that the attempts of the early friars to extirpate the Maya calendar were without success because most of the Maya knew it because it had been handed down to them from their forebears. Sanchez de Aguilar, who places first of Pop on July 17, surely did not take his material from Landa. His information on native customs does not repeat Landa; it supplements him. Moreover, in the use of the expression
cuch haab
and in the three names he gives for Uayeb he cannot be following Landa who used no such Maya terms. His spelling of month names differs from that of Landa. Accordingly, Aguilar is an independent source for the Maya year's having started with first of Pop in mid-July. If that is the case, Mrs. Makemson's elaborate explanation of the actions of this rascally scribe falls to the ground, but that is the cornerstone of the elaborate structure she has erected to house an astronomical correlation. Without it this towering mass of assumptions piled one upon another can ill withstand "from the lips of truth one mighty breath." Having dismissed Landa's correlation, Mrs. Makemson opts for an Ahau equation 489,138, which is just 246 days before the Spinden correlation. The result is that 12 Kan 1 Pop coincides with November 22, 1552 (Gregorian), and holds the LC position 12.9.17.9.4.
This correlation shares with that of Spinden the overwhelming disadvantage of leaving a great gap in the ceramic sequences of the Maya area and central Mexico, which has already led every person who has studied the pottery of either area to abandon it, but at the same time it does not partake of the one strong point in favor of the Spinden correlation, namely, agreement (with a one-day lag) with the almanacs of the Aztec and the present-day Maya of the highlands of Guatemala. Furthermore, all sources place the beginning of Pop during the sixteenth century in July, and, since Mrs. Makemson's paper was written, data on the Manche Chol calendar have confirmed this general equation. I can see no reason for supposing that all the sources which make Pop coincide with July 16 (O.S.), or thereabouts, stem from Landa. Mrs. Makemson to the contrary, we have no certain information that Landa's manuscript was widely copied in Yucatan, nor is its influence apparent in all later historical documents written by Spaniards, although some of the authors of the Relaciones de Yucatan had access to it. Lopez de Cogolludo and Herrera probably studied a copy in Spain.
I do not think that much stock can be put in the Makemson thesis that the festivals detailed by Landa fit better a year starting in November than one starting in July. The descriptions of the rain-making ceremony in Mac and Pax have been shown by Long (1923a) to refer to the burner period, a celebration related not to the year, but to the 260-day period. Mrs. Makemson supposes that the reason for the absence of festivals in Ceh was that the men were busy in the fields at that time (June 29-July 18 in her correlation), but it is in February, March, April, and early May that the agriculturalists are most busy. Her correlation, of course, agrees very well with the lunar data and that concerning the planet genus, but that was the basis on which it rested. The paper serves to illustrate the dangers of trying to establish a correlation on two or three lines of evidence instead of considering all evidence, that of the positions in the 260-day almanac, the years, the katuns, the moon, Venus, pottery sequences and architecture.
ESCALONA RAMOS CORRELATION
A correlation which makes the katun of the Spanish conquest occupy a position in the vicinity of 11.3.0.0.0 has had supporters for many years. Lehmann (1910) was probably the first to propose such a correlation, and Leslie Mitchell had a somewhat similar scheme. Escalona Ramos (1940) has published a day-for-day correlation using the Ahau equation 679,108 which makes 11.3.0.0.0 13 Ahau 13 (12) Pax correspond to March 11, 1543 (O.S.). This causes Landa's 12 Kan 1 Pop to fall on May 1 (O.S.), which means that it is 75 days out of conformity with the almanacs of all other groups, and in disagreement with what Landa himself writes. Escalona Ramos solves this problem to his own satisfaction by supposing that there were two different calendars, one the LC, the other the popular calendar. He supposes that in the popular
calendar leap days were inserted, and cites a hodgepodge of long-since discredited references to the use of leap days by Aztec and Maya. I can see no evidence whatever for a second calendar which comprises a separate cycle of 52 years, with insertion of leap days every fourth year. If this was the popular calendar, why is it that the popular calendars of the present-day Maya of the Guatemalan highlands do not also insert leap days, and why should those almanacs without leap days check (with a one-day gap) with 12 Kan on July 26, 1553, which was in a cycle allegedly corrected by the insertion of leap days? Furthermore, we have the definite statement of Tovilla that the Manche Chol did not use leap days, and their new-year's agrees within a day or so with Landa's date for 12 Kan 1 Pop by counting back the requisite multiple of 365 days, not a multiple of 365¼ days. The argument this 52-year cycle with its leap days is against all the evidence, and represents an unsuccessful attempt by the of the correlation to keep one foot in the camp astronomy and the other in the Landa year. If Escalona Ramos accepts Landa, his lunar data are about nine days out. He must, therefore, ignore Landa's year or reconcile by this strange method with his other data.
This correlation does not place Venus at heliacal rising after inferior conjunction on any of the possible dates in Dresden. Escalona Ramos chooses as his base 10.10.11.12.0 1 Ahau 18 Kayab, at which time, according to his calculations, Venus was 235 days past heliacal rising and about to be lost to sight, about 53 days before superior conjunction. However, the Maya and other peoples of Middle America were interested in heliacal rising of Venus four days after inferior conjunction at the end of the eight days of invisibility. The Venus table in Dresden ends at that point; there is no emphasis on heliacal setting nearly two months before superior conjunction.
Although I have not been averse to an 11.3.0.0.0 correlation, I can see very little to recommend this particular version of it.
10.10.0.0.0 (WEITZEL) CORRELATION
The latest correlation to be proposed makes 10.10.0.0. 13 Ahau 13 Mol the katun of the conquest (Weitzel, 1947). Weitzel's thesis is that month positions were shifted forward one position, i.e. 4 Ahau 8 Mol shifted to 4 Ahau 7 Mol, in order to distinguish dates in a new calendar which was based on a concept of counting time by the day on which the period started rather than that on which it was completed, and this was achieved by subtracting 80 days, viz.:
(10.5. 0. 0.0)
10 Ahau 8 Muan,
katun ends
May 18, 1448   (O.S.)
4.0
(10.4.19.14.0)
8 Ahau 7 (8)   Zac,
katun begins
February 28,   1448 (O.S.)
Presumably Weitzel does not suppose that the katuns were given any LC position in his new calendar. He assumes that this new concept of counting by the beginning days of periods was due to Mexican influences, and cites the Mexican year of 365 days as being named for its beginning date, but that is not certain, for Caso (1939) brings forward good, although not irrefutable, evidence that the Aztec years were named not by the first day of the year then current but by the last day of the year (Caso, 1439). Even should he not be convinced by Caso's arguments, there is not a tittle of evidence for placing the Aztec year bearers at the start of the year. The alternative thesis places them at the start of Toxcatl (the sixth or seventh month).
Furthermore, texts from Etzna already cited (p. 305) make it clear that the shift of one day in month positions made no difference to the LC. The date 9.12.0.0.0 is recorded as 10 Ahau 7 Yaxkin at Etzna, whereas other cities wrote it 9.12.0.0.0 10 Ahau 8 Yaxkin. Nowhere is a there any evidence for a backward shift of 80 days.
In an attempt to reconcile his correlation with the archaeological picture, Weitzel is forced to consider such purely Maya buildings as the Monjas and the Three Lintels as of the Mexican Period. No Maya hieroglyphic inscription at Chichen Itza can be safely referred to the Mexican Period. Weitzel cites an inscription on the tail of a serpent column in the definitely Mexican Temple of the Wall Panels in support of his ideas, but he omits to repeat what had been written on this subject by the excavator: "The portion belonging to the north column is plainly part of a hieroglyphic lintel which has been cut down to the proper size and the feathers and rattle treatment added, so that there is almost complete obliteration of the glyphs" (Ruppert, 1931, p. 124). The plate amply demonstrates the correctness of Ruppert's description, and in the caption repeats the information that the stone is reused. The only other writer to treat of this inscription likewise notes that it is "a re-used inscription fashioned into a serpent's tail" (Beyer, 1937, p. 169). It is hard to see how the re-use of a piece of a lintel as part of the tail of a serpent can be taken as evidence for the contemporaneity of hieroglyphic stone lintels with buildings of that period. Nor is the presence of a snake with a human head in its jaws evidence that the lintel on which it occurs belongs in the Mexican Period, as Weitzel claims, since y this motif is found throughout the Classical Period in the Central Area (e.g. Yaxchilan L 13, 14, 15, 25).
If the Initial Series Lintel was not re-used—and it almost certainly was because part of the inscription was
covered when it rested on the Atlantean columns—an extraordinary archaeological situation arises. It is known that Atlantean columns belong to the close of the Mexican Period and are later than buildings in the styles of the Temple of the Warriors, the Temple of the Jaguars, and the Temple of the Wall Panels. The Initial Series Lintel was dedicated in 10.3.0.0.0, but the lintels of the Monjas are admitted by Weitzel to have been dedicated in the same katun. In fact, the CR date of the Temple of the Initial Series is a year earlier than that on the various lintels in the Monjas, both readings again being accepted by Weitzel. There is some reason to believe the Monjas lintels may have been re-used because in some cases the width of the inscribed part of the lintel is too great for the doorway, and parts of glyphs are hidden under the masonry. Even ignoring that possibility and accepting the lintels as contemporaneous with that typically Maya construction the second story of the Monjas, Weitzel's scheme allows no time at all for the architectural and stylistic sequences which include such buildings as the sub-Castillo, the Castillo, and the Temples of the Chac Mool, the Warriors, the Jaguars, the Wall Panels, and the High Priest's Grave. This is so because this whole sequence and more besides lie between the second story of the Monjas and the Atlantean columns of the Initial Series Temple. Too much time may be allowed for the Mexican Period at Chichen Itza by other correlations, but one can not reduce that span to nothing.
Furthermore, in the Weitzel scheme Chichen Itza had not been abandoned by A.D. 1400, but we have seen that Chichen Itza had been deserted before the end of the plumbate horizon, which on evidence from the Mexican highlands almost surely ended about A.D. 1250. Weitzel's correlation also demands that the period of Mayapan's domination coincided with the occupation of Chichen Itza, which again is against the ceramic and architectural evidence. In addition to being at complete variance with the ceramic and architectural evidence, this correlation fails to agree with the data on the Aztec and highland Maya calendars which lead to the equation 12 Kan = July 25, 1553. His Ahau equation can be deduced to be 774,078.
Weitzel assumes that Christian influence in Yucatan was strong enough to cause the calendar to be frozen into the European year between 1528 and 1531; I deem that inconceivable, for at that time Yucatan was unconquered, and there were then no missionaries at work in the province. The attempts of the Montejos to conquer Yucatan from 1531-35 were never consolidated, and we can be sure that the calendar was not frozen at that time, and that no serious attempts had yet been made to evangelize the country. It was not until 1539 that Champoton became permanent Spanish territory, and not until 1541 that the final conquest of Yucatan was commenced and pushed with determination to its conclusion in 1546. It was not until 1545 that the friars arrived, and the first attempt was made to Christianize the country; even then the friars were too few to make much impression on the native way of life. The Maya certainly did not know enough about the European calendar to change their own to conform with it in or before 1532, and one can be reasonably certain that 1 Pop had not been frozen at July 16 even 20 years later.
Weitzel must also assume that the 260-day almanac was tied to the European year, and that is almost unthinkable. The Weitzel thesis requires us to assume that once every four years there was a nameless day (inserted at February 29, 1532, 1536, 1540, etc.?), but no such arrangement was ever followed in the 40o years of Spanish domination in Guatemala. If the last unfrozen year in Yucatan had started in 1530, the year bearer according to Weitzel would have been 2 Muluc on first of Pop equivalent to July 26, 1530 (Gregorian), but the present-day calendars of the Guatemalan highlands projected backwards and the Aztec almanac projected forward from 1521 make to Kan, not 2 Muluc, fall on that date.
Weitzel asserts that the Maya year was frozen into the European year so that from 1532 onwards 1 Pop always fell on July 16 (O.S.), but at the same time he uses an equation 2 Ix 1 Pop = July 13, 1543 (O.S.) to bring the 11 Chuen 18 Zac = February 15, 1544 (O.S.), equation into his scheme. Apart from the fact that the entry in question surely dates from much later than 1544, he can scarcely freeze the year between 1528 and 1532, and then get confirmatory evidence for his correlation in an unfrozen entry supposedly a dozen years later.
In brief, this correlation is based on two false premises: (1) the shift in month positions was a late innovation due to a wish to bring the Maya calendar into conformity with supposed Mexican practice, and (2) the shift in month positions was accompanied by a break of 80 days in the katun dates. The correlation is contrary to all archaeological evidence and fails to agree with the almanacs of the Aztec and present-day Maya peoples of the highlands of Guatemala. Moreover, the postulate that the Maya year was frozen into the European year before 1532 is untenable; a second postulate, that the Maya were naming their katuns for their opening days, is contrary to the general evidence (p. 182). One might also add that the evidence for a Katun 11 Ahau beginning late in 1546 is very poor.
If a new correlation is needed, we may have to discard the katun count, but at all costs keep the equation 12 Kan 1 Pop = July 25, 1553.
CONCLUSIONS
There is no prospect, I believe, that any of the three correlations just reviewed can be the right one. The 11.16.0.0.0 correlation with Ahau equation 584,283 still seems best to fit the sundry requirements. The possibility of a pre-Columbian break in the calendar becomes even more remote in the light of the new data on the Manche Chol and Ixil calendars. Moreover, the discovery that the shift in month positions was an early development and was not accompanied by any change in the LC is strong evidence against a break, since had there been one, that was the logical place to have made it.
The Ahau equation 584,283 requires that the Maya reckoned their moons not from the appearance of the new moon or from conjunction, but from disappearance of the old moon or conjunction, perhaps with both bases in use at different times and in different cities. However, we have seen that there is probably glyphic evidence for that thesis (p. 241).

=== 5 | Appendix III. Whorf's Attempts to Decipher the Maya Hieroglyphs ===
Maya Hieroglyphic Writing (excerpts)
, by J. Eric S. Thompson, [1950], at sacred-texts.com
APPENDIX III
Whorf's Attempts to Decipher the Maya Hieroglyphs
It is an old trait of human nature when in the mist to be very sure about its road.
—JOHN BUCHAN
IT HAD BEEN my intention to ignore Whorf's (1933, 1942) attempts to read the Maya hieroglyphic writing, supposing that all students of the subject would by now have consigned them to that limbo which already holds the discredited interpretations of Brasseur de Bourbourg (1869-70), de Rosny (1876), Charency (1876), Le Plongeon, Cresson (1894), and Cyrus Thomas (1886). Nevertheless, it seems advisable to examine his writings because of his position in the linguistic field and because of the air of certitude with which his interpretations are offered.
My objections to Whorf's writings are not against his conclusions as to the nature of Maya hieroglyphic writing, but against his lines of reasoning. I feel that he has built his structure on the shifting sands of false premises with the aid of a scaffolding of misidentifications. That the structure contains some good stone is not improbable. Whorf maintained that the glyphs are purely phonetic, and that each element represents a syllable or the single consonant with which that syllable commences. Glottal stops may be ignored. Obviously, with such a method, one can get almost any interpretation one likes out of the writing.
I propose to analyze very briefly the steps by which Whorf reaches two or three of his fundamental interpretations in order to show how shaky are the whole foundations.
Cumhu
. Whorf's interpretation of the month sign Cumhu serves him both as proof of his arguments and as a base on which to build a whole series of interpretations. First, it should be noted that the month was almost certainly called Cumku in Yucatec, not Cumhu, for it is thus spelled in all the books of Chilam Balam and in the month list of Sanchez de Aguilar. The only source for Cumhu is our edition of Landa, which is notoriously weak in the transcriptions of Maya words; the
k
of Cumku might easily have been copied as
h
by the scribe who extracted the surviving version of Landa's writings. Secondly, it should be noted that in no other Maya language does the eighteenth month have a name resembling in any way Cumku.
Whorf (1933, p. 19) takes the superfix of Landa's drawing of Cumku as "a form of the day sign Ahau," which, he says, "was pronounced with the
a
scarcely sounded, and which would seem to represent the syllable
hu
. An examination of a series of Cumku glyphs would have shown Whorf that the superfix of Landa's glyph is not a sort of Ahau, but a poorly drawn example of the regular superfix which, whatever else it may be, is not a form of that day sign (fig. 19,
1-16
). Whorf next argues that the original name of the glyph may have been Cumhau. As he takes certain extraneous elements to the left as standing for
cum
, he reads the whole as Cumhau, completely ignoring the Kan sign which is the main element of the month glyph.
However, in 1942 a quite different derivation of Cumku appears: Whorf decides that the Kan sign does not stand for maize or ripeness, the fact that everywhere in the codices and on sculptures one finds the Kan sign associated with maize or the maize god being dismissed as secondary symbolism. Instead the Kan sign means
hu
, "iguana," apparently because the Aztec equivalent is Cuetzpalin, "lizard." The original meaning of the Kan sign, Whorf tells us, is
huun
, "a letter or book," and the sign shows us this book or letter folded up like a modern letter in its envelope! A glyph of an iguana above a Kan sign from Dresden is explained as "an example of the method of repeated affirmation, using the ordinary sign for
hu
[the Kan sign], topped by an iguana figure . . Here the formula which we use in transliterating is
hu-hu
, to be read or pronounced, of course, as
hu
." On the same pages (29-31) as the iguana over the Kan sign, and occupying precisely the same positions, are pictorial glyphs showing respectively a turkey head and a haunch of venison, both above a Kan sign, and two fish, but these Whorf ignores. Obviously, they represent offerings, either turkey and maize, venison and maize, and iguana and maize, or, more probably, turkey tamales, venison tamales, and iguana tamales. The Kan sign cannot stand for
hu
, "iguana," in one place and not in the other; the pictures are so obviously related.
Whorf now returns to Cumhu (Cumku). Whereas before the hu had been represented by Ahau (elided to
hau
) as the superfix, now the
hu
is shown by the main element. A variant form of the superfix is identified as a feather (fig. 19,
15
), "
kukum
," from which one drops the
ku
and obtains kumhu. The mere fact that kumhu (glottalized) and Cumhu are totally different sounds is not accepted by Whorf as a valid argument against his theory. Whorf does not mention that the superfix in question is extremely rare with Cumku,
occurring
only twice in Dresden and never in the inscriptions, and he gives nothing beyond his bare statement for accepting this highly conventionalized symbol as representing a feather.
Thus, two entirely different phonetic translations are offered for what is almost certainly a misspelled version of a Yucatecan month name. They are self-contradictory and based on a complete ignorance of Maya hieroglyphs.
One of the most important of Whorf's "proofs" derives from an identification of the hand as the symbol for the sound
ma
or
m
. First, Whorf, in a very roundabout and unconvincing way, shows how the sound
ma
might have been represented in Maya writing by a hand. Next, he calls attention to his drawing of Landa's sign for
m
, of which he says, "I regard it as a corrupted reproduction of a cursive Manik." I do not know whether he means that Landa's drawing or his own is the corrupted reproduction, for besides turning Landa's sign upside down, he has redrawn it in such a way that it appears about halfway between a Manik sign and Landa's
m
. Because the hand is the sign for the day called Manik only in Yucatec (other names in other dialects are ignored by Whorf), and because his drawing of Landa's
m
is identified by him as a hand (and of course
m
also covers
ma
), Whorf uses the definite identification of the hand as the symbol for
ma
. The hand completion sign is then given the sound
ma
, and we learn that in an IS this hand before a period glyph should be translated as
ma
, e.g. 9 baktuns, 15 katuns,
ma tun
,
ma uinal
,
ma kin
. Although this interpretation is not implausible, it has, so far as I know, no parallel in the books of Chilam Balam. When used to translate the similar hand before a PE date, it makes nonsense: "9 Ahau 18 Mol, no 19 Katuns." If the sign means
ma
"no" or "not," it cannot precede a numeral.
Next, Whorf, rightly or wrongly, identifies the well-known prefix of Mac (Beyer's "down-balls" prefix) as two hands (fig. 18,
1-15,20
). He should at least have noted that in the scores of examples of this element in this and other glyphs not once do hands drawn in a naturalistic manner replace the elements he identifies as such; there is no mention of that fact. Instead, Whorf boldly states as a fact that the sign represents two hands wrist to wrist, and previous identifications of the element which are totally different are passed over in silence. The two hands are again given the sound
ma
. The fish head of Mac is identified as Cimi, "death," and given Landa's sound
k
, no attention being paid to the fact that the sound is
ka
with a glottal, not
c
. Thus two doubtful hands (
ma?
) plus a wrongly identified Cimi (
ka
) equal Mac.
The hand in Whorf's thesis can stand not only for
ma
but also for
m
. Thus in discussing Glyph C of the lunar series, Whorf assigns to the head of the death god, not the sound
ka
as given by Landa, nor that of
c
which he used in the derivation of Mac, but that of
la
. To a kin sign which is not in the original, is ascribed the value
le
, although Landa assigns it the sound
te
. The hand below is given the sound
m
or
ma
, and the whole, together with the coefficients and the moon signs, reads "3
Lama
lunations," "3
lelemma
lunations," "5
lemma
lunations." Next we are referred to Tozzer's grammar where, we are told, "a classifier used for periods of time is
lem
." Accordingly, if the Maya wrote these moon inscriptions
in the way they talked
they must have written not "six lunations," but "six
lem
lunations." It sounds very convincing, but if the reader will turn obligingly to Tozzer's grammar (1921, p. 291), he will find the entry "Lem. For times; hun lem, once." In other words,
lem
refers not to
time
, but to
times
. References to lunations in the books of Chilam Balam show the use of the numerical classifier
p’el
with moons. The least that can be said of such arguments is that they are unbelievably sloppy.
Rather than prolong this examination unwarrantedly, let us briefly discuss one of the two passages Whorf has translated from the codices. It is that on Madrid 113d [read 102d1, I give below Whorf's interpretation and my comment.
The action in the pictures is that of weaving. . . . The verbs for both pictures are alike and their second components are
ma
. The first component is a sign for which I have a body of evidence to show a phonetic value
ya
. Maya students will recall that it is the superfix of the glyphs of the months
Yax
(
Yac
) and
Yaxkin
(
Yack’in
) in the codices. The verb then reads
ya-ma
.
Yama
or
Yamah
would be a perfective or possibly an aorist of the transitive conjugation of a verb with stem
yam
. A common stem
yam
in the Perez dictionary means between, interstice, and as verb, interpose, insert, force between, get caught between. This is the action shown; the subject is
inserting
the shuttle and its thread into the warp, or
putting it between
the warp threads.
Comment: The first component, as every Maya student will recall, is definitely not the yax superfix. If, as I suppose, the body of evidence largely rests on this identification, it is of a wraithlike nature. Whorf completely ignores the postfix. The
ma
is our old friend the grasping hand.
I cannot understand the many meanings for verbs with the root
yam
which Whorf derives from Pio Perez. I find:
yambezah, mudar, diferenciar; dejar espacio entre dos cosas; interponer. Yamnaat, entrever, presuponer
,
calcular, prever. Yampahal, mudarse, diferenciarse, vomitar. Yampal, trocar suertes. Yamtah, poner intermedios
. Of these only the last could possibly correspond to the meanings assigned the stem by Whorf, although actually it means to set intervals. The word
yamtah
is not given in the Motul dictionary, but we find there a more precise definition of
yam:
"
la concavidad o espacio que hay entre dos cosas, e intervalo, o distancia de tiempo y lugar
." No word with the root
yam
in the Motul dictionary carries any meaning approaching that which Whorf implies. In fact, the action of inserting the shuttle seems to be the opposite of one main concept which is that of creating, not filling, a space in time or place which separates two objects. Whorf's translations from the Perez dictionary are grossly exaggerated and misleading. Taken in conjunction with the
lem
incident and Landa's
m
, they imply that Whorf considered that he could strain the evidence as much as he liked to gain his point.
Granting, even, that
yam
could be the root of a word meaning "to insert," I see no reason why that word should have been used to describe the act of weaving.
Whorf continues:
The first part of the object glyph is a sign that has phonetic values
sa
and
sak
. It appears here in the form it has as sign of the month Zac (Sak) and of the color white (sak), and so might have here the value
sak
. The second upper part of the glyph is the
a
of Landa. . . . The second lower part of the glyph is a form of the day-sign Ahau. My evidence is that Ahau is a polyphonic character and that one of its values besides
hau
,
hu
is
li
,
l
. Maya students will recall its use as superfix of the sign for east,
lik’in
. It is thus possible to read this object glyph as
sak-a-l
. But
sakal
[
sacal
] is the Maya word for woven cloth. . . . The two glyph blocks in the lower line are name-glyphs answering to the unknown name of the deity shown in the picture. We may denote them and this deity's name as X
1
X
2
. We may now transliterate the "verse" and translate it . . .
Yama sakal
X
1
X
2
. Translation: X
1
X
2
inserts (it) into the cloth.
Comment: Unfortunately, Whorf is again in error. The element he reads as
zac
"white" is not that at all; the zac sign has two nubbins, and varies quite a lot from the element depicted on this page. One wants a lively imagination to recognize the superfix [my
te
(1) affix] as Landa's
a
. The main element is not an Ahau. Whorf elsewhere (1942, p. 487) identifies this same glyph as
e
, deriving it from Landa's sign for
e
. Thus, one must conclude that all three components of the glyph are wrongly identified.
Even had the elements been correctly translated, and even did the glyph compound actually represent the sounds
sakal
(admitting the dubious argument that the appearance of Ahau in the glyph for east permits its identification with
li
and thence
l
), it is very much to he doubted that such first-class weavers as the Maya would have used a word for woven cloth to represent the warp threads. I am neither a weaver nor a linguist, but such imprecision in nomenclature does not strike me as Maya.
Of the five elements which Whorf uses, four are wrongly identified; of the two words he obtains, one does not have the meaning he ascribes to it, whereas the other probably would not be used in the sense he attributes to it. Whorf's writings are a direful warning to those with a similarly uncritical approach to the hieroglyphic problems. For imprecision of a somewhat similar nature in Whorf's special field of linguistics, the reader is referred to a paper (Thompson, 1943g), in which I demonstrate that two words,
mis
and
tumin
, for which Whorf created an imposing Uto-Aztecan ancestry, are common Spanish words, introduced to the New World in post-Columbian times.

=== 6 | Appendix IV. Maya Calculations Far into the Past and into the Future ===
Maya Hieroglyphic Writing (excerpts)
, by J. Eric S. Thompson, [1950], at sacred-texts.com
APPENDIX IV
Maya Calculations Far into the Past and into the Future
Picked from the worm holes of long-vanish’d days.
—SHAKESPEARE, Henry V, Act II
IT SEEMS advisable to gather the most outstanding of Maya calculations into the past and into the future in order to illustrate how the Maya thought in vast expanses of time, and how they handled those great distances. It must be confessed that the Maya did not make those tremendous calculations without occasional mistakes, but they did calculate a date over 500,000,000 years in the past without error, a truly remarkable achievement.
For the sake of simplicity, I shall use the terms derived from Beltran to distinguish the higher periods, namely:
1 pictun
= 20 baktuns
(
8,000 tuns)
1 calabtun
= 20 pictuns
(
160,000 tuns)
1 kinchiltun
= 20 calabtuns
(
3,200,000 tuns)
1 alautun
= 20   kinchiltuns
(
64,000,000 tuns)
It should be remembered, however, that there is no direct evidence for the use of these compounds. They have been employed by Morley, Spinden and others, and thus have been legitimized, so to speak, by use.
One of the most interesting of the calculations into the past occurs on the Tablet of the Inscriptions, Palenque. It was Richard C. E. Long (1923) who first solved this equation by reading the tun coefficient as 2 instead of 1. With that change he was able to connect the dates satisfactorily:
1.13. 0. 9. 9. 2. 4.8
5 Lamat 1 Mol
7.18. 2. 9. 2.12.1
Subtract
(1. 5. 2.)6.19.19.10.7
1 Manik 10 Zec
The coefficients of the two highest periods of the first date have been supplied from a possible arrangement of the inscription on Tikal to. The calculation here covers 1,264,982 tuns, a little short of 1,250,000 years.
On this same tablet there is a calculation into the future which leads to the end of the current pictun:
(1.13. 0.) 9. 8. 9.13.0
8 Ahau 13 Pop
10.11.10.   5.8
Add
(1.13.)1. 0. 0. 0. 0.8 5
Lamat 1 Mol
8
Subtract
(1.13.)1. 0. 0. 0. 0.0
10 Ahau 13   Yaxkin
As Long has noted, the pictun glyph has a coefficient of r. This, I think, is fair evidence that the coefficient of the pictun which ended at 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku was 0, especially as the Maya priest had just been juggling with pictuns and calabtuns, and therefore desired that there should be no doubt as to the LC position of this date. On the other hand, it is possible that the 1 pictun merely records the distance from 4 Ahau 8 Cumku, although I regard this as a less plausible reconstruction. In any case, the record is positive proof that the Maya thought of the pictun as composed of 20, not 13, baktuns.
On Copan N there is a long calculation into the past (Thompson, 1944a), which again is incorrect as it stands. By changing the katun coefficient from 19 to 7 the distance number will connect the two dates:
(1.13. 0.) 9.16.10.0.0
1 Ahau 3 Zip
14. 17. 7.10.0.0
Subtract
(1.12. 5.)12. 9. 0.0.0
1 Ahau 8 Zac
Here the distance is considerably less than in the example for the Temple of the Inscriptions, but reaches 118,950 tuns. Again, the coefficients above that of the baktun are here supplied in accordance with those which may have been in the minds of the astronomers of Tikal.
Tikal 10 has a most unusual inscription of early date. It opens with a day 8 Manik which is followed by three glyphs, any one of which might be the corresponding month position. There follows an IS introductory glyph and then an IS or distance number of eight periods, although the kin and its coefficient are suppressed.
The opposite side of the stela opens with a CR date 4? 13 Uo or Zip, for the downward extension of the reinforced cartouche argues against a month of the Cauac group. This I think may represent 9.2.0.0.0 4 Ahau 13 Uo. In that case the long series of period glyphs probably represents a distance number. Unfortunately, this number will not connect 8 Manik with 4 Ahau, for counted from 8 Manik and calling the kins 13, it leads to 1 Ahau. The variable element in the IS would agree reasonably well with the forms for Uo or Muan (fig. 23,15).
I am inclined to think that this sequence should be treated as a distance number because there seems no plausible reason for the base from which the IS would be counted. If a dot is added to the coefficient of the great-great cycle, that is to say, if it is read as 12 instead of 11, the distance number will connect 8 Manik to the date 4 Ahau 13 Uo:
(0. 0. 0. )19.18. 8.15. 7
8 Manik (10   Mol)
1.12.19. 9. 3.11. 2.(13)
(1.13. 0.) 9. 2. 0. 0. 0
4 Ahau 13 Uo
This reconstruction is not offered with any assurance as to its validity, but as a possible alternative to the reading advocated by Morley. It has one advantage in that the pictun coefficient of the second date can be restored as 0 in accordance with the better interpretation of the 10 Ahau 13 Yaxkin, 1 pictun text at Palenque. It also connects, but with a correction, 8 Manik and the terminal date which is perhaps 4 Ahau 13 Uo. However, it should be noted that there is no evidence that the month position, 10 Mol, is recorded, and there is no apparent notation of 13 kins. Miss Proskouriakoff informs me that she believes on stylistic grounds that this is too early for this stela, but, of course, the count may have been carried forward to a later dedicatory date. The period glyphs of distance numbers are occasionally arranged in descending order, as would be the case were this a distance number. So far as the higher numbers are concerned, there is strong evidence at Quirigua, which will be reviewed, in favor of the suggested reconstruction. The distance number or IS, as it stands uncorrected, amounts to over 5,000,000 years, 5,115,671 tuns to be exact. One's mind reels at such stupendous spans of time.
The Stone of Chiapa has a distance number which, rearranged in descending order, reads 13.13.13.1.?.11.4. The equation can not be restored because the starting point is missing, although 6 Imix 9 Xul is perhaps the preferable reading. The distance is 2,189,220 tuns, well over 2,000,000 years.
A number of calculations, not of such startling magnitude, but of considerable range, occur on Dresden 61, 62. These have been discussed by a number of writers, and the LC position of 9 Kan 12 Kayab, the point of departure, has been established by Beyer (1943b). There are eight of these distance numbers, all of which have the sane point of departure, and all of which consist of 4 pictuns, 6 baktuns, and an odd number of katuns, tuns, uinals, and kins. The longest which is correct as it stands can be transposed as follows:
(1.12.16.) 3.16.14.11.4
9 Kan 12 Kayab
4.   6.11.10. 7.2
Add
(1.13. 0.)10. 8. 5. 0.6 3
Cimi 14 Kayab
The interval is 34,630 tuns; the higher numbers in parenthesis are derived from the suggested reconstruction of the Tikal inscription.
A long distance number on Copan C is preceded by the calabtun glyph with a coefficient of u, 52, or 13 and the date 6 Ahau 18 Kayab. The equation reads:
(1.12.19.)17.19.14.17.0
6 Ahau 18 Kayab
11.14.   5. 1.0
(1.13. 0.) 9.14. 0. 0.0
6 Ahau 13 Muan
Conceivably the equation should be moved forward one CR. The association of the calabtun glyph with the earlier date would most logically
indicate
that the earlier date fell in a calabtun which was not the same as that current during Baktun 9. Should the coefficient of the pictun have been 0 at 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku, as I believe, the coefficient of the calabtun would have been one digit less if a subtraction led back to the previous pictun, because as that pictun had a coefficient of 0, it was necessary to "borrow" from the calabtun, the next highest unit. If, as we have assumed, the coefficient of the calabtun during Cycle 9 was 13 and the pictun coefficient was 0, it follows that the calabtun coefficient corresponding to 6 Ahau 18 Kayab was 12. It is therefore highly probable that the number recorded with these calabtun glyphs on Stela C is 12, the insertion of 12 calabtuns serving as a warning that a calculation far in the past was to follow. This inscription therefore tends to confirm that the pictun coefficient was o during the period of the stela cult and is, to a lesser degree, evidence that the calabtun coefficient was 13 at the same time.
I now come to what may be the two greatest feats in calculation attempted by the Maya. On Quirigua F, C16b-C17a, there is a record which appears to read 0 pictuns, 13 kinchiltuns at 1 Ahau 13 Yaxkin (fig. 33,
48
). The kinchiltun glyph appears to be distinguished from the calabtun by a prefix to the left. In fact, 1 Ahau 13 Yaxkin does end 13 kinchiltuns:
( 0. 1.13.0.)9.16.10.0.0
1 Ahau 3 Zip
1. 8.13.0. 9.16.10.0.0
Subtract
(18.)13. 0.0. 0. 0. 0.0.0
1 Ahau 13   Yaxkin
Here the distance calculated is well over 90,000,000 years, to wit, 91,683,930 tuns. There is, apparently, another count far into the past in this inscription to reach the date 1 Ahau 13 Mol but the calculations elude me.
In a previous paper (Thompson, 1932b) I offered an entirely different decipherment for the date 1 Ahau 13 Yaxkin (Morley, 1937-38, 4:129) in reading the glyph at D16a not as 13 kinchiltuns, but as end of 13 baktuns. This latter reading is not acceptable, however; a hand as an ending sign cannot be placed between the coefficient and the period glyph. The glyph must be 13 kinchiltuns or 13 calabtuns; the prefix to the left suggests that it is the former.
The astronomers of Quirigua appear to have been interested in taking the current date of a monument and casting back until they found some great period far in
the past which ended on the same day. Stela D at that city has the dedicatory date 9.16.15.0.0 7 Ahau 18 Pop. At C20 there is recorded 13 kinchiltuns, 7 Ahau 3 Pop (fig. 33,49). The calculation is:
( 0. 1.13.0.)9.16.15.0.0
7 Ahau 18 Pop
6. 8.13.0. 9.16.15.0.0
(13.)13. 0.0. 0. 0. 0.0.0 7
Ahau 3 Pop
This is exactly 5 alautuns or 320,000,000 tuns before the extremely early date on Stela F, and some 400,000,000 years before the date at which Stela D was erected. The calculations to verify these positions are based on the very useful table published by Long (1919).
I feel reasonably confident that the two dates are correctly deciphered, because 1 Ahau 13 kinchiltuns next preceding the date of the IS end precisely on 1 Ahau 13 Yaxkin, and the 13 kinchiltuns which end on 7 Ahau prior to that fall on 7 Ahau 3 Pop. The chances of a date such as 1 Ahau 13 Yaxkin actually being that which marks the end of the first 1 Ahau kinchiltun preceding the IS are 1 in 73; the chances of 3 Pop being the month position of the next preceding 13 kinchiltuns ending on a day 7 Ahau are also 1 in 73.
There are, apparently, other calculations far into the past at Quirigua, notably on Stelae F and A where there are references to dates connected with periods which have coefficients of 19, but I have not been able to elucidate them.
I have throughout assumed that the baktuns were grouped, not in 13's but in 20'S, for the evidence supporting a vigesimal count of baktuns in Dresden and at Palenque and Copan is too strong to be overridden. I assume that at an early date, when the LC was first invented, the highest period was the baktun and that baktuns were arranged in re-entering series of 13, but that a subsequent desire to extend the range of time led to the invention of the pictun and still greater periods. With that expansion of time, it was essential to fit the baktuns into a vigesimal count. Consequently, 20 baktuns were made the equivalent of one pictun, but by then 4 Ahau 8 Cumku was so strongly established as the cyclic ending of a round of 13 baktuns that it continued to be given that designation, although reckoned as the end of a cycle of 20 baktuns for the purposes of calculation. Should my reconstruction of the higher periods be correct, 4 Ahau 8 Cumku then became the end of 13 calabtuns, with the theoretical LC position 1.13.0.0.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku.
In view of what has been written, I think there is reasonably good evidence that the Maya did not have great difficulty in handling numbers involving alautuns, each of which consisted of 64,000,000 tuns. For us, with modern facilities, it is not a simple matter to construct a table of alautun endings; for the Maya it must have been a formidable task. The desire to probe half a billion years into the past reveals a strange mental quirk. It was, perhaps, an attempt to grasp the intangible in order to show that infinity has no starting point. The Maya priest traveled 400 million years backward, but he was as far as ever from the beginning which still eluded him. If time consisted of larger and larger cycles, obviously there was no beginning. I feel reasonably confident that when these stelae came to be erected at Quirigua, the Maya priest-astronomers had accepted the idea that time had no beginning. Withal, there was, I think, in these elucidations of the day and month positions on which these periods ended millions of years ago a certain affinity to the spirit which leads campanologists to seek fresh combinations to extend the changes which can be rung. It is a subject which should also appeal to the psychologist.

=== 7 | Appendix V. Determinants ===
Maya Hieroglyphic Writing (excerpts)
, by J. Eric S. Thompson, [1950], at sacred-texts.com
APPENDIX V
Determinants
Gallop apace bright Phoebus, through the sky
—CHRISTOPHER MARLOW, Edward II
THE DETERMINANT THEORY was first enunciated by Teeple (1930, pp. 70-85). A determinant is a date which is believed to record the gain of the Maya year of 365 days over the solar year of approximately 365.2422 days in the interval between 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku and the date in question. Teeple showed that the Maya calculated the accumulated error in one of two ways: they either noted the month position at 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku which by their calculation then occupied the same position in the solar year as the given date did at the time then current; or they recorded the anniversary in the solar year then current of the position which, according to their calculations, the month position in question had occupied in the year 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku.
These calculations frequently dealt with the month position on which the current katun fell. Thus, shortly before 9.17.0.0.0 13 Ahau 18 Cumku the Maya priest might have been interested in calculating how great an interval there was between the solar anniversary of the original 18 Cumku at 13.0.0.0.0 and the position occupied by 18 Cumku in the year then current. The interval between 13.0.0.0.0 and 9.17.0.0.0 is 1,418,400 days which reduces to 3883 solar years of 365.2422 plus about half a year. However, in the course of 3883 years 940 leap days have been inserted. The subtraction of 730 (2 × 365) from this total of leap days, gives 210 as the number of days the Maya calendar is ahead of the solar year. By subtracting 210 days from r8 Cumku the position 8 Mol is reached. That date then held the same position in the solar year at 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku as 18 Cumku does at 9.17.0.0.0. The equation could be reversed, and the Maya priest could pose this problem: "The current katun ends on 18 Cumku, but what was the position in the solar year of 18 Cumku at 13.0.0.0.0?" To find its anniversary in the current year, add 210. Then, 18 Cumku + 210 = 3 Zac; accordingly, 3 Zac current time is the solar anniversary of 18 Cumku at 13.0.0.0.0. Perhaps this can be expressed better in terms of our own calendar. If 9.17.0.0.0 13 Ahau 18 Cumku falls on January 24, then according to the tropical year 8 Mol fell on January 24 at 13.0.0.0.0. Similarly, if 18 Cumku fell on August 22 at 13.0.0.0.0, that position in the solar year is at 9.17.0.0.0 occupied by 3 Zac.
At Copan the date 9.16.12.5.17 6 Caban 10 Mol is repeated on half a dozen monuments, and its katun and 1½ katun anniversaries are also recorded; it is clearly the most important date at that city. Teeple identified it as a determinant of 9.17.0.0.0 13 Ahau 18 Cumku many years ago. As the date falls approximately eight years before 9.17.0.0.0, the correction should be two days less than for the latter date: 10 Mol + 208 = 18 Cumku. That is to say, so Mol occupied the same position in the solar year at 13.0.0.0.0 as 18 Cumku currently does (9.16.12.16.5 6 Chicchan 18 Cumku). It might be asked why the Maya chose 9.16.12.5.17 6 Caban to Mol rather than some other date, for instance 9.16.19.7.10 11 Oc 8 Mol, which has the advantage of being nearer the katun ending. I think that there were other factors which led to the election of 6 Caban to Mol, one of which is that Caban seems to have been a more popular day than Oc, but the choice may have been guided by a desire to establish a lunar relationship in harmony with that of the sun. The moon age of 9.16.12.5.17 is recorded on Temple 11 as 11 days. The Copanecs appear to have thought that 13.0.0.0.0 had a moon age of 22 days, and in that case the to Mol immediately following 4 Ahau 8 Cumku would also have had a moon age of 11 or 12 days. This may be coincidence, but I think there is enough evidence from other sources to suggest that the Maya sought to link the age of the moon with the solar relationships.
Copan, apparently, gave the reverse determinant of 9.17.0.0.0 on Altar Z, seeking the anniversary in current time of 18 Cumku at 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku, as discussed above. The date is 9.16.18.9.19 12 Cauac 2 Zac which does not appear on the altar, but is implied by the following arrangement:
(9.16.18.9.19
12 Cauac 2 Zac)
1.8.   1
(9.17. 0.0. 0)
13 Ahau 18   Cumku
The correction should be 210 days; the equation is 18 Cumku + 209 = 2 Zac. It will be noted that 12 Cauac is the day before 13 Ahau. In this case there is no obvious lunar relationship.
At Piedras Negras 9.10.6.5.9 8 Muluc 2 Zip was carved on Stelae 33, 36, and 38, on L 2, and on MSS 1; its thirteenth
tun and second katun anniversaries are declared respectively on Stelae 34 and 38. Of its importance, therefore, there can be no doubt. This date is the determinant of the current katun, 9.11.0.0.0 12 Ahau 8 Ceh, for it is the anniversary of 8 Ceh placed at 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku. The interval is 3752 years requiring a correction of 179 days; the equation is 8 Ceh + 179 = 2 Zip. The moon age of 9.10.6.5.9 is recorded on Piedras Negras 36 as 4 days, and the moon age of 9.11.0.0.0 is given as four days by Pusilha K and as 5 days by Copan 13. The interval between the two dates (4931 days) is 167 moon less half a day. It therefore is probable that this date was chosen because it is linked to 8 Ceh both by solar and lunar calculations, although the lunar arrangement is different from that supposedly part of the 6 Caban 10 Mol equation.
On a jade in the Bishop collection occurs (9.10.10.16.14) 4 Ix 7 Zip. As this is followed by its katun anniversary, it is clearly a date of some importance. There is a possibility, however, that the date falls one CR later (Beyer, 1945). The interval of 3756 years requires a correction of 180 days. Here, the equation is the reverse of that just discussed. Instead of calculating the current anniversary of 8 Ceh placed at 13.0.0.0.0, the month position at 13.0.0.0.0 with the same solar position as 8 Ceh current time was sought: 7 Zip + 181 = 8 Ceh.
In the tun ending on 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku 7 Zip should have had a moon age of 16 days, if 8 Cumku had a moon age of 22 days. The moon age of 9.10.10.16.14 4 Ix 7 Zip was 15 or r6 days. Here, again, there are both solar and lunar associations.
The recession of 8 Cumku in the solar year was also of interest to the Maya. Again, the solar position at 13.0.0.0.0 equivalent to 8 Cumku current time or the month position in the current year which held the same position as 4 Ahau 8 Cumku at 13.0.0.0.0 might be given.
Dates which recorded the solar equivalents at 13.0.0.0.0 of 8 Cumku current time are given in Table 21.
Date 1 has no obvious lunar associations, but note that it recovers 4 Ahau of 4 Ahau 8 Cumku:
Date 2 is given a moon age of 22 days, which, according to Teeple, was that of 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku in the opinion of the Copanec priesthood of that time. This date falls 191 days before 9.12.8.13.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku, which is distant 73 CR from 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku. The appearance of this CR anniversary of the original 4 Ahau 8 Cumku undoubtedly inspired calculation of the associated determinant. As we shall see, the Maya made a special point of noting determinants or anniversaries of 8 Cumku in the vicinity of CR anniversaries of 4 Ahau 8 Cumku.
Date 3 has a moon age calculable from 9.12.6.5.8 as to days. The moon age of 12.19.19.8.9 8 Muluc 17 Mol would have been 10 days if Palenque reckoned the moon age of 4 Ahau 8 Cumku as 24 days. Date 3 is just one vague year before Date 2, and is also related to the current 4 Ahau 8 Cumku.
Date 4 has a moon age which can be calculated from the base of 9.12.6.5.8 as 6 days. The moon age of 14 Mol at 12.19.19.8.6 5 Cimi 14 Mol would have been 7 days if Teeple was correct in supposing that Palenque reckoned the moon age of 13.0.0.0.0 as 24 days. Of course, it follows that 8 Cumku at 13.0.0.0.0 had the same moon age as at 9.12.18.15.10 1 Oc 8 Cumku.
Date 5. The moon age of this date can be calculated as 21 days from 9.14.0.0.0 given on Piedras Negras 3 as 17 days. It is plausible that this was an attempt to reach the same moon age for Date 5 as was calculated for 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku.
Date 6 has no apparent lunar link with 8 Cumku. This date is one year and 201 days before 9.15.1.8.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku, which is distant 74 CR from 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku. Presumably a date one year and 201 days before the CR anniversary was chosen because the Maya did not wish to give the date 201 days before 9.15.1.8.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku because that would have been a date posterior to 9.15.0.0.0 4 Ahau 13 Yax, that of the erection of the monument. The Maya generally eschewed the practice of recording on a monument dates subsequent to that of dedication.
TABLE 21—DETERMINANTS OF 8 CUMKU
NO. OF INSCRIPTION
DATE
EQUATION
SOLAR
1. Copan 19
9.10. 19.15. 0 4 Ahau 8 Ch’en
8 Ch'en + 180 = 8 Cumku
182
2. Copan H´
9.12. 8. 3. 9 8 Muluc 17 Mol
17 Mol + 191 = 8 Cumku
189
3. Palenque   Cross
9.12. 7. 3. 4 7 Kan 17 Mol
17 Mol + 191 = 8 Cumku
189
4. Palenque Sun
9.12.18. 5.16 2 Cib 14 Mol
14 Mol + 194 = 8 Cumku
192
or
9.12.18. 5.17 3 Caban 15 Mol
15 Mol + 193 = 8 Cumku
192
5. Piedras   Negras 8
9.14. 2.11. 9 6 Muluc 7 Mol
7 Mol + 201 = 8 Cumku
198
6. Calakmul 52
9.14.19.15.14 10 Ix 7 Mol
7 Mol + 201 = 8 Cumku
202
7. Yaxchilan L   14
9.15.10. 0. 1 4 Imix 4 Mol
4 Mol + 204 = 8 Cumku
204
8. Bonampak 2
9.17. 5. 8. 9 6 Muluc 17 Yaxkin
17 Yaxkin + 211 = 8 Cumku
213
9. Copan Q
9.17.19.11 .17 5 Caban 15 Yaxkin
15 Yaxkin + 213 = 8 Cumku
215
10. Naranjo 8
9.18. 9.14. 3 11 Akbal 11 Yaxkin
11 Yaxkin + 217 = 8 Cumku
218
Date 7. There is again no obvious connection of a lunar character with 8 Cumku. The moon age of the current 8 Cumku for both Dates 6 and 7 is 7 days.
Date 8. 17 Yaxkin in the tun ending on 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku (22 days) would have had a moon age of 17 days. The moon age of the current 7 Yaxkin can be calculated as 20 days.
Date 9 reveals no lunar associations.
Date 10 has no clear lunar basis, although the 11 Yaxkin
after
4 Ahau 8 Cumku has a moon age of 22 days presumably the same as that calculated for 4 Ahau 8 Cumku.
Four of the ten determinants thus have both solar and lunar associations. In view of the various possibilities involved in each date these lunar associations may be merely fortuitous, although one imagines that the Maya would have been interested in thus hitting two birds with one stone.
Two interesting anniversaries of 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku appear, respectively, on Quirigua G and Palenque Cross. The seventy-fifth CR anniversary of the original 4 Ahau 8 Cumku fell on 9.17.14.3.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku. The correction at that date should have been 214 days, which, added to the anniversary of 4 Ahau 8 Cumku, reach 9.17.14.13.14 10 Ix 17 Yax; we find 9.17.14.13.12 8 Eb 15 Yax recorded on Quirigua G. On the Cross at Palenque the date 8.19.6.8.8 11 Lamat 6 Xul appears. This is one vague year and 123 days after 8.19.5.2.0, the sixty-eighth CR anniversary of 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku. The interval is 3535 years, which calls for a correction of 2 years and 126 days. The Maya calculation is: 8 Cumku + 123 = 6 Xul. This is four days off, but may be a calculation made at an early date, before greater accuracy was attained. It is not clear why a date one year and 123 days after 8.19.6.8.8 4 Ahau 8 Cumku was chosen, although the earlier date, 10 Akbal 6 Xul, may have been regarded as unlucky, for 10 is the number of death, and Akbal and Xul have associations with the underworld.
Copan 16 carries the date 5 Ahau 8 Yaxkin. The glyphs are carved in an early style which indicates that the date has the LC position of either 9.4.9.17.0 or 9.7.2.12.0 If the earlier position is accepted, the date becomes a determinant of the seventieth CR anniversary of 4 Ahau 8 Cumku, which fell on 9.4.10.10.0, again one year removed:
9.4. 9.17. 0
5 Ahau 8 Yaxkin
7.   5
=
145 days subtract
9.4. 9. 9.15
3 Men 8 Cumku
1. 0. 5
365 days add
9.4.10.10. 0
4 Ahau 8 Cumku
[paragraph continues]
The Maya equation is 8 Cumku + 145 = 8 Yaxkin; the true solar correction would be 8 Cumku + 151 = 14 Yaxkin. The accuracy is not remarkable, but the calculation was made at an early date. It was probably set one year earlier than the anniversary of 4 Ahau 8 Cumku so that the day Ahau might be recovered.
The manner in which determinants were calculated is not surely known, and it is obvious that more than one correction was used, for the Maya calculations may fall two or three days either side of the solar corrections. Teeple thought a solar-lunar equation was used; I am more inclined to think the correction was made in terms of the CR. Let us examine again those dates which are related to CR anniversaries of 4 Ahau 8 Cumku:
TABLE 22—DETERMINANTS OF 8 CUMKU NEAR CALENDAR ROUND ANNIVERSARIES
Anniversary of 4   Ahau 8 Cumku
Determinant Date
Correction
Date
No.
Maya
Solar
A   8.19. 5. 2.0
68
8.19. 6. 8. 8
11 Lamat 6 Xul
+ 123 days
and 1 vague year
126
B   9. 4.10.10.0
70
9. 4. 9.17. 0
5 Ahau 8 Yaxkin
+ 145 days
less 1 vague year
151
C   9.12. 8.13.0
73
9.12. 8. 3. 9
8 Muluc 17 Mol
-191 days
189
C´  9.12. 8.13.0
73
9.12. 7. 3. 4
7 Kan 17 Mol
-191 days
and -1 vague year
189
C´´ 9.12. 8.13.0
73
9.12. 8. 4. 5
11 Chicchan 13 Ch’en
+ 190 days
less 1 vague year
189
D   9.15. 1. 8.0
74
9.14.19.15.14
10 Ix 7 Mol
-201 days
and -1 vague year
201
E   9.17.14. 3.0
75
9.17.14.13.12
8 Eb 15 Yax
+ 212 days
214
Obviously different corrections are being applied, for no reasonably accurate system could lead to differences in corrections of 10 days in 52 vague years and 21 days in 104 vague years (differences between B and C, and B and D). Variations in the corrections at different times
and at different cities are to be expected. It will be noted that the poorest (B) is on the earliest monument, and the next poorest on the second earliest monument. Dates C and E fall two days short of the solar calculations; Date D is the same as would be reached by using a correct solar year.
Most of the CR anniversaries of 4 Ahau 8 Cumku during the period of the inscriptions appear in the list, but the important seventy-second anniversary at 9.9.16.0.0 is absent. It is possible that this was recorded on the hieroglyphic stairway at Naranjo. On Glyph Block 7 there is a distance number of 13.1, followed by 13? 18 Zip. Morley hesitatingly supports 13 Men 18 Zip; Spinden reads the date as 9.9.15.13.10 13 Oc 18 Zip; Joyce reads it as 12 Oc 18 Zip. Personally, I should be inclined to read the day sign as Akbal, since the lower part definitely resembles the glyph for that day. If, however, Spinden's reading is used, the following relationship develops:
9.9.15. 3.10
13 Oc 18 Zip
13. 1
Subtract
9.9.14. 8. 9
12 Muluc 2   Ch'en
The second date is 2 × 365—179 days before 9.9.16.0.0. The solar correction at this date is 177 days; the Maya calculation would be 8 Cumku + 179 = 2 Ch'en.
If this reading is accepted, nearly all the CR anniversaries of 4 Ahau 8 Cumku during the period of the stela cult were accompanied by their determinants or solar anniversaries, calculated within a year or two of the dates in question. Those missing fell in early or late periods when very few calculations were being made. It is a fair conclusion, I think, that the Maya deliberately recorded the determinant or anniversary of 4 Ahau 8 Cumku as each CR anniversary of that date approached. If such dates are accepted as deliberate, it follows that the many other determinants are almost certainly the result of Maya calculations for the correction of their year, and are not coincidences.
The subject is vast and complex. I do not purpose to enter into further detail; enough has been written to outline the determinant theory, and for fuller information, the writer is referred to Teeple's discussion of the matter in
Maya Astronomy
.

=== 8 | « Previous: Errata ===
Errata
page 143: 'Futhermore'->'Furthermore'
page 152: 'inauguraton'->'inauguration'
page 298: 'birh'->'birth'
page 312: 'occuring'->'occurring'
page 315: 'indictate'->'indicate'
