=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
החטין והזונין (wheat and weed growing among wheat, darnel or rye-grass) – we call it ZIYUAN in Arabic.
אינן כלאים זה בזה – because when the generation of the Flood perverted their way, the land became degenerate in his produce for they (i.e., the people) would sow wheat and it would produce weeds, therefore, they were not the forbidden junction of heterogeneous plants with the wheat. But with the rest of the kinds of grain, they would be the forbidden junction of heterogeneous plants, and even though that it wasn’t appropriate for human consumption, nevertheless, since they bring it from place to place for the consumption of doves, they were the forbidden junction of heterogeneous plants in the same field (i.e., כלאים).
השעורים ושבולת שועל – all that is taught in this Mishnah, pair by pair are not the forbidden junction of heterogeneous plants in the same field with each other, [but] one from this pair and one from that pair are the forbidden junction of heterogeneous plants in the same field with each other. And that which we stated in [Tractate] Menahot [9a] that the spelt is a species of wheat and rye is a species of barley, these words, as regards Hallah that combine one with the other for the measurement of Hallah, but concerning the issue of the forbidden junction of heterogeneous plants, they would be the forbidden junction of heterogeneous plants with each other.
ושבולת שועל – desert barley and in the foreign tongue, OYNAH.
כוסמין (spelt) – In the foreign tongue ASPILTAH.
שיפון (rye; some say oats) – in the foreign tongue, SIGLAH, but because spelt and rye [or oats] are similar to each other they are not the forbidden junction of heterogeneous plants in the same field with each other.
והספיר (name of a species of beans) – there are those who say that it is TZITZERKALA in the foreign tongue. But Maimonides explained that we call it MA’AS in Arabic.
הפורקדן (species of peas) – Maimonides explained that it is thin seed that we call GILBAN In Arabic.
וטופח (bean) – it is a small legume whose berries are round and we call it KORTEMAN, but I heard that טופח is what they call GILBAN (i.e., a species of bean/pea).
והשעועית (species of bean, kidney-bean) we call it LOBIAH in Arabic.
אינם כלאים זה בזה- if he sowed each of them with its partner.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
כל סאה שיש בה רבע – The Kab (=1/6 of a Seah or 24 egg bulks) which is one in twenty-four parts of a Seah, and the Seah is six Kabim.
ימעט - [he shall diminish/reduce] that other species that is mixed in it until the quarter [of a Kab] would be diminished and will be nullified within the Seah and he would be permitted to sow and not be prohibited because of sowing a forbidden junction of heterogeneous plants in the same field.
יבור – for since it was necessary to diminish, he removes everything, because I appears like he is establishing a forbidden junction of heterogeneous plants/diverse kinds in the same field, for since he began to sift, if he would not sift everything. But if at its outside it is less than one-quarter [of a Kab] it is permitted. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
בין ממין אחד – whether in that ssame quarter from one species or whether from many species, he must diminish/reduce it.
לא אמרו אלא ממן אחד – for two species do not combine to the measurement of a quarter [of a Kab].
וחכמים אומרים כל שהוא כלאים לסאה – there is [a difference] between the Sages and the first Tanna/teacher [of the Mishnah] as for example, a Seah of barley that has in it a quarter [of a Kab] of oats and spelt, [according] to the first Tanna/teacher, one needs to diminish it; to the Sages, oe does not have to diminish it, for oats do not combine with spelt since they are not diverse kinds in the Seah of barley. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
ערוגה שהיא ששה טפחים על ששה טפחים – it is explained below at the conclusion of the document. [if so, in all of the published editions, this commentary is not found at the conclusion of the document and now, when we have merited to the publication of the work Melekhet Shlomo (the work of Rabbi Shlomo Adani – 1567-1629 the 17th century scholar of Hebron), we found in it a copy of this commentary of Rabbi Obadiah of Bartenura with his thoughts. And in order that the teaching of the LORD is perfect [renewing life] (see Psalms 19:8), we have published it here in its appropriate place]. ערוגה – which is six handbreadths [by six handbreadths], etc.
היה לו גובל גבוה וכו' – in the Jerusalem Talmud [comment: and so it appears from the Babylonian Talmud in the ninth chapter of Shabbat/”Rabbi Akiva] they said that also the width of a boundary is a handbreadth, it is fund that the garden-bed is eight [handbreadths] by eight [handbreadths] and they sow in it thirteen [seeds]. Three on each and every boundary and one in the middle like this (see drawing #6 in the standard editions of the Mishnah), and it will be that the measurement of what is sown from it thirty-handbreadths. And the Rosh, of blessed memory (Rabbi Asher ben Yehiel 1250-1327 – born in Cologne, Germany and died in Toledo, Spain) explained that on each and every border he sows four [seeds] in the four corners and between each and every corner (comment: the rest of each boundary that is from one corner to another corner), [he sows] two kinds of seeds, and that which is taught in a Baraitha that three [seeds are sown] on each boundary because one [corner] is counted with the two and he counts one corner for every direction and between the four species that are in each direction, he has to needs to distance three [handbreadths of] blank space that between them are four and one-half handbreadths, and there will remain a place for seed that are four species of three and one-half handbreadths and this for each species a handbreadth minis one-eighth of a handbreadth. But in the Jerusalem Talmud an objection is raised that they place three [seeds] on every border and five in the middle like the garden-beds of the first clause and that there would be seventeen species. And it responds because the borders are excluded, meaning that one must distance the seed of the garden-bed from the seed of the border a handbreadth and-a-half [comment: it means a handbreadth-and-a-half from the eastern side and a handbreadth and-a-half from the western side, which are three handbreadths, and there doesn’t remain, etc.) but there does not remain a free space to sow in the garden-bed other than three handbreadths by three handbreadths. But if you would say, why doesn’t he sow on each and every border five species of six handbreadths for the four handbreadths of open space that is between the five species [of seed] and there would remain two handbreadths for the five species. Two-fifths of a handbreadth for every species by length of a handbreadth, and that there would be between everything sixteen species [comment: explanation – four seeds for the four corners and another three on each and every border, that makes sixteen except for the middle]. But one can say that perhaps with the multiplicity of species, there is confusion.
זורעים וכו' – in the explanation of Rabbi Akiva, he expounded upon the Scriptural verse as it is written (Isaiah 61:11): “For as the earth brings forth her growth and a garden makes the seed shoot up,” תוציא/brings forth – is one; צמחה/her growth is one, which is two, זירועיה/the (i.e., its) seed – which is two, that makes four; תצמיח/shoot up – is one that makes five (see Tractate Shabbat, Chapter 9, Mishnah 2). For it is taught above in Chapter 2 (Mishnah 10) that “vegetables [of one kind which are to be sown in a field containing mostly] vegetables [of another kind must themselves cover an area of] six handbreadths, these words concern a large field where there is in a lot of vegetation but here, when he does not sow from each other than a little bit, we are not concerned. And what there is to advance to the explanation of the Mishnah is that we require that there will be between each and every sowing/seeding a distance of a handbreadth and one-half (the comment – this not according to the opinion of Rashi or the Raavad (Rabbi Abraham ben David 1125-1198 b. Posquieres, France) may their memories be blessed, and they, may their memories be blessed, hold that we have to distance between each and every sowing three handbreadths, but in [Tractate] Shabbat in the [ninth] chapter [entitled] “Rabbi Akiva,” he copied from the commentary of Rashi (Rabbi Shlomo Yitzhaki of Worms, France– 1040-1105) of blessed memory, for there it is like what is written in the [commentary of] Tosefet Yom Tov (i.e., Rabbi Gershon Shaul Yom Tov Lippman Heller 1579-1654 d. in Krakow, Poland)], in order that they don’t absorb one from the other than if there will be corners at the side of corners or the side of the rib which is the place of a second sowing, then he will have no need for it, for at the setting bounds of the corners, he will see their distinction and then there is no concern for their absorption, even if they are one at the side of the other, and if so, in a garden bed of which is six [handbreadths], it is possible to sow in it five kinds of seeds and they would not be mixed seeds/Kilayim and this is its shape (see drawing #1 in standard volumes of Tractate Kilayim): And the measurement will be what was sown in the garden-bed of twenty-four handbreadths, and we stated in the Gemara in the chapter [nine] “Rabbi Akiva” of Tractate Shabbat 85b, that we taught this concerning a garden-bed in a destroyed area but in a garden bed among garden-beds, it is prohibited to sow in it five different kinds, for if he would sow in each direction of this garden-bed and in every direction that is in the garden-bed that is around it, he will see everything as mixed. And our teacher the Rabbi Shimshon, may his memory be blessed, explained according to the Jerusalem Talmud that this is the order of the sowing. He places in the corners of a destroyed area one handbreadth and half of a fifth [of a handbreadth] by a handbreadth and a half- of-a- fifth [of a handbreadth] in order that he can remove [one] seed from [another] seed, the seed to the east from the seed to the south is the measurement of a diagonal line of one handbreadth and half of one-fifth, which is a handbreadth-and-a-half, and he sows in every direction four handbreadths minus a fifth by length and the width is a handbreadth and a half but rather defines the boundaries on each side util he completes the width of a handbreadth minus one-fifth in order that there would always be between the seed of the south to the seed of the east a handbreadth and one-half, and similarly in every direction until he places in the middle of he garden bed three handbreadths by three handbreadths and he makes in the middle a perforation and seeds in it one kernel like this (see drawing #2 in the standard editions of the Mishnah). [The comment: There are those in interpret that that all of the sowing will not come up in this shape, just less than twelve handbreadths]. But they posed a difficulty in the Gemara (Tractate Shabbat 84b) why did they squeeze it to establish it in a garden bed that is in dry land? Let it surround the garden-bed from every side corresponding to the corners and there isn’t anything sown? But the Gemara (ibid.,) that it is a decree lest he fill up the corners and sow the garden-bed in this form (see drawing #3 in the standard editions of the Mishnah) or on this form (see drawing #4 in the standard editions of the Mishnah). But the reason that they didn’t say in garden-bed which is six handbreadths by six handbreadths, that they sow within it nine seeds/rows of plants and that there will be between each one a handbreadth-and-a-half like this (see drawing #5 in the standard editions of the Mishnah). Because everything that is sown from it is only nine handbreadths and on this when they do it first, it will be twenty-four handbreadths, but that the Mishnah took a garden-bed of six handbreadths by six handbreadths because it is the smallest of the garden-beds which is a cubit by a cubit, and it came to teach us that it is possible to sow in it different seeds and that it would not be mixed seeds/Kilayim.
מפני שהוא ממלאהו – and he won’t be able to sow three [seeds] in each border.
רבי יהודה אומר ששה באמצע – In the Jerusalem Talmud, it expounds upon זרע/offspring (see Leviticus 22:13), זרעה/her offspring (see Genesis 3:16) and זירועיה/the seed (see Isaiah 61:11), these are three, for these words/ הו"מ to be written זרע/offspring but it is written "זרועיה ותוציא צמחה"/ “For as the earth brings forth her growth [and a garden] makes the seed shoot up,” תצמיח/grow – these are three which makes six. And Rabbi Shimshon [son of Abraham of Sens 1150-1230), of blessed memory, wrote that in the Jerusalem Talmud raises the objection – for what reason do we teach above according to the Rabbis that the boundaries limit? How does Rabbi Yehuda teach that there are six seeds [planted] in the middle? But if you were to say that Rabbi Yehuda is referring to the first clause, meaning that when the first Tanna/teacher states that it is five [seeds sown] and he states six [seeds sown], surely Rabbi Hiyya teaches that Rabbi Yehuda states that there are eighteen [seeds sown] in the middle, so we see that he refers to the concluding clause, but the explanation that there are twelve [seeds sown] on the boarder and six in the middle which makes eighteen does not solve anything in the Jerusalem almud. Therefore, I appears that the height of the border counts for the number of the distance, for if you would not say this, why does it [the Mishnah] take this, it would be a border that is one handbreadth high, let it teach that the garden-bed was eight [handbreadths] by eight [handbreadths] but rather, certainly, it teaches that it is a handbreadth high to inform us that the border is part of the measurement of the distance. And one must say that Rabbi Yehuda, according to his reasoning, that stated in our chapter – like as large as the width of a toe, which is a handbreadth, and one does not have to distance more than an handbreadth, and now, since the height of the boundary is from the number according to Rabbi Yehuda, he is able to sow in all of the garden-bed. And he sows in it six species, thee in one row from the east and three in one row from the west and each and every species is a handbreadth and one-third of a handbreadth wide at the length of two and one-half handbreadths (see drawing #7 found in standard editions of the Mishnah). But the width of that which is sown from these is a handbreadth and a third-of a handbreadth with the length of two and one-half handbreadths and the white line of dry land that is between the three rows that is from this side or whether the three rows that are from the other side, they are six handbreadths along the length of the garden-bed, and the dry land that is between that which is sown is to sow two and one-half handbreadths according to the length of what is sown, but its width is one handbreadth according to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda for he does not require distancing other than a handbreadth, and they are four blank spaces which are ten handbreadths , the total is that tall of the dry land in the garden-bed is sixteen handbreadths, and in total, all that is sown in the middle of the garden-bed , excluding the borders counts for twenty handbreadths. But according to the Rabbis, one sows one species in the garden-bed five [handbreadths] by five [handbreadths] for one requires one-half a handbreadth from each side from the border. But if you say regarding the Sages, why one does not sow other than one species in the entire garden-bed, and isn’t he able to sow in it five species, a handbreadth by a handbreadth in each and every corner and a handbreadth and a handbreadth in the enter as long as there would not be a diagonal line of the middle handbreadth corresponding to the diagonal line of the garden bed and one-half between the middle sown seed and the sown seed of the corners, because the diagonal line of the garden bed is seven handbreadths and the diagonal of the sown seeds of the corner and of the middle is four and one-fifth handbreadths. And one can say that since the All-Merciful did not permit other than five [sown seeds] within the six [handbreadths], it follows that less than six there is confusion. But Rabbi Meir Rothenberg, of blessed memory, explained that the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda that it is possible that he can so in this garden-bed which is six [handbreadths] by six [handbreadths] and that it has a boundary of a handbreadth of eighteen species like this form (see drawing #8 found in standard editions of the Mishnah). And it will be that the measure of the sown seeds from it will be thirty handbreadths, but when one observes this form, you will find six marked, the length of each one is three handbreadths and the width is two handbreadths, it is found that each side of them has a diagonal line of one and one-half handbreadths by one handbreadth, it is found that these seeds are distant from each other more than a handbreadth and a half. But, if you want to say to Rabbi Yehuda that he should sow nine species in the middle of the garden-bed and according to the measure of this sowing and we should draw it like this figure (see drawing # 9 found in standard editions of the Mishnah), this is impossible because all that is marked from the nine marked and embroidered areas, its length is two handbreadths and its width is two handbreadths, it is found that each side of them has a diagonal line one handbreadth by one handbreadth and this is a handbreadth and two fifths, but we require a handbreadth and a half and it is lacking. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda. [and examine his explanation in Tractate Shabbat, Chapter 9 (Mishnah 2)].

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
קרחת – [razed portion of] a vineyard and the untilled ground surrounding the vineyard [between the vines and the fence], I will explain them further on.
בית שמאי אומרים כ"ד אמות – if its razed portion is twenty-four cubits, it is permitted to sow there; less than this, he should not bring seed to there.
שחרב מאמצע – and there are vines all surrounding the razed portion which is sixteen cubits by sixteen cubits, and similarly, if the razed area went over the face of the width of the vineyard where there are no vines other than from the two sides of the razed portion [of the vineyard].
אם אין שם שש עשרה אמה – according to the words of the School of Hillel, he should not bring seed to there even in the middle cubit, for four cubits that are on the side of the vineyard from this side and four cubits that are on the side of the vineyard from that side, is the tillage of the vineyard of four cubits as is taught in the Mishnah (i.e., Mishnah 2) because they would cut the grapes with oxen and with wagons and at the time of the plowing, they plow it with oxen; therefore, those four cubits in the vineyard are like the vineyard, but if there remained between them eight cubits besides those four on each side, they were not nullified in regard to the vineyard, and it is permitted to sow them; less than eight cubits, they cast one-half to this side and the other half to that side, and they nullify it concerning the vineyard, and it is like the vineyard itself and it is prohibited to sow in them because of mixed seeds/Kilayim. But according to the School of Shammai, it is not considered a field when it is less than eight cubits, therefore, we require twenty-four cubits – four for the tilling/working of the vineyard from this side and corresponding to them from the other side, subtract from them sixteen [cubits]- though eight to here and eight to there, and one has a field and it is not nullified.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
כרם שחרב. עשר גפנים לבית סאה – that there are in the ground of a Bet Seah (i.e., 50 cubits by 50 cubits) ten vines, no fewer from this.
ונטועות כהלכתן – that is two opposite two and one produces a tail, and they are not distant from each other sixteen cubits but not less than four cubits.
כרם דל (sparsely planted vineyard)- that its vines are few but nevertheless it has the law of a vineyard [applying to it]. But this is not a razed portion of a vineyard, for that part laid waste is from its middle, and this one is laid waste from every side.
ערבוביא (in an irregular manner) – that the vines are not corresponding like a line.
אם יכול לכוין – in all of the vineyard two corresponding to three, as for example that he would bring a thread and trains it and he finds the stem/shoot corresponding two corresponding to two and one extends as a tail but the bough is not corresponding, behold this is a vineyard. But, if he finds the bough corresponding and the stem/shoot does not correspond, it is not a vineyard.
כתבנית כרמים הרי זה כרם – and it requires distancing sixteen cubits. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
איזהו עריס – that the place for him his tilling of four cubits like the tilling of a vineyard even though there is only one row, and the espalier is that they make a partition by means of net-work (i.e., like lattices) with reeds like an arbor in the matter that they gird the bedstead and they suspend upon it the tendrils of the vines, and according to the School of Hillel, they established as they stated above in [Tractate Kilayim] Chapter 4 [Mishnah 5] that it is not a vineyard util there would be two rows there, but in an espalier, they admit that with one row also, it is a vineyard.
מן הגדר ולשדה – as for example, if the vines were planted to the east of the fence and the vine-shoots rise up on the fence, if he comes to sow on the west side of he fence, they do not count four cubits from the base of the vines which are further from the fence, but rather, he needs to distance four cubits from the fence for the tendrils of the vines are suspended upon it. And this is from the leniencies of the School of Shammai and the stringencies of the School of Hillel.
טועים כל האומרים כן – for after all, the School of Hillel did not state that the espalier of one row of vines is a vineyard that would necessitate that they distance from it four cubits to the field, and the law was not mentioned of four cubits for an espalier other than in regard to this matter that if there are four cubits from the base of the vines to the fence on which they are suspended , we give him for his tillage six handbreadths, like we give for an individual vine, and he sows the remainder until the fence, but if there aren’t four cubits from the base of the vines until the fence, he should not bring seed to there, something that resembles a vine which is planted in a vat for wine-pressing or in a cavity/ravine that Rabbi Yossi stated in the chapter above (i.e., Tractate Kilayim, Chapter 5, Mishnah 4) if there aren’t four cubits there, he should not bring seed to there, but Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri and Rabbi Yossi said one thing and this is explained explicitly in the Jerusalem Talmud.
רבי עקיבא אומר שלשה טפחים – which is the tilling of an individual vine. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Akiva.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
המבריך את הגפן בארץ – and it passes the sinking outside of six handbreadths, for within six handbreadths, even that there is dirt upon it for three handbreadths, it is prohibited, because it is the tilling of an individual vine.
לא יביא זרע עליה [the underground vine] – but from the side, it is permitted, for when one seeds to the sides, they don’t take root, but rather that they make the crushed earth and it affects the foundations of the wall when they are sown next to it, but their roots grow from the side. But the reason that one should not bring seed upon the sunken vine even outside of its tilling is because the vine is soft and the roots of the seeds enter the vine and there is the sinking of a vegetable in the tree, but the rest of the trees that are not soft is permitted.
אפילו הבריכה בדלעת או בסלון (if in sinking a vine he conducted it through gourd shells or through a pipe – so that it could draw no nourishment from the ground which it passed) – that he inserted the vine within the gourd or within the pipe, it is prohibited because the roots of the seeds perforate and penetrate until the vine when there are not three handbreadths of dirt upon it. And because the seeds in a gourd is not forbidden as for example, that the gourd is dry.
סלון – it is a water pipe and a tube/spout or one pipe. But especially in an earthenware pipe/tube, we are speaking of a metal tube that does not require dirt of three handbreadths.
הבריכה בסלע – in a hard [rock], for a soft rock [penetrates] and is opened from the roots.
הארכובה שבגפן – a vine that is curved and bent on the ground and returns and is put up like a kind of curved knee, when hey come to measure six handbreadths that are the tilling of the individual vine, hey measure from the second root from the place where it returns and stands up straight. But these words apply when the first root is not seen but rather it is similar to a tree when it is planted in the place of its bending, but if the first root appears that it is the root of the curved vine, we don’t measure other than from the first root.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
כלאי הכרם אסורים מלזרוע – but he is not flogged because of diverse kinds in a vineyard until he sows two kinds of seeds which are mixed seeds/Kilayim one to the other, and he sows them in the vineyard, for this is implied by the Scriptural verse (Deuteronomy 22:9): “You shall not sow your vineyard with a second kind of seed,” – you shall not sow two kinds of seeds which are mixed seeds/Kilayim within your vineyard, but if you sowed [them] in a vineyard, you are flogged twice because of [both] mixed seeds and because of diverse kinds of the vineyard.
ומלקיים – if he sees them and he gives up hope to uproot them [from the ground], it is prohibited , but he is not flogged other than if he commits a [positive] action.
ואסורים בהנאה – as it is written (Deuteronomy 22:9): “else the crop – from the seed you have sown – [and the yield of the vineyard may not be used],” [the Rabbis explained] that it is set on fire, teaching that they require burning and that they are prohibited from deriving benefit.
אלא ללבוש – and the same law applies about placing it upon oneself, as it is written (Leviticus 19:19): “you shall not put on cloth [from two kinds of mixture].”
אלא להרביע – to forcibly with his strength bring them into a tube, but it is permit to bring them into a pen and to raise them two species one next to the other, a male of this species and a female of another species.
כלאי בהמה אסורים זה עם זה – as for example those born from a horse whose father was a donkey with those born of a donkey whose father was horse, but our Mishnah brings according to the opinion that we are not concerned about the seed of the father, for one who states that we are concerned about all kinds of mules are one, they are permitted one to the other. But in the Jerusalem Talmud, they (i.e., the Rabbis) wanted to prove that it is prohibited to ride on a mule from an a fortiori, for just as if regarding clothing you are permitted to wear this on top of that (i.e., mixed seeds), [but] you are prohibited in their mixture, an animal in which you are prohibited from directing/leading this one with that one, is it not all the more so, that you are prohibited in its mixture, and we raise the following difficulty: Isn’t it written (2 Samuel 13:29): “whereupon the other princes mounted their mules and fled,” regarding the sons of David when Amnon was killed, but we teach that one cannot learn from the [family] of the kingdom, further, we raise the difficulty, but surely it is written (1 Kings 1:33): “[The king said to them: ‘Take my loyal soldiers] and have my son Solomon ride on my mule [and bring him down to Gihon],’” and we respond that this creature is from the six days of creation. But however, we see that for the Rabbis that those who are older before me – that they ride before him first on mules and they did not protest in the matter, but rather, that they warn [them’ that they should not lead together two mules, for perhaps one of them was born from a donkey and its father was a horse, and the other was from a horse and is father was a donkey.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
אין אסור משום כלאים אלא צמר ופשתים – as it is written (Deuteronomy 22:11): “You shall not wear cloth combining wool and linen.” [The word] שעטנז is a generalization; צמר ופשתים /wool and linen is a specification/detail; a generalization and a specification/detail, the generalization refers only to that which was specified in the details. Wool and Linen, yes, [are forbidden together]; something else is not [forbidden together]. But צמר/wool is the wool of sheep or rams alone, as it is written (2 Kings 3:4): “Now King Mesha of Moab was a sheep breeder; and he used to pay as tribute to the king of Israel the wool of one hundred thousand lambs and of one hundred thousand rams.” You do not have it called mere wool, but rather the wool of rams, but he rest of wool, one needs to give an epithet, the wool of camels, the wool of hares, the wool of goats.
ואינו מטמא בנגעים אלא צמר ופשתים – as it is written (Leviticus 13:47): “When an eruptive affection occurs in a cloth of wool or linen fabric.”
אין הכהנים לובשים לשמש במקדש אלא צמר ופשתים – for regarding the clothing of the priests, it is written (Exodus 39:27-29): “They made the tunics of fine linen of woven work, [for Aaron and his sons];…and the linen breaches of fine twisted linen,” which is a flax that grows in linen stalks, that is to say, a singular red from each seed, but no two reeds grow from one seed. And regarding the sashes/אבנט (verse 29), it is written (Exodus 39:29): “blue and purple and crimson yarns, [done in embroidery -as the LORD had commanded Moses].” “And blue/תכלת” -the wool that is colored with the blood of the purple-shell used for dying tekhelet, “and purple/ארגמן”- that is colored by the color ed whose name is ארגמן/purple, which is LAKA in the foreign tongue; and “crimson yarns/תולעת שני” which is colored in the color red that they call CARMAZI.
שטרפן – that mixed them.
מותר – to mix flax with them because the wool of lambs/sheep is nullified through the majority of [wool of] camels.
וכן פשתן וקנבוס – that became combined – and the majority is from the hemp, it is permitted to bring wool and to mix with them.
