=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
Anyone who intentionally eats an olive's size1Whenever the Torah uses the verb אכל (eat) in the context of a mitzvah or a prohibition, it refers to the consumption of at least a minimum amount, established by Eruvin 4b as the size of an olive.It must be emphasized that the measure of a כזית (an olive's size) cannot be determined by measuring an average olive today. Rather, it is dependent on the measure established by the Sages and this is the subject of debate by the Rabbinic authorities. The Pri Chadash (Orach Chayim 486) explains that the Rambam considers an olive as one third the size of an egg (כביצה, a more familiar Talmudic measure). In terms of modern measurements, this olive size would be between 16.6 and 24 grams, according to various Halachic opinions.Tosefot (Chullin 103a) differs, and defines a כזית(the size of an olive) as one half the size of an egg (between 25.6 and 36 grams according to the various opinions). With regard to the practical application of the law (halachah l'ma'aseh), the Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Orach Chayim 486) advises that in all questions of Torah law, Tosefot's opinion should be followed. However, in questions of Rabbinic law, the more lenient opinion can be relied upon. [כזית, or more]2Eating less than this amount of chametz is also forbidden by Torah law. However, there is no punishment for its consumption, nor need a sacrifice be brought as atonement (See Halachah 7). of chametz3any mixture made from grain or grain products that has come into contact with water and was allowed to become leavened. The following (and only the following) five species are referred to as grain: wheat, rye, barley, oats, spelt. on Pesach from the beginning of the night of the fifteenth [of Nisan] until the conclusion of the day of the twenty-first [of Nisan]4In the mitzvot mentioned above, the Rambam also mentions the prohibition against eating chametz from noon on the fourteenth of Nisan. However, the violation of that prohibition is not punishable by כרת. is liable for כרת,5The prohibition against eating chametz on Pesach is counted as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. See Sefer HaMitzvot, negative commandment 197; Sefer HaChinuch, mitzvah 19. as [Exodus 12:15] states: "Whoever eats leaven... will have his soul cut off."6Moed Kattan 28a relates that a person who violated a sin punishable by כרת would die before reaching the age of fifty.In his commentary on the Mishnah, Sanhedrin 9:6, the Rambam emphasizes that premature death does not represent the totality of the retribution these individuals will receive. In addition, "their souls will be cut off."In Hilchot Teshuvah 8:1, the Rambam elaborates on the latter dimension:The good that is hidden for the righteous is the life of the world to come... The retribution of the wicked is that they will not merit this life. Rather, they will be cut off and die.This is the intent of the meaning of the term כרת in the Torah, as [Numbers 15:31] states: "That soul shall surely be cut off."[Should one eat this amount of chametz] unintentionally,7בשוגג one is liable to bring a fixed sin offering8The Rambam adds the word "fixed" to indicate that he is referring to the standard sin offering described in Leviticus 4:27-35, in contrast to the offering to atone for certain sins mentioned in Leviticus, Chapter 5. (See Hilchot Shegagot 1:3.) The latter offering is not "fixed," but rather is adjustable according to the financial state of the person liable. [as atonement].[The above applies] equally to one who eats chametz and one who converts it into a liquid and drinks it.9Though the Torah specifically mentions "eating," Chullin 120a equates drinking a liquid made from chametz and water with the former act. In his responsum (Vol. V, 1517), the Radbaz differentiates between mixing chametz with water (the instance in question here) and mixing chametz with other substances, as mentioned in Halachah 6. The punishment of כרת applies only when nothing else but chametz and water is contained in the mixture.
On Pesach, it is forbidden to derive any benefit from chametz,1for example, to sell it or use it for purposes other than eating. as [Exodus 13:3] states: "Do not eat (לא יאכל) chametz"; i.e., it is not permitted [to be used to derive benefit that leads to]2The bracketed additions are based on Rashi's commentary on Pesachim 21b. eating.3The Rambam's statements are somewhat problematic. Pesachim 21b records the following disagreement between the Sages:Chizkiyah states: What is the source from which we learn that it is forbidden to derive benefit from chametz? [Exodus 13:3] states: "Do not eat (לא יאכל) chametz"; i.e., it is not permitted [to be used to derive benefit that leads to] eating.His decision is based on the fact that the Torah uses the expression לא יאכל. Had the Torah not written יאכל לא, we may presume that a prohibition against eating would be implied, but not a prohibition against deriving benefit.This contradicts the opinion of R. Abahu who states: Wherever the Torah states לא תאכל, לא יאכלor לא תאכלו, a prohibition against eating and deriving benefit is implied.The Rambam's statements in this Halachah quote the opinion of Chizkiyah. However, in Hilchot Ma'achalot Asurot 8:15, he quotes the opinion of R. Abahu as accepted halachah.The Kessef Mishneh resolves the contradiction, explaining that in the halachah at hand, there is no difference in law between Chizkiyah and R. Abahu. Therefore, although the Rambam generally accepts R. Abahu's opinion, in this instance he quotes Chizkiyah's statements because the manner in which the latter derives the concept is more explicit.A person who leaves chametz within his property on Pesach,4As stated in Halachah 9, once chametz becomes forbidden on noon of the fourteenth of Nisan, we may not derive any benefit from it. even though he does not eat it, transgresses two prohibitions: [Exodus 13:7] states: "No leavening agent may be seen in all your territory"5This prohibition is counted as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah: Sefer HaMitzvot, negative commandment 200; Sefer HaChinuch, mitzvah 20. and [Exodus 12:19] states: "No leavening agent may be found in your homes."6This prohibition is counted as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah: Sefer HaMitzvot, negative commandment 201; Sefer HaChinuch, mitzvah 11.[Though the prohibitions stated in these verses apply to שאור,]7S'or refers to leavening agents, notably yeast. it is the same prohibition which forbids both חמץ (leaven) and שאור (a leavening agent).8Beitzah 7a explains that Exodus 13:7 mentions both chametz (leaven), and שעור (S'or, a leavening agent) in the same verse to emphasize that they are identical.The Ra'avad comments that the equation between the prohibitions against chametz and S'or is not complete. Among the differences between them are: Once chametz is no longer fit to be eaten by a dog, it is no longer prohibited. In contrast, yeast is never fit to be eaten and is prohibited even in that state. Nevertheless, the Maggid Mishneh and the Kessef Mishneh do not accept his statements.
[A violator] is not lashed1this is the punishment given for the active violation of any of the Torah's prohibitions that are not punishable by death. for [transgressing the prohibitions] not to have [chametz] seen [in his possession] and not to have [chametz] found [in his possession] unless he purchased chametz on Pesach2The Tzafnat Paneach emphasizes that this law applies only to chametz purchased from a gentile. However, once chametz belonging to a Jew becomes prohibited, that Jew no longer has the authority to sell it. Thus, the purchaser will never really become the legal owner of the chametz (See Rashi, Sukkah 35a; Tosefot, Chullin 4b).The Or Sameach questions how a person can become liable even for chametz purchased from a gentile, but resolves the issue based on the commentary of Rabbenu Nissim (Avodah Zarah, Chapter 3). or [caused flour] to become leavened, and thus committed a deed.3The Mishneh LaMelech raises a significant question: A person is not liable for lashes for violating any prohibition which he can correct by fulfilling a positive commandment (לעשה לאו הניתק): For example, if a person violates the prohibition against taking both a mother bird and her eggs, he can free himself from the punishment of lashes by sending away the mother bird.Tosefot (Pesachim 29b) states that the prohibition against chametz being seen in one's property falls into the above category, because one can correct the violation of this prohibition by fulfilling the positive commandment to destroy chametz. Thus, it appears that a person can never be held liable for lashes for this transgression.Among the resolutions offered to this difficulty is that of Rav Chayim Soloveitchik, who explains that Tosefot's statements apply only according to the opinion of Rabbi Yehudah, who maintains that chametz must be destroyed by burning. However, according to the Sages (whose opinion is accepted by the Rambam, Halachah 3:11), who maintain that chametz can be destroyed by any means, not necessarily burning, the prohibition against possessing chametz is not considered a לאו הניתק לעשה.What is the essential difference between these opinions: Rabbi Yehudah maintains that the fundamental aspect of the mitzvah to destroy chametz revolves upon the article itself (חפצה); it is a mitzvah to destroy chametz. In contrast, the Sages maintain that the mitzvah centers on the person (גברה); he is commanded to remove all chametz from his possession.According to Rabbi Yehudah, since the commandment revolves around the chametz itself, its destruction directly "corrects" the sin of its possession. In contrast, according to the Sages, the positive commandment of ridding one's house of chametz is merely a reinforcement of the prohibition against its possession, and the fulfillment of the positive commandment does not have the power to "correct" the violation of the prohibition.However, if he possessed chametz before Pesach, and when Pesach came he did not destroy it and left it in his possession,4However, should he remove it from his possession (by giving it to another person or declaring it ownerless), he is not liable even if he does not actually destroy the object. even though he transgresses two prohibitions, according to the Torah, he is not lashed, for he did not perform a deed.5Sh'vuot 21b states: "The transgression of any prohibition which does not involve a deed is not punishable by lashing." [Nevertheless,] he is given "stripes for being rebellious."6"Stripes for being rebellious (מכות מרדות)" is a punishment instituted by the Sages for violation of a Rabbinic prohibition. A person liable for lashing according to Torah law receives a uniform number of 39 lashes unless he is physically incapable of bearing that number. In contrast, the number of lashes given to a person liable for "stripes for being rebellious" is left to the discretion of the court.Chullin 14b states that this punishment is also inflicted upon those who violate a Torah prohibition that is not punishable by lashing.
It is prohibited to ever benefit from chametz1itself, in contrast to mixtures of chametz, as explained in Halachah 5. [that a Jew]2in contrast to a gentile (Pesachim 28a). possessed during Pesach.3This prohibition applies to all Jews, not only to the owner of the chametz (Rabbenu Nissim, Pesachim 28). Thus, it is prohibited to buy chametz from a store owned by a Jew who did not observe the prohibition against possessing chametz on Pesach. This prohibition is a penalty instituted by the Sages.4Pesachim 29a mentions Rabbi Yehudah's opinion that the prohibition stems from the Torah itself. However, this opinion is not accepted as halachah.The Tzafnat Paneach explains that the debate between Rabbi Yehudah and Rabbi Shimon (who maintains that the Torah does not forbid benefiting from chametz after Pesach) revolves around an abstract concept. Rabbi Yehudah maintains that once Pesach comes, chametz itself becomes forbidden and, therefore, can never become permitted again. In contrast, Rabbi Shimon maintains that the prohibition does not affect the essence of the chametz itself. Thus, we are forbidden to benefit from it during Pesach, but after Pesach there is no prohibition. Since the person transgressed [the prohibitions against chametz] being found and being seen [in his possession], they prohibited its use.5The Maggid Mishneh explains that the prohibition against using a Jew's chametz after Pesach applies even when the prohibitions against possessing chametz are not violated. See Halachah 4:5.[The above applies] even if he inadvertently left [the chametz in his possession during Pesach]6e.g., he forgot that he possessed it. or was forced to do so.7The Nodah BiYhudah (Orach Chayim 20) gives an example of such a case. A thief stole chametz from a person before Pesach and returned it to him after the holiday. Even though the person had no opportunity to destroy it before Pesach, it is forbidden.In that responsum, the Nodah BiYhudah also raises the following question: A person died on the fourteenth of Nisan without nullifying or selling his chametz. Are his heirs forbidden to benefit from that chametz or not? He maintains that although the Rambam would probably prohibit benefiting from this chametz, there are rationales on the basis of which its use may be permitted. [Other authorities (note Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Kuntres Acharon 435) do not accept this conclusion.] [These stringencies were instituted] lest a person8intentionally leave chametz in his possession during Pesach in order to benefit from it after Pesach.9on the pretense that he had forgotten about its existence.
If, on Pesach,1Rabbenu Asher and the Sefer Mitzvot Gadol maintain that this principle does not apply until the holiday itself actually begins. Thus, even if chametz became mixed with other substances on the fourteenth of Nisan, after the time chametz is forbidden, the mixture is bound by the laws regarding the nullification of forbidden objects (ביטול איסורים) that apply throughout the entire year.The Kessef Mishneh maintains that a simple interpretation of the Rambam's statements leads to the conclusion that he accepts this opinion. Though others, among them the Maggid Mishneh, do not accept this view, it is accepted as Halachah (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 447:2). even the slightest amount of chametz becomes mixed together with another substance,2Ordinarily, it is permissible to use a mixture of a prohibited substance and a permitted substance provided that the permitted substance is present in a greater amount, to the extent that the prohibition is nullified (ביטול איסור). either of its kind3When the prohibited substance is of the same kind as the forbidden substance (e.g., improperly slaughtered meat mixed with properly slaughtered meat), all that is required to nullify the prohibition is that the permitted substance constitutes the majority of the mixture (Hilchot Ma'achalot Asurot 15:1). or not of its kind,4When the prohibited substance is of a different kind from the permitted (e.g., forbidden fats mixed with grain), the prohibition is ordinarily nullified if the taste of the forbidden article is not discernible, or the quantity of the permitted substance is at least 60 times as great as the forbidden article (ibid. 15:1, 6). [the entire mixture] is forbidden.5The above principles do not apply with regard to chametz on Pesach. Even the slightest mixture of chametz may not be eaten, nor may benefit be derived from it. In Hilchot Ma'achalot Asurot (15:9), the Rambam explains that this stringency is instituted because chametz is a דבר שיש לו מתירין (a substance which later will become permitted).A דבר שיש לו מתירין which becomes mixed together with a permitted substance of its own kind is never permitted to be used because of the following rationale: Since its use in its entirety will later become permitted, there is no need to grant a leniency allowing it to be eaten when forbidden.Similarly, with regard to chametz on Pesach: There is no prohibition against using a mixture of chametz after Pesach. Hence, there is no need to grant permission to eat such a mixture on Pesach itself, even though the quantity of the permitted substance far surpasses that of the chametz.Furthermore, there is a stricter dimension to chametz than to any other דבר שיש לו מתירין. Generally, a דבר שיש לו מתירין is permitted if it becomes mixed with a substance of another kind to the extent that its taste can no longer be discerned. However, this leniency is not granted regarding mixtures of chametz. Since Exodus 12:20 states: "You must not eat any leaven," the severity of the prohibition obligates additional stringency.Though it is forbidden to benefit from chametz which a Jew possessed on Pesach, if it became mixed with another substance, whether of its kind6for example, a dough containing yeast mixed with flour. or not of its kind,7for example, a mixture of flour with any other substance. it is permitted to be eaten after Pesach.8The Ma'aseh Rokeach explains that this leniency applies whether the mixture occurred after Pesach or on the holiday itself. Nevertheless, the latter point should not be misinterpreted. Should such a mixture be discovered on Pesach, we are obligated to destroy it (Ramah, Orach Chayim 447:1). Nevertheless, if either intentionally or unintentionally, the mixture was not destroyed on the holiday itself, it may be used afterwards. [The Sages] only penalized and forbade [the use of] chametz itself. A mixture [containing chametz possessed on Pesach] is permitted to be eaten after Pesach.9Pesachim 30a explains that since the penalty is of Rabbinic origin, it was applied only to chametz itself and not to mixtures.
One is liable for כרת1as stated in Halachah 1 only for eating chametz itself. However, a person who eats a mixture containing chametz—for example, Babylonian kotach,2a mixture including sour milk, moldy bread crusts, and mineral salts (Pesachim 42a). Median beer,3beer made of fermented barley, as our beer. Generally, the beer referred to in the Talmud was made from fermented dates (Rashi, Pesachim 42b). or similar mixtures which contain chametz--[is4Pesachim 42a also emphasizes that a person transgresses the commandments against possessing chametz if he owns any of the above mixtures. punished by] lashes and is not liable for כרת [for this involves the transgression of a different commandment],5different from eating chametz itself as [Exodus 12:20] states: "Do not eat any leaven."When6The Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 198) and the Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 12) consider this as one of the Torah's 613 commandments.Nevertheless, this decision is a matter of debate among the commentators. The Ramban (Hasagot to Sefer HaMitzvot) does not accept the Rambam's view, and explains that a person who consumes an olive size of chametz within the specific time period (פרס כדי אכילת) described below should be liable for כרת as described in Halachah 1. See also Halachah 4:8 and commentary.The Maggid Mishneh supports the Ramban's view, noting that in Hilchot Ma'achalot Asurot 15:3, the Rambam himself explains that any person who eats a mixture containing an olive size of a forbidden food within this time period is liable, just as if he had eaten the forbidden food itself.Based on the explanation of the Tur (Orach Chayim 442), the Drisha and the Pri Chadash interpret the Rambam as referring to a mixture to which the chametz does not impart any flavor and is added only for consistency and color.The Tzafnat Paneach offers a different interpretation, explaining that were chametz to be mixed with other foods, a person eating the mixture would be liable for כרת as the Ramban states. However, the Rambam is talking about an instance when flour was mixed with another substance and became leavened as part of the mixture, without ever becoming a distinct entity of its own. The Torah considers this as a different category of chametz and holds a person who eats it liable for a lesser punishment. does the above apply? When the person consumed an olive size7the minimum size of a prohibited substance for which one is liable for punishment, as explained in Halachah 1. of chametz [while eating] from the mixture within the time it takes to eat three eggs or less.8This period (כדי אכילת פרס in Hebrew) is significant in halachah. Just as the Torah requires a specific quantity, the size of an olive, as regards many of the mitzvot and prohibitions concerning eating, it also specifies a limited period in which this amount of food must be consumed: אבילת פרס כדי.This measure is also a point of Rabbinic controversy. The Rambam defines it as the time it takes to eat three eggs (Hilchot Ma'achalot Asurot 14:8). Rashi (Pesachim 44a) takes a more lenient view, defining it as the amount of time it takes to eat four eggs. As regards this matter as well, the Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Orach Chayim 612:4) advises that whenever a question of Torah law is involved, the more stringent opinion should be observed. However, in questions of Rabbinic law, the more lenient view can be relied on.In converting this figure to modern measures of time, there is also a difference of opinion. The shortest opinion limits this period to two minutes. The most commonly accepted view is four minutes and there are opinions of seven and eight minutes as well. Then, he is obligated for lashes by the Torah.9as explained above. However, if he does not consume an olive size of chametz from the mixture in less time than it takes to eat three eggs, even though such eating is forbidden,10for as explained in the previous halachah, chametz can never be nullified within a mixture. As the following halachah explains, eating less than an olive size of chametz is also prohibited by Torah law. Nevertheless, he is not [punished by] lashing. Rather, he is given "stripes for being rebellious."11see Halachah 3.
Eating even the slightest amount of chametz itself1The laws regarding mixtures of chametz were mentioned in the previous halachah. on Pesach is forbidden by the Torah2The commentaries cite the source for the Rambam's decision as Yoma 73b, which mentions Rabbi Yochanan's opinion that all the Torah's prohibitions against eating apply even when one consumes less than the size of an olive (חצי שיעור), that measure being significant only as regards punishment. as [Exodus 13:3] states: "Do not eat [leaven]."3The Kessef Mishneh questions why the Rambam cites this verse. Yoma (ibid.) derives the prohibition against eating less than an olive size of prohibited substances from another source.The Radbaz (Responsa, Vol. V, 143) explains that the prohibition against חצי שיעור exists only when eating the prohibited substance itself. In contrast, חצי שיעור of chametz is forbidden even when mixed with other substances, as explained in the previous halachah. He explains that since deriving benefit from chametz is forbidden according to Torah law, that prohibition also includes eating חצי שיעור in any form. Nevertheless, [a person who eats chametz] is not liable for כרת, nor must he bring a sacrifice for anything less than the specified measure, which is the size of an olive.4Nevertheless, [a person who eats chametz] is not liable forכרת5as stated in Halachah 1. A person who intentionally violates the prohibition and eats less than an olive size of chametz6The Kessef Mishneh questions why the Rambam begins the halachah by describing the prohibition against "even the slightest amount" of chametz, and concludes with the expression "less than the size of an olive." is given "stripes for being rebellious."7Hilchot Ma'achalot Asurot 8:16 states that anyone who benefits from forbidden substances receives "stripes for being rebellious." A person who eats less than the size of an olive of chametz also benefits, and hence is liable for this punishment.
It is forbidden to eat chametz on the day of the fourteenth [of Nisan] from noon onward—i.e.,1The Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 199) and the Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 485) count this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. The Ramban and the Ra'avad take issue with this point, explaining that from noon on the fourteenth of Nisan until the beginning of the fifteenth at nightfall, there is a positive commandment to rid one's house of chametz, but no negative command forbidding the possession or eating of chametz. from the beginning of the seventh hour of the day.2The intent of this expression is midday. However, in particular, the term needs elaboration: According to Torah law, a day begins at dawn (עלות השחר), the appearance of the first rays of sun, and ends when three stars appear (םיבכוכה תאצ, Berachot 2b). This period is divided into 12 and the resulting figure is referred to as one seasonal hour (שעה זמנית). [Other opinions consider the period to be divided into twelve as beginning at the appearance of the sun, נץ החמה, and ending at sunset.]Thus, if dawn were at 5:09 AM and three stars appeared at 6:45 PM, each seasonal hour would be an hour and eight minutes, and the beginning of the seventh hour would be 11:57 AM. Any person who eats chametz3The Rambam explicitly states that lashes are never given for violating prohibitions against benefiting from forbidden articles (Hilchot Ma'achalot Asurot 8:16). The Mishneh Lamelech (Hilchot Yesodai HaTorah 5:8) elaborates on this principle in detail. during this time is punished by lashes according to Torah law,4as opposed to the punishment of כרת for eating chametz within Pesach, as described in Halachah 1. as [Deuteronomy 16:3] states: "Do not eat any leaven with it "; i.e., together with the Paschal sacrifice.Based on the oral5Pesachim 5a tradition, we received the interpretation of that statement as: Do not eat any chametz during the time which is fit to slaughter the Paschal sacrifice, that being the afternoon—i.e.,6i.e., after midday. -- The Paschal sacrifice could be offered from midday on the fourteenth of Nisan until sunset (Hilchot Korban Pesach 1:1).The Paschal sacrifice should not be slaughtered before the daily afternoon sacrifice, which would never be offered before half an hour past midday. However, if, by mistake, the Pesach sacrifice was slaughtered before the afternoon sacrifice, but after midday, its offering may be completed, provided a person continues stirring its blood until the afternoon sacrifice is offered (ibid. 1:3). after midday.
The Sages forbade the eating of chametz from the beginning of the sixth hour in order to prevent infringement upon a Torah commandment.1This is one of the Rabbinic commandments instituted as a "fence" and safeguard to Torah law. Thus, from the beginning of the sixth hour,2This is also a "seasonal hour." Thus, if as stated above, dawn of the fourteenth of Nisan is 5:09 AM and three stars appear at 6:45 PM, the beginning of the sixth hour is 10:49. it is forbidden to eat or benefit from chametz, based on Rabbinic law. During the rest of the day, from the seventh hour on, eating chametz is forbidden because of the Torah law.3as stated in the previous halachah.During the fifth hour of the day,4in the instance stated above from 9:41 until 10:49. we do not eat chametz, lest the day be cloudy and we err between the fifth and six hours.5In his commentary to the Mishnah (Pesachim 1:4), the Rambam explains that it is possible that a person may err in his estimation of the time by an hour and thus, transgress the Rabbinic prohibition against possessing chametz at the sixth hour.In a Responsa, the Rambam replies to the following question: The passage in Pesachim which is the source for this halachah appears to imply that a person may make an error of over two hours. Indeed, Rav Yitzchak Alfasi states the matter as such in his halachot. If so, why did the Rambam alter the explanation of the law.In a reply which reflects his overall purpose in the composition of the Mishneh Torah, the Rambam answers:I mentioned a mistake of an hour which is a common error because my intention in composing this text is to bring the matters closer to our understanding or what is general practice. However, there is no prohibition against benefiting from chametz during the fifth hour.6Since the restriction against benefiting from chametz during the sixth hour is only Rabbinic in origin, the Sages did not feel it necessary to forbid benefiting from chametz for another hour because of the mere possibility of error.Therefore, Terumah7a portion of grain given to the priests and the breads of the thanksgiving offering8A thanksgiving offering involves 40 loaves, ten of which are leavened (Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 9:17-18). which are chametz are left in a tentative status because of their holiness.9The Torah refers to Terumah as קדש (sanctified). Similarly, the breads of the thanksgiving offering have a sacrificial status. Therefore, They are neither eaten10for the Sages did not desire to relax their prohibition against eating chametz. Nevertheless, the priests were allowed to benefit from chametz during this period, and hence could feed Terumah to their animals. nor burned11for it is forbidden to destroy sacred articles unless absolutely necessary. Therefore, Pesachim 13b explains that thanksgiving offerings were not brought on the fourteenth of Nisan. [This law is also relevant at present. From the fourteenth of Nisan until the conclusion of Pesach, the "Psalm of Thanksgiving" is omitted from the morning service.] until the beginning of the sixth hour. Then, the entire quantity [of chametz] is burned.12because of the Rabbinic prohibition mentioned above. As explained in Halachah 3:11, generally, chametz can be destroyed by other means as well. However, this halachah deals with bread brought as sacrifices; hence, it is proper that they be burned (Rabbenu Manoach).
Thus, you have learned that it is permitted to eat chametz on the day of the fourteenth [of Nisan] until the end of the fourth hour.1as explained in the previous halachah. During the fifth hour, [chametz] is not eaten, but benefit may be derived from it.2Thus, during this time, a person may sell his chametz to gentiles or feed it to his animals. A person who eats chametz during the sixth hour is [punished by] "stripes for being rebellious."3The punishment given for transgressing a Rabbinic commandment. The Lechem Mishneh notes that the Rambam does not prescribe a punishment for a person who breaks the Rabbinic decree against eating chametz during the fifth hour.The Tzafnat Paneach (Responsum 83) also differentiates between the fifth and sixth hours, calling the former, a Rabbinic safeguard, and the latter, a Rabbinic prohibition. One who eats4With regard to the prohibition against benefiting from chametz, see commentary, Halachah 8. during the seventh hour is lashed.5as explained in Halachah 8.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
It is a positive commandment from the Torah to destroy chametz before the time it becomes forbidden to be eaten, as1The Rambam describes the more practical aspects of the nullification of chametz in Chapter 3, Halachot 7-10. There, he requires a person to make a formal statement nullifying his chametz. That declaration is a Rabbinic requirement. According to the Torah itself, a firm resolve is sufficient, and no statement is necessary (Binyan Shlomo). [Exodus 12:15] states: "On the first day, destroy leaven from your homes." On the basis of the oral tradition, it is derived that "the first day" refers to the day of the fourteenth.Proof of this matter is the verse from the Torah [Exodus 34:25]: "Do not slaughter the blood of My sacrifice with chametz," i.e., Do not slaughter the Pesach sacrifice while chametz exists [in your possession]. The slaughter of the Pesach sacrifice was on the fourteenth after midday.
What is the destruction to which the Torah refers? to nullify chametz within his heart1The Kessef Mishneh quotes a different version of the text:What is the destruction to which the Torah refers? to remove all chametz known to one from his property. [The chametz] which is unknown should be nullified...This version implies that, according to Torah as well as Rabbinic law (See Halachah 2), we must rid our homes of all chametz of whose existence we are conscious; its nullification is not sufficient.Nevertheless, the Kessef Mishneh brings a number of proofs from the Talmud and also quotes other commentaries of the Rambam, which maintain that the published text is correct and that the nullification of chametz is sufficient according to Torah law. He also quotes Hilchot Berachot 11:15, which emphasizes that "from the moment a person resolves in his heart to nullify it, the mitzvah of destroying [chametz] is fulfilled." and to consider it as dust,2The Rambam describes the more practical aspects of the nullification of chametz in Chapter 3, Halachot 7-10. There, he requires a person to make a formal statement nullifying his chametz. That declaration is a Rabbinic requirement. According to the Torah itself, a firm resolve is sufficient, and no statement is necessary (Binyan Shlomo). and to resolve within his heart that he possesses no chametz at all:2doing so removes his legal ownership over the chametz. all the chametz in his possession being as dust and as a thing of no value whatsoever.2If a person nullifies chametz within his heart and genuinely does not consider it as belonging to him, Torah law does not obligate him for the possession of chametz even if large quantities of it are found within his home.
According to the Sages' decree,1As explained in the previous halachah, according to the Torah, chametz may be within a person's property as long as he declared it ownerless. Nevertheless, the Sages forbade such practices and required all chametz to be removed from one's property.Two reasons are given for this decree:a) The nullification of chametz is dependent on the feelings of a person's heart. A person may possibly have difficulty totally removing all thoughts of ownership over the chametz from his heart (Rabbenu Nissim, Pesachim 2a).b) In contrast to other prohibited substances, chametz is used throughout the year. Thus, were he allowed to leave chametz within his property, he might accidentally forget about the prohibition and eat it on Pesach (Tosefot, Pesachim 2a).In addition to the restriction against possessing chametz, the Sages further expanded the scope of [the mitzvah2to destroy chametz so that it involves] searching for chametz3It must be emphasized that the obligation to search for chametz is Rabbinic in nature only when a person nullifies his chametz when required. Otherwise, the obligation stems from the Torah, for the prohibitions against possessing chametz and the commandment to destroy it require such a search. The Tzafnat Paneach quotes a number of examples that demonstrate how the existence of a Torah commandment obligates a person to check and search to see that it is being fulfilled correctly. in hidden places and in any holes [within one's house],4as clarified in Halachah 6, the obligation to search applies only to those holes and crevices in which chametz is usually placed. seeking it5Bedikat chametz and removing it from all of one's domain.6Biyur chametz.Similarly, according to the Sages' decree, we must search [with the intent to] destroy chametz by candlelight, at night,7The destruction of chametz at night refers to the statement חמירא כל, in which we nullify all the chametz of whose possession we are unaware. The chametz that we know about is either eaten or destroyed the next morning. at the beginning of the night of the fourteenth [of Nisan].8i.e., the night between the thirteenth and fourteenth of Nisan. [They instituted the search at that time]9in contrast to the day of the fourteenth, when the prohibition against possessing chametz begins (Pesachim 4a). because all people are at home at night,10while during the day people are occupied outside their homes. and the light of the candle is good for searching.11during the day, its light would not be as effective.A study session should not be fixed for the end of the thirteenth of Nisan.12Rabbenu Yonah allows a person to continue a study session on the night of the fourteenth if the session began while it was still day. Rav Yosef Karo accepts his opinion, but the Ramah does not. However, the Taz explains that leniencies may be made for public study sessions. Shulchan Aruch HaRav and the Mishnah Berurah go further and allow public study sessions even after nightfall, provided the subject matter is not overly involving. Similarly, a wise man should not begin to study at this time,13half an hour before nightfall (Magen Avraham, Orach Chayim 431:3). lest he become involved,14The Maggid Mishneh mentions that it is also improper to begin a meal at this time. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 431:2) also prohibits beginning work. Communal prayer is allowed. and thus be prevented from searching for chametz at the beginning of the time.15There are two reasons for the preference in carrying out the search in the beginning of the night:a) it is appropriate to carry out a mitzvah as soon as possible;b) at the beginning of the night, there is still some daylight left, which will facilitate the search (Ra'avad, Commentary on the Rif).
We do not search [for chametz] by the light of the moon, the light of the sun,1if one searches by day; i.e., either one forgot to search on the night of the thirteenth and had to carry out the search the following day. Alternatively, one decided to search for chametz before the fourteenth of Nisan with the intention of keeping the room chametz-free afterwards (Jerusalem Talmud, Pesachim 1:1). The light of the sun is insufficient to check indoor areas carefully. or the light of a torch;2Pesachim 8a explains that a person will be scared to placed a torch close enough to check small holes and crevices carefully lest he start a fire. only by the light of a candle.3It is customary to use a candle made from beeswax. To what does this apply? to the holes and hidden places. However, for a porch4a room with three walls and the fourth side open. which has much light,5Pesachim 8a states that the same principle applies to the area directly under an aperture in the roof. The Magen Avraham (Orach Chayim 433:4) also applies this principle to the area directly opposite an open window. searching it by the light of the sun is sufficient.6The Rambam's choice of phraseology clearly implies that it is not desirable to do so. Rather, even a porch should be checked at night by candlelight. Other authorities question this perspective, but it is accepted as halachah by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 433:1).The middle of a courtyard7Pesachim 8a states "a courtyard need not be searched." The Rambam adds the words "the middle" out of fear that the birds will not eat the chametz in the cracks and holes close to the wall. In this case as well, though other authorities are more lenient, the Shulchan Aruch (ibid. 433:6) quotes the Rambam's opinion. does not need to be searched, because birds are found there, and they eat all the chametz which falls there.
A hole1The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 433:4) applies the same principle to protrusions extending from a wall. in the middle2neither very high or low, see the following halachah. of [the wall of] the house3In previous generations, the walls of the homes were very thick and large holes would frequently be used for storage. between a person and his colleague [should be searched by both individuals],4for both may use it. each searching to the extent his hand reaches. [Afterwards,] each must nullify in his heart [any chametz in] the remaining portion.5As mentioned in Halachah 2, according to Torah law, the nullification of chametz is sufficient.[This applies to a hole in a wall separating two Jewish homes.] However, a hole between [the home of] a Jew and a gentile should not be searched at all, lest the gentile6see the Jew looking intently through the hole by candlelight and fear that the Jew is casting spells against him.7This might motivate him to harm the Jew. The Sages did not require a Jew to endanger himself to fulfill their decrees. All that is necessary for him to do is to nullify it within his heart.8The Kessef Mishneh (and similarly, the Taz) require the Jew to check the hole for chametz by day.Any place where chametz is not brought in does not need to be searched.9This is a major principle governing the search for chametz. The Sages only obligated a search where it was likely that chametz might be found. Therefore, they did not require a person to search places into which he did not bring chametz. Nevertheless, places where babies might have brought chametz must be searched, even though adults might not necessarily bring chametz there.
The upper1those above a person's reach (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 433:4) and lower holes2below three handbreadths high (ibid.). The Magen Avraham (433:8) emphasizes that if children are found at home, these lower holes must also be searched. [in the wall] of a house,3This halachah continues the final clause of the previous one, listing a number of places into which chametz is generally not brought. the roof of a balcony,4The commentaries explain that this refers to slanted roofs. a cow stall, chicken coop,5Rashi, Pesachim 8a, explains that most likely, the animals and the chickens will eat any chametz brought there. Nevertheless, the Shulchan Aruch (ibid. 433:6) qualifies this leniency explaining that it does not apply when a person definitely knows that chametz was brought into these premises one month before Pesach. (See Magen Avraham; the Makor Chayim brings a more lenient opinion.) In such an instance, he must search the premises on the night of the thirteenth by candlelight. hayloft, wine cellars or storage rooms for oil when supplies are not taken from them [in the midst of a meal],6Hence, there is little possibility that chametz was brought there. and storage rooms for large fish,7Small fish may be taken out during the course of a meal. However, generally, a person will take large fish to prepare only before a meal and not in the midst of eating. need not be searched unless one brought chametz into them.8need not be searched unless one brought chametz into them. In contrast, storage rooms for beer, storage rooms for wine from which supplies are taken [in the midst of a meal], storage rooms for salt, candles, small fish, wood, and brine,9In all these cases, the Sages regarded it likely that a person would get up in the middle of a meal while holding chametz in his hand to bring supplies from these storage rooms. Hence, they required such premises to be searched. the middle holes in a wall,10On the surface, these holes were mentioned in the previous halachah, and their mention here is redundant. and all similar places must be searched, for chametz is usually brought into them.11Thus, unless a person knows otherwise, he must act under the presumption that he brought chametz into these premises. However, if a person knows that he did not bring chametz into these places, they do not have to be searched.12However, if a person knows that he did not bring chametz into these places, they do not have to be searched. When searching a wine cellar,13where barrels of wine are stacked one on top of the other so that a person cannot enter the area where they have been placed [all that is necessary to] search are the two outer rows—i.e., the highest row and the one below it.
We do not suspect that a weasel dragged chametz into a place where it is not usually brought.1Pesachim 9a states: "We do not suspect that a weasel dragged chametz from one house to another or from place to place." Rashi explains that this statement applies after the search for chametz was carried out. Once we have searched our homes, we need not worry that rodents brought new chametz there.In contrast, the Rambam interprets the statement as applying before the search. There is no need to suspect that perhaps a rodent took chametz from a place where chametz is usually kept to a place where it is not usually brought. The Kessef Mishneh emphasizes that the two interpretations are not contradictory and both are halachically applicable. Were we to suspect [that chametz would be taken] from house to house, we would also have to suspect [that chametz might be taken] from city to city. There is no end to the matter.2There is always the possibility that chametz will be taken from one house to another. Hence, the Sages decided to ignore this possibility entirely.A person who checked on the night of the fourteenth3as required and placed ten loaves of chametz [on the side]4to be used the following morning and [later] found [only] nine must suspect [that chametz is present in his home,] and [hence], must search a second time,5The Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Orach Chayim 439:7) relates that he may stop the second search as soon as one loaf is found. He may presume that this was the loaf that he originally put aside. for definitely it was taken by a weasel or mouse.6The rodent may have eaten the chametz or removed it from the premises entirely. Nevertheless, a new search is required, for it is also possible that some chametz was left within the house (Pesachim 9a).As mentioned in Halachot 2 and 3, according to Torah law we need not do anything more than negate our ownership over our chametz. Nevertheless, the Sages also required that we search for chametz and destroy it completely. However, when a person does not nullify his chametz, the obligation to search takes on the severity of a Torah commandment.This and the following halachot (8 through 13) deal with circumstances which raise questions whether a second search is required. Throughout these halachot, the Rambam makes no mention of whether the owner of the house previously nullified his chametz or not. This fact is extremely important, for different principles apply to an obligation required by Torah law from those that apply to one instituted by the Rabbis. Indeed, other Rabbinic authorities (some of whom are quoted in the commentaries to the various halachot) devote much attention to this issue, clarifying at length whether the laws apply:a) only when a person had already nullified (or can still nullify) his chametz, or;b) even when the search for chametz is required by Torah law.Since the Rambam does not explicitly state his opinion on this matter, it is impossible to be sure which perspective he adopts. However, when the chapter is considered in its entirety, it appears that these halachot describe a situation where chametz has already been nullified. Unless specified to the contrary, this should be assumed to be the case. Nevertheless, certain of the leniencies are also applicable even when the search takes on the severity of a Torah obligation.
Similarly, a person who saw a mouse enter the house with chametz in its mouth after he searched [for chametz] must search a second time.1In this instance as well, there is an obvious reason for the suspicion that chametz has been brought into the home. [This applies] even if he found crumbs in the middle of the house; we do not necessarily presume that it already ate the bread in this place and that these are its crumbs.2for mice do not generally crumble food. (See the following halachah.) Rather, we suspect that it left the bread in a hole or window, and that these crumbs were [originally] located there.3and accidentally ignored, and the mouse deposited the bread it was carrying elsewhere. Hence, he must search again.4Though some authorities do not require a second search when the bread was small and most probably eaten by the mouse, the Shulchan Aruch HaRav and the Mishnah Berurah (Orach Chayim 438) do not accept this leniency.If he does not find anything, he must search through the entire house.5The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 438:1) quotes this opinion as halachah. The Magen Avraham (based on the Tur) is more lenient. Rather than require that the entire house be searched, he maintains that searching the room that the mouse entered is sufficient. If he found the bread6even if it was no longer whole that the mouse took when he entered,7He must be able to recognize this as the bread seen in the mouse's mouth he need not search [further].8and may presume that the mouse ate the rest of the bread.
[A person who] saw an infant enter an already checked house1checked for chametz with bread in his hand, followed him inside and discovered crumbs, need not search [again].2The Magen Avraham (Orach Chayim 438:3) explains that if the child is intelligent enough to reply to questions, we should ask him what he did with the chametz and we may depend upon his reply. We may confidently assume that he ate the bread and that these crumbs fell from him while eating.3Tosefot (Pesachim 10b) require a second search if the amount of crumbs does not equal the quantity of the original bread. The Shulchan Aruch HaRav and the Mishnah Berurah favor the Rambam's opinion only when the person has nullified his ownership over his chametz. If not, the search takes on the seriousness of a Torah commandment. Hence, it must be repeated. Infants generally crumble food while eating, though mice do not.4Hence, the difference between this and the previous halachah.If he does not find any crumbs, he must check [again].5and the principles mentioned in the previous halachah apply.
Nine piles of matzah and one of chametz were placed [aside].1For example, after the search for chametz, a person will still have some chametz in his property for use the following morning. However, he may already bring out his Passover matzot. A mouse came and took [something from one of the piles]2The Mishnah Berurah emphasizes that this decision applies only when we actually saw the mouse take from the piles. If no one saw the mouse, the ruling mentioned in the last clause of the following halachah applies. and entered a house that had been checked.3for chametz If we do not know whether it took either chametz or matzah, the house must be checked [again],4as if it were definitely chametz, as prescribed in Halachah 8. for every instance where [a doubt arises and the presence of both the permitted and forbidden substances] is fixed, [is judged] as if they5the permitted and forbidden substances were present in equal amounts.6The probability that the mouse took from the matzot is considered no greater than the probability that he took from the chametz.This is a classic Talmudic case. Pesachim 9b draws a parallel to the following passage:Nine butcher shops which all sell ritually slaughtered meat and one which sells meat which has not been slaughtered properly: should a person take meat from one of them without knowing from which he took (i.e., without knowing whether he purchased kosher or non-kosher meat), he must consider [the meat] forbidden because of the doubt involved.In both cases, the permitted and forbidden substances remain in one place, and their existence is therefore considered as fixed (קבוע). In such instances, the fact that there is a much higher probability that the article in question was taken from the permitted substances is not considered significant, and the more stringent perspective is taken. See also Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 8:11.Nevertheless, the Ra'avad and other authorities take issue with this halachah, explaining that the Talmud only made such a statement when a person has not nullified his chametz, and the responsibility to search the house stems from the Torah itself. However, if the person already nullified his chametz, the search is only a Rabbinic obligation. Hence, it should be judged more leniently.The Maggid Mishneh explains that even though leniencies may generally be taken when doubts arise concerning Rabbinic obligations, the search for chametz is an exception. The entire obligation was instituted even when there was no definite knowledge that chametz existed. Hence, even in this case, a search must be made.Though the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 439:1) accepts the Rambam's opinion, the Ramah and the other Ashkenazic authorities make the following qualification: If the person had already nullified his chametz and if the bread was small enough for the mouse to have eaten it entirely, a second search is not required.
There were two piles: one of chametz and one of matzah, and two houses: one that had been searched and one that had not been searched. Two mice came; one took chametz and one took matzah [and they entered the houses] without our knowing which house the mouse holding the chametz entered...1In such an instance, we presume that the mouse holding the chametz entered the unchecked house, and the mouse holding the matzah entered the checked house. Comparable decisions are found in Hilchot Terumah 13:14, Hilchot Issurei Biyah 9:29 and Hilchot Mikvaot 10:3.Pesachim 10a emphasizes that this leniency is only rendered because once a person has nullified ownership over his chametz, the search is only a question of Rabbinic law. The Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Orach Chayim 439:4) agrees to this principle, but offers an addition leniency: Even if the owner did not nullify his chametz, a second search is not required when the bread the mouse was holding is small enough to be eaten at once.Similarly, there were two houses which had been checked, with one pile of chametz before them. A mouse took [from the pile and entered a house]. However, we do not know which house he entered...2Each of the homes is judged individually. Since we do not definitely know that chametz was not brought into either of the homes, we need not change our original presumption and consider each one as free of chametz.Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTum'ah 19:2 mentions a similar case, but reaches a more stringent conclusion. Leniency is only offered when the two people in question approach the Rabbis separately. If they come together, the case is judged more severely.The Maggid Mishneh and the Kessef Mishneh both note this matter and explain that since the search for chametz is a question of Rabbinic law, greater leniency can be taken. Nevertheless, the Ramah (Orach Chayim 439:2) and other Ashkenazic authorities do not accept this decision and require a second search, should the owners of both homes approach the court together.or we saw which one he entered, a person followed him, checked [for chametz], and did not find anything...3Pesachim 10a compares this to a case in which a corpse was presumed to be found in a field. Though Rabbi Meir maintains that the field is considered ritually impure until the corpse is found, the halachah follows the Sages, who maintain that all that is necessary is to carry out a thorough search. The Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Orach Chayim 439:6) states that this law applies even when the owner of the house had not nullified his chametz, and the search is required by Torah law.or he checked and found bread...4we presume that this was the bread the mouse had taken. Pesachim 10a compares this to a case where a field was suspected to contain a grave; the field was searched, and a grave discovered. Though Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel requires the entire field to be searched, Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi maintains that no further search must be made.The Shulchan Aruch HaRav (ibid.) emphasizes that this leniency should only be followed when the owner of the house has nullified or can still nullify the ownership over his chametz. Otherwise, he must thoroughly search the entire house.Similarly, when there were nine piles of matzah and one of chametz, and a loaf became separated from the piles, and we do not know whether it was chametz or matzah: If a mouse took the loaf that became separated and entered the house that had been checked:In5The passage from Pesachim 9b concerning the ten butcher shops quoted in the commentary on the previous halachah, continues:[If meat from these shops] is found, follow the majority.The principle of קבוע - judging the permitted and forbidden substances as if they were equal - applies only when the doubt concerning the identity of the substance arises in the place where the presence of the forbidden substance has become fixed. Thus, since the meat has become separated (פירש) from its original place, this principle no longer applies and, as in most cases of mixtures, the decision depends on whether there is a greater number of kosher or non-kosher stores.Similarly, in the case at hand: Since the loaf became separated from the piles before being taken by the mouse, there is no question of a prohibited substance having a fixed identity (קבוע). Hence, we follow the majority, and thus do not require a further search. The Shulchan Aruch HaRav and the Mishnah Berurah emphasize that this leniency applies even if the owner of the house had not nullified the ownership over his chametz. all of these cases, there is no need to check a second time,6The Kessef Mishneh emphasizes that this is a complete thought in its own right. because the presence of the forbidden substance is not fixed.7According to the Kessef Mishneh, this statement applies only to the final instance mentioned in the halachah as explained.
A person who placed chametz in one corner and discovered it in another...1Pesachim 10b explains that the Sages felt that it was likely that the chametz discovered was not the chametz lost. Rather, different chametz was placed in the other corner, and the first chametz, deposited elsewhere throughout the house. Hence, a new search is required (See also Hilchot Mitamei Mishkav U'Moshav 12:16.)The Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Orach Chayim 439:9) states that if the same amount of chametz that was lost is found there is no need to search further if the owner had already nullified the ownership over his chametz. The Mishnah Berurah grants an even greater leniency and frees the owner of the necessity to search, without placing any qualifications on the chametz discovered, as long as he has nullified his chametz.or who put aside nine loaves and found ten...2Pesachim 10a compares this to the following case: "A person put aside 100 dinars of money designated as ma'aser sheni (the second tithe, to be used only to purchase food in Jerusalem) and discovered two hundred."In Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 6:3, the Rambam declares that none of the money is considered as ma'aser sheni. In both instances, we suppose that the substance put aside was taken away and a new substance substituted for it. Accordingly, the Magen Avraham emphasizes that the owner cannot cease his search until he finds nine piles of chametz. This law applies even if the owner has nullified his ownership over the original nine piles of chametz.or a mouse came and took the chametz, and there is a doubt whether he entered this house or not...3Pesachim 10a likens this to a case when a person traveled through a valley in which one of the fields was known to possess a grave. Though he is unsure of whether he entered the field containing the grave or not, he must consider himself ritually impure (See Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTum'ah 20:9.)The Ra'avad's text of the Mishneh Torah contained an additional clause:or there were nine piles of chametz and one pile of matzah: A loaf became separated from them and it is not known whether it was chametz or matzah. A mouse came and took it into a checked house.The Kessef Mishneh rejects the inclusion of this clause because in the previous halachah, the Rambam had already stated that once a substance is separated from its original place, its identity is determined on the basis of the majority.In all these cases, he must search [the house again].
A mouse entered a house with a loaf1of chametz in its mouth. Afterwards, a mouse left there with a loaf in its mouth; we presume that the same mouse who entered originally was the one which ultimately left, and [the owner] need not search [again].2The Pri Chadash (Orach Chayim 438:1) follows this decision even when the owner did not nullify his chametz. The Shulchan Aruch HaRav follows his opinion, though the Tur requires the owner to nullify his chametz or search. If the first mouse which entered was black and the one which left was white,3Obviously, the mouse which left is not the same as the mouse that entered, and it is not likely that one mouse took the chametz from the other (Pesachim 10b). Hence, he must search [again].4even if he has already nullified his chametz (Pri Chadash, Shulchan Aruch HaRav).If a mouse entered with a loaf in its mouth and a weasel left there with a loaf in its mouth, he must search [again].5Even though it is possible that the weasel took the chametz from the mouse, that probability is not strong enough to free the owner from the obligation to search (Pesachim, ibid.). This applies even if he nullifies his chametz (Pri Chadash, Shulchan Aruch HaRav). If a weasel left there with a mouse and a loaf in its6the weasel's mouth, he does not have to search [again].7Even though one might say that unless the chametz is found in the mouse's mouth, we cannot be sure that it is the same. Nevertheless, since it is possible that the mouse dropped the chametz out of fear (Pesachim ibid.) [We may presume] that this is the loaf which was in the mouse's mouth.8The Talmud left this questioned unanswered (תיקו). The Pri Chadash and the Shulchan Aruch HaRav explain that this decision applies only when the owner nullifies the ownership over his chametz. In such an instance, the question is only one of Rabbinic law (for according to Torah law, the nullification is sufficient). Hence, the Rambam chooses the more lenient opinion.If a snake enters a hole with a loaf in its mouth, there is no obligation to bring a snakecharmer to remove it.9This question is also left unanswered by the Talmud (Pesachim, ibid.). Therefore, the Rambam again chooses the more lenient view.
When chametz is [discovered] on a very high beam, [the owner] is obligated to bring a ladder1even if he must rent the ladder and remove it, for it might fall from the beam.2and the owner might come to eat it.The Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Orach Chayim 438:11) and the Mishnah Berurah explain that this obligation applies even if:a) generally, the owner would not have access to this beam;b) he already nullified his ownership over the chametz. If chametz is in a pit,3to which a person does not have easy access [the owner] is not obligated to bring it up.4The Maggid Mishneh emphasizes that a person is not allowed to store chametz in a pit. However, should chametz accidentally fall into the pit before it becomes forbidden... All that is necessary is for him to nullify [ownership over it] in his heart.5However, if he had not nullified ownership over his chametz and did not discover the chametz until after it becomes forbidden, he is obligated to remove the chametz from the pit (Mishnah Berurah).The Tosefta (Pesachim 3:3) states: "Chametz which fell into a pit is considered as if it has been destroyed;" implying that even nullification is unnecessary. However, the Tzafnat Paneach differentiates between the two cases, explaining that our halachah refers to a pit to which a person could descend if required. In contrast, the Tosefta refers to a pit which is totally inaccessible, or accessible only with extreme difficulty. Since the owner cannot make use of his chametz, there is no necessity for him to nullify his ownership of it.
A block of yeast which was designated to be used as a seat:1Generally, all prohibitions against eating forbidden foods do not apply after the food is no longer fit for human consumption. Nevertheless, additional stringencies are placed on chametz, because it may be useful as a leavening agent even if it is no longer fit to be eaten by a human being. Hence, it is not nullified until it is no longer fit even for animal consumption. (See Ra'avad, Maggid Mishneh, Kessef Mishneh Halachah 1:2.) If its surface was coated with mortar,2The Mishnah Berurah (Orach Chayim 442:42) explains that if the surface of the block is covered with mortar, it does not become forbidden even though it is still fit to be eaten. This act clearly implies that the owner no longer considered the chametz as food. it is [considered as] destroyed and we are permitted to keep it [on Pesach].3Its possession does not violate the prohibition against owning chametz.The Taz emphasizes that only the prohibition against owning chametz is lifted. Even if the chametz is unfit for animal consumption, a person is forbidden to eat it on Pesach should he desire to do so.The dough in the cracks of a kneading trough: If a size of an olive [of dough] exists in one place,4As mentioned in Halachah 1:1, the size of an olive is considered the minimum amount for which one is liable for the transgression of most of the Torah's prohibitions. one is obligated to destroy [the dough under all circumstances].5The Shulchan Aruch HaRav emphasizes that this applies even when one has nullified his ownership over this chametz or covered it with mortar. The size of an olive is considered as a significant amount and must be destroyed at all times. Should there be less than that amount:6of dough in one place, though there are many smaller pieces of dough throughout the kneading trough If it7the dough serves to reinforce the broken pieces of the kneading trough or to plug a hole, it is [considered] negligible8and thus, part of the kneading trough because of its minimal size.9and, therefore, need not be destroyed. If not,10If the dough does not serve a useful purpose one is obligated to destroy it.11for the obligation to search after and destroy chametz applies to all quantities of that substance, even if they are smaller than the size of an olive (Maggid Mishneh).The Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Orach Chayim 442:28) explains that dough which has not become stuck to the cracks of the kneading trough must be removed. However, leniency may be taken regarding dough stuck in the cracks of the kneading trough, even though it does not serve a purpose. Should the owner nullify his ownership over his chametz, that dough need not be destroyed if:a) the entire kneading trough contains less than an olive size of chametz stuck to its sides;b) the dough has become dirty and unfit for consumption.Two [quantities of dough,12used to fill cracks in the kneading trough each] half the size of an olive were found in separate places, and a string of dough connects them:13Thus, the question is raised:Are the two considered as a single quantity, and hence obligated to be destroyed; orCan they be considered as separate entities, and thus allowed to be kept? We check whether the [pieces of] dough themselves are lifted up when the string of dough is picked up. If they are, one is obligated to destroy [them]. If not, one is not obligated to destroy [them].14This leniency applies only to dough that strengthens the kneading trough. Otherwise, they must be destroyed (Mishnah Berurah, Orach Chayim 442:35).
To what does the above1leniency apply? to [pieces of dough stuck to] a kneading trough. However, [if a similar situation is discovered] within a house,2whether the dough is used to fill cracks in the house or not one is obligated to destroy [the dough] even if, when the [connecting] thread [of dough] is lifted up, the pieces of dough are not raised up with it.3Based on this decision, whenever there is more than the size of an olive of dough in the same room, we are obligated to destroy any and all pieces of dough in the room, even if they are not connected by strings of dough. [This stringency was instituted] because the [smaller portions] may sometimes be brought together.4when the house is swept, and thus produce a quantity the size of an olive (Rashi, Pesachim 45b).If half of an olive size [of dough] was found in a house and another half in the second storey;or5where it would be unlikely for the two halves to come together (ibid.); if half of the size of an olive was found in a house and another half in [the adjoining] porch;or6where there is a greater probability of the two small portions of chametz coming together if half of the size of an olive was found in a room7Generally, the word בית means "house." However, it is often used to mean "room." and another half in an inner8where the probability is even greater. room;Since these portions of dough which are less than the size of an olive are found stuck to the walls, beams, or floors [of the house],9This is a major point of debate among the halachic authorities. Rabbenu Asher (Pesakim, Pesachim 3:2) writes that the dough need not be stuck to the walls of the house. However, the Maggid Mishneh and the Kessef Mishneh oppose that thesis. They argue that the only reason for leniency is that when the dough is stuck to the walls of the house, it is considered as part of the house and not as an entity in its own right. one is not obligated to destroy them. All that is necessary is to nullify them in one's heart.10After describing the above laws in detail, the Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Orach Chayim 442:30) concludes:The above represents the law itself. However, the Jews are holy and have customarily accepted greater stringencies upon themselves. They scrape away even the slightest amount of chametz, even if it is stuck to the walls of a home or utensil. They have accepted the stringency of scraping down all benches, chairs, and walls that have come into contact with chametz.
A person who rents out a house on the fourteenth [of Nisan]:1One might suppose that the sequence of this halachah and the following halachah should be reversed. First, the Rambam should state who is obligated to search for chametz, and only then the fact that we can rely that this search was properly carried out. Indeed, Pesachim 4 and the Shulchan Aruch follows that sequence when discussing these laws.Possibly, the Rambam's choice of sequence can be explained as follows: The motivating principle of many of the previous halachot is that once a person has nullified the ownership over his chametz, the search is merely a Rabbinic obligation. Hence, many leniencies can be taken.Because of that same principle... Behold, [the tenant may operate] under the presumption that it has been searched2Pesachim 4b questions whether we can rely on this presumption or not and does not arrive at a conclusion. Nevertheless, the Rambam's statements can be understood in light of the Pesakim of Rabbenu Asher. He explains that if ownership over the chametz is negated the obligation to search is only Rabbinic. When doubt arises regarding matters of Rabbinic law, the more lenient position may be accepted. and he need not search.3The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 437:2) qualifies this statement, requiring the prospective tenant to ask the owner of the house if it has been searched. However, if he cannot possibly ask the owner, he need not search the house. However, this applies only when the tenant has the opportunity to nullify his ownership over any chametz that may be found within the home.[Furthermore,] even if we must assume that the person who rented out the house did not search [it],4and we know that before Pesach, chametz had definitely been kept within the home (Mishnah Berurah) should a woman or a minor say: "We have searched it," they are believed,5The Shulchan Aruch HaRav and the Mishnah Berurah emphasize that this law applies only if the chametz has been nullified. Otherwise, the statement of a woman or child may not be relied upon.Generally, a woman's statements are accepted even as regards Torah prohibitions. However, an exception is made in this case because the search for chametz involves much effort. Hence, our Sages worried that perhaps a woman might state that she had made a thorough search even though she had merely made a superficial inspection (Tosefot, Pesachim 4b) for everyone's statements are accepted with regard to the destruction of chametz.6for everyone's statements are accepted with regard to the destruction of chametz.7Everyone is acceptable to search [for chametz], even women, slaves- Tosefot (ibid.) states that slaves are believed in matters where a woman's word is accepted. Everyone is acceptable to search [for chametz], even women, slaves, and minors.8Eruvin 58b and Ketubot 28a quote instances where a child's statements are not accepted even with regard to Rabbinic prohibitions. However, we may rely on their word regarding the search for chametz, because they are capable of performing the search. The latter applies only when the minor has sufficient understanding to search.9i.e., he has reached the age where his parents have begun to educate him about the prohibition against possessing chametz.
A person who rents1Different rules apply to a sale (Rabbenu Nissim). a house to a colleague: If2the beginning of the the fourteenth [of Nisan]3i.e., the night between the thirteenth and the fourteenth falls before [the landlord] gave the keys to [the tenant],4Rashi (Pesachim 4a) explains that giving the keys to the tenant represents the transfer of ownership of the house to the tenant. Whoever is the rightful owner of the property at the time the obligation to search begins must carry out this mitzvah.However, Tosefot and most other halachic authorities explain that giving the keys does not formalize the act of transfer. Thus, the Maggid Mishneh explains that in this instance, the rental agreement has been concluded beforehand. Nevertheless, since the landlord is still in possession of the keys, the tenant is not able to conduct the search. Hence, the responsibility becomes that of the landlord. the landlord is responsible for searching.5He is required to undertake this search, even though he has abandoned ownership over any chametz that might be left in the house and does not violate the prohibitions against possessing chametz because of it (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 437:1). If the fourteenth falls after the keys have been transferred,6Based on the statements of Rabbenu Nissim and the Maggid Mishneh, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 437:1) states that this applies only once the rental agreement has been formalized through an acceptable kinyan (act of contract). However, the Mishnah Berurah mentions other opinions that require a search even if the tenant has not formalized the rental agreement. the tenant is responsible for checking.7Even though the chametz was left by the landlord, when the tenant takes over the landlordship of the house, he becomes the owner of all its contents, including the chametz.When a person rents out a house under the presumption that it has been searched and [later, the tenant] discovers that it has not been searched,8If the landlord is available, the tenant must ask him whether the house has been searched or not. [the tenant] is responsible for searching it9He must carry out the mitzvah even though he made an explicit condition requiring the landlord to do so. and [cannot nullify the transaction by claiming that it was carried out] under false premises.10Under certain conditions, a person can nullify a business agreement on the grounds that it was carried out under false premises. This applies even when it is customary11in that locale to hire people to search, since, behold, he is performing a mitzvah.12Pesachim 4b explains that the need for searching the house is not the real factor motivating him to retract his agreement, because every Jew desires to perform mitzvot, even if doing so requires financial expense.Based on the Maggid Mishneh, the Ramah (Orach Chayim 437:3) requires the landlord to reimburse the tenant if it is customary to hire people to search. After all, the house was rented with the explicit condition that it had been searched.
A person who sets out to sea or one who leaves in a caravan within thirty days [of Pesach] is obligated to search1Furthermore, any chametz which he knows about must be removed from his possession (Magen Avraham, Orach Chayim 436:1. [for chametz].2at night by candlelight before he departs (Magen Avraham). However, no blessing is recited (Shulchan Aruch).The Shulchan Aruch emphasizes that this law applies only when a person does not leave anyone else at home (e.g., a wife or older child) who could conduct the search at the customary time. [If he leaves] before thirty days [prior to Pesach],3Thirty days before Pesach, we begin "asking and explaining the laws of the holiday." Hence, from that time onward, concern is shown for all the Pesach laws (Pesachim 6a). he is not obligated to search. However, if he intends to return before Pesach,4Even if his intention is to return far before Pesach, if there is a likelihood that his return may be delayed until the holiday, he must search before departing (Chatam Sofer). he must search before departing,5even if he departs at the beginning of the year (Pesachim 6a). lest he [be delayed and] return Pesach eve at nightfall,6The Shulchan Aruch HaRav and the Mishnah Berurah maintain that this law applies only when the person is going on a sea voyage or caravan where delay is a frequent phenomenon. A person who sets out on a sure land journey is not obligated to search before he departs. when he will have no opportunity to destroy [the chametz].7As stated in Halachah 1:9, the prohibitions against possessing chametz begin after the conclusion of the fifth hour on the fourteenth of Nisan. From that time onward, it is forbidden to nullify any chametz that we possess. However, if he does not intend to return,8until after Pesach he does not have to search.9Nevertheless, he is obligated to nullify any chametz that might be in his possession on Pesach eve. This nullification takes effect even though he is very far from the chametz in his home (Ramah, Magen Avraham).Similarly, a person who makes his house a storage room:10chametz which is buried under more than three handbreadths of other substances is considered as having been removed from a person's property and need not be uncovered and destroyed before Pesach. (See Halachah 3:11.) Thus, making the house a storeroom and covering any chametz with more than that amount of other material would free him from the obligation of searching (Rashi, Pesachim 6a).However, the Sages explain that this leniency applies only to chametz which accidentally becomes covered by other substances. If he does so11intentionally covering the chametz with other goods within thirty days [of Pesach], he is required to search and then bring in the goods he wants to store.12Once the thirty-day period when the Pesach laws begin to be studied arrives, one is obligated to search. Over thirty days before Pesach: If he intends to remove the goods before Pesach, he is required to search13The Kessef Mishneh (and the Shulchan Aruch) quote certain opinions that do not obligate a search, explaining that it is far less likely that the person will be delayed in removing his goods and bring about a situation where he will uncover the chametz on Passover eve. and then bring in the goods he wants to store; if he does not intend to remove the goods before Pesach, he does not have to search.14The Mishnah Berurah (437:15) explains that most authorities allow this leniency only when the owner has only a suspicion, but no definite knowledge of chametz. However, if he definitely knows that chametz is found under the goods, the chametz must be removed. Nevertheless, there are some opinions that do not require the removal of chametz whose existence is known.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
When a person checks and searches on the night of the fourteenth [of Nisan], he should remove [all] chametz from holes, hidden places, and corners,1In the second chapter (Halachot 2:3-2:6), the Rambam discusses the theoretical aspects of the search for chametz. In this chapter, he concentrates on their practical application. and gather the entire amount together, putting it in one place until the beginning of the sixth hour2when the obligation to destroy chametz begins (Halachah 1:9) and [then,] destroy it.3as explained in Halachah 11, below. If he desires to destroy it on the night4The Ramah (Orach Chayim 445) explains that though chametz can be destroyed through any means, some choose to burn it, utilizing the means required to dispose of notar (leftover sacrificial meat). Just as notar cannot be burned until the morning, similarly, those who follow this custom should not burn their chametz at night. of the fourteenth, he may.5There is an advantage to waiting to destroy the chametz. As explained in the following halachah, we are allowed to save a certain amount of chametz to eat on the morning before Pesach. By saving the chametz found in the search, we will remember to destroy all the chametz that we possess.
The chametz which was put aside on the night of the fourteenth,1The Magen Avraham (Orach Chayim 434:1) explains that the same law applies to the chametz found in the search. Nevertheless, only the chametz set aside for eating is mentioned, for it is possible that no chametz will actually be found in the search. so that it can be eaten on the next day until [the end of] the fourth hour,2as stated in Halachah 1:10 should not be spread out and scattered in every place. Rather, it should be put away in a utensil or in a known corner, and care should be taken concerning it.3Accordingly, Shulchan Aruch cautions that the chametz should be covered by a bowl, placed in a cabinet, or hung from the ceiling. Otherwise, should some be found lacking, he would have to search for it and check [the house] a second time, for mice4Pesachim 9b also mentions the possibility of children taking this chametz. might have dragged it away.5Halachah 2:7 explains that a person who finds less chametz than he set aside must search the entire house again. Similarly, if we see a mouse taking the chametz, a second search is required.
When the fourteenth falls on the Sabbath,1the Pesach holiday being celebrated Saturday night. According to the fixed calendar we follow, this is an infrequent, but not totally uncommon, phenomenon. we search for chametz on the night before Sabbath eve,2Thursday night the night of the thirteenth.3between the twelfth and the thirteenth. Searching with a candle is forbidden on the Sabbath itself. Hence, the search for leaven is carried out on Thursday night. The chametz that is collected is burned on Friday morning. We set aside [enough] chametz to eat4on Friday and on the Sabbath. On the Sabbath, we are obligated to eat bread at both the evening and morning Sabbath meals. until [the end of] the fourth hour on the Sabbath day.5when the Rabbinic prohibition against eating chametz (Halachah 1:9) takes effect. Before that time, the chametz saved for the Sabbath meals should have been completed and disposed of in a way other than burning - e.g., throwing it in the toilet. The remainder should be destroyed before6The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 444:2) suggests burning the chametz on Friday morning, to prevent confusion arising in future years. However, if one is prevented from doing so, the chametz may be destroyed later on with no compunctions. the Sabbath.If some of the chametz remains on the Sabbath7The Ra'avad notes that in Pesachim 49a, the majority opinion accepts this decision only as regards Terumah. In contrast, other chametz need not be destroyed until the appropriate time on the Sabbath.The Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 444) explains that the Rambam's decision is based on Pesachim 13b, which differs from the opinion in Pesachim 49a. However, even according to the Rambam, the obligation to destroy the chametz before the Sabbath is not a hard and fast rule. On the contrary, our halachah itself states that one is allowed to keep all the chametz he needs for the Sabbath meals. Rather, this can be seen as good advice, facilitating the destruction of chametz, which is much easier before the Sabbath than on that sacred day. day after the fourth hour, he should nullify it8so he is no longer the owner and thus does not transgress the prohibitions against possessing chametz.The halachic authorities note that even when the person does not have any chametz which he knows about, he should nullify his chametz before the beginning of the sixth hour, as is done on Pesach eve every year. and cover it with a utensil9so it is not seen. This obligation is derived from Pesachim 6a, which states such a law as regards chametz discovered on the first day of the festival. until the conclusion of the first day of the festival, and then destroy it.10The Rambam forbids destroying the chametz after the fourth hour on the Sabbath itself for the following reason: Since it can no longer be eaten, it is considered muktzeh and cannot be moved any longer.A basic question is asked concerning the Rambam's statements: Until the beginning of the sixth hour on Pesach eve, a person may benefit from chametz by giving it to a gentile or feeding it to an animal. Therefore, it should not be considered muktzeh until that time.The Rivosh explains that since eating is the most important use of chametz, it is considered muktzeh once it can no longer be eaten. However, the Bach considers "the fourth hour" a printing error and amends the Rambam's text to read "the fifth hour." All Ashkenazic halachic authorities decide accordingly. Nevertheless, the Magen Avraham justifies the Rambam's statements, explaining that they apply in a situation where there is no gentile or animal to give the chametz to.In practice, the following procedure is suggested when Pesach falls on Saturday night. The transfer of chametz and Pesach pots, dishes, and cutlery is carried out on Thursday night or Friday, and no chametz is cooked afterwards. The Sabbath meals should be totally kosher for Pesach and prepared in the Pesach pots. Four small challot are kept in a special place for the evening and morning meals (two for each meal).They are eaten away from the table, and afterwards, the crumbs are collected and flushed down the toilet. Otherwise, the meals are eaten as all the other meals of the Pesach holiday itself.As mentioned, it is forbidden to eat chametz on the fourteenth of Nisan after the fourth hour of the day (usually around 9:20 AM). To complete the eating of the above-mentioned challot before this hour, certain synagogues may have to conduct their morning services at an earlier time than usual.
A person who has many loaves of bread that were Terumah and must burn them on the Sabbath eve;1i.e., when Passover comes out Saturday night and the chametz must be destroyed on Friday as explained in the previous halachah. he should not mix the pure loaves together with the impure loaves and burn them.2for we are forbidden to cause Terumah to become ritually impure (Rashi, Pesachim 14a). Even though we are destroying the Terumah, we must be careful it does not become impure. Rather, he should burn the pure loaves alone, the impure ones alone,3Based on Pesachim 15b and 20b, the Kessef Mishneh and Rabbenu Manoach explain that the same principles apply when burning Terumah every Pesach eve until the end of the sixth hour. However, afterwards, when chametz is forbidden according to Torah law, no differentiation is made, and both pure and impure Terumah are burned together. and the ones [whose status4as Terumah is] left pending5because of a question which arose whether they became impure or not. Generally, they would not be used as food for perhaps they are impure, nor are they burned immediately as impure Terumah, because perhaps they are pure, and the destruction of pure Terumah for no purpose is forbidden. Rather, they are left until they are no longer fit for use, and then burned. alone.6Pesachim 15a asks rhetorically: How can we burn the Terumah of questionable status with that which is definitely impure? Perhaps Elijah will come and determine that the former was, in fact, pure.He should leave a sufficient quantity, but no more than necessary,7These words of qualification are added as regards Terumah in contrast to other chametz. (See the previous halachah.) Other chametz is fit to be eaten by all people or beasts. In contrast, Terumah can be eaten only by a priest's household. Hence, greater precautions should be taken not to leave over extra amounts (Rabbenu Manoach). of the pure loaves to eat until [the conclusion of] the fourth hour on the Sabbath day.8when the prohibition against eating begins and they must be destroyed.
A person who either inadvertently or intentionally did not search on the night of the fourteenth should search on the fourteenth in the morning.1Even though searching with a candle at night is preferable, as explained in Halachot 2:3-4, if that is impossible the search should be carried out as soon as possible the following morning. If he did not search on the fourteenth in the morning,2There is an advantage to carrying out the search in the early morning. In this manner, there will be no last minute pressure or tension to complete the search and the destruction of chametz before the prohibition against possessing chametz takes effect. he should search at the time for destroying [the chametz].3before the completion of the fifth hour on the fourteenth of Nisan. If he did not search at the time for destroying the chametz, he should search in the midst of the festival.4Pesachim 10b explains that even though by searching for chametz a person exposes himself to the possibility of eating the chametz that he finds, nevertheless, a person searching to destroy chametz is highly unlikely to lose sight of the prohibition against eating it.The obligation to search for chametz in the midst of the festival emphasizes that the Rambam conceives that the mitzvah to destroy chametz applies, not only before Pesach begins, but throughout the holiday. Indeed, this concept can be seen in the Rambam's words describing the mitzvah in the preface to this text. There, he explains that the mitzvah is to destroy chametz "from" and not "on" the fourteenth of Nisan.[It must be noted that the adoption of such a position represents a change of mind for the Rambam. In Sefer HaMitzvot (positive mitzvah 156) and in the earlier handwritten texts of the Mishneh Torah, the Rambam writes that the mitzvah is to destroy chametz "on the fourteenth."]The definition of the term "in the midst of the festival" is the subject of debate among the commentaries. Some define it as "in the midst of Chol HaMoed," explaining that since chametz is muktzeh and cannot be moved or destroyed on the first day of the festival, there is no need to search for it at that time (Rabbenu Manoach).Nevertheless, the Magen Avraham (Orach Chayim 435:1) and the other Ashkenazic halachic authorities require a search on the first day of Pesach itself even though it is Yom Tov. Should chametz be found, it should be covered with a utensil. If the festival passed without his having searched, he should search after the festival to destroy whatever chametz he might find which [he possessed] during Pesach,5This applies even if the person nullified his chametz, and thus did not transgress the prohibitions against possessing chametz on the holiday. Were he not to destroy this chametz, it would be obvious that he had not totally negated his ownership over the chametz, and thus his nullification would be proven as invalid retroactively. since we are prohibited against benefiting [from such chametz].6as mentioned in Halachah 1:4.
When a person checks for chametz on the night of the fourteenth, on the day of the fourteenth,1Though, as explained in Halachah 2:3, the search for chametz is only a Rabbinic obligation if one nullifies his chametz, blessings are also recited when fulfilling Rabbinic commandments. (See Hilchot Berachot 11:3.) and during the festival,2This emphasizes that, as explained in the previous halachah, even when searching during the festival, one fulfills a positive commandment. he should recite the [following] blessing before he begins to search:Blessed3Pesachim 7b emphasizes that all blessings should be recited before the performance of the mitzvah. are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us concerning the destruction of chametz.4Pesachim (ibid.) debates whether the blessing should state על ביעור חמץ (concerning the destruction of chametz) or לבער חמץ (to destroy chametz), and reaches the conclusion stated by the Rambam.Hilchot Berachot 11:15 explains that it is not proper to state "to destroy chametz," since from the moment the person decides to nullify the chametz, the mitzvah to obliterate chametz has been completed according to Torah law. Hence, the expression "concerning the destruction" is more appropriate.The blessing mentions "the destruction of chametz," for that is the ultimate aim of the search.He must check and search in all the places where chametz is brought in, as was explained.5in Halachah 2:3. If he searches after the holiday, he does not recite a blessing.6Though the Sages also required the search after Pesach, carrying out such a search is not considered the fulfillment of a Rabbinic commandment. The prohibitions against possessing, and hence the mitzvah to destroy, chametz are completed by the end of Pesach. This search is not considered as an end in its own right, but rather was instituted merely to prevent a person from eating the chametz, which is forbidden according to Rabbinic decree.A parallel can be drawn to the following instance (Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 57): Fowl were attacked by beasts of prey and wounded to the extent that they would not recover. Even though they did not die immediately, the Sages required that they be slain, lest another Jew not be aware of their wounds and slaughter them to eat as kosher birds. Needless to say, no blessing is required when killing them for these reasons (Shulchan Aruch HaRav).
When he concludes searching, if he searched on the fourteenth at night, or on the fourteenth during the day before the sixth hour, he should nullify all the chametz1as stated in Halachah 2:2. that remains in his possession2Pesachim 6b states that the Sages feared that even after a thorough search has been conducted, the possibility exists that perhaps, some chametz will have been overlooked. that he does not see.3for the chametz that is seen must be destroyed, as stated in Halachah 2:3.He should say — The text in most Haggadot is in Aramaic, because that was the language of the common people in Talmudic times. A person who does not understand that text must make the declaration in a language that he comprehends.He should say: "All chametz which is in my possession that I have not seen,4Since this statement is being made while it is still possible to benefit from chametz, we do not nullify all the chametz we possess. It is customary to make a second statement nullifying the chametz after burning the chametz in the morning, and in that statement we nullify all chametz "that I have seen or not seen, that I have destroyed or I have not destroyed." behold, it is nullified and must be considered as5The text in most Haggadot states "dust of the earth." Job 28:6 uses the expression עפרות זהב "gold dust," a substance with obvious worth. By stating "the dust of the earth" we imply that we attach no value to the chametz at all. dust."However, if he searched after the beginning of the sixth hour and onward,6Though the prohibition against possessing chametz during the sixth hour is only Rabbinic in origin, the Sages enforced their decree and gave it the same strength as Torah law. he can no longer nullify it, for it is not in his possession, since benefiting from it is forbidden.
Thus, a person who does not nullify [his chametz] before the sixth hour1The Ra'avad questions the phraseology used by the Rambam, noting that the prohibitions against owning chametz do not begin until the evening. On the day of the fourteenth of Nisan, there is only a positive commandment to destroy chametz.Most commentaries explain that the Rambam himself intended this interpretation. However, some note that Rashi (Pesachim 4b) does maintain that the prohibitions against owning chametz begin on the fourteenth, and they maintain that the Rambam shares this view (See Responsa, Nodah BiYhudah, Orach Chayim 20). and discovers chametz2Tosefot (Pesachim 21a) states that a person does not violate the prohibition against possessing chametz unless he becomes conscious of the chametz in his possession. As long as he is unaware of its existence, he does not violate the prohibition. which he:considered important and [valued] in his3Tosefot (Pesachim 6b) states that the prohibitions only apply when the chametz has an intrinsic value, in contrast to crumbs. heart,then forgot at the time of the destruction of chametz,and hence did not destroy,transgresses [the prohibitions]: "[leaven] shall not be seen" and "[leaven] shall not be found."Behold, he has neither destroyed nor nullified [his chametz], and nullification at this time would not be effective, for [the chametz] is no longer in his possession.4as stated in the previous Halachah. Even so, the Torah considers it as if it were in his possession, to obligate him for [transgression of the commandments:] "[leaven] shall not be seen" and "[leaven] shall not be5Pesachim (6b) compares the possession of chametz at this time to digging a pit in the public thoroughfare. The pit does not belong to the person who dug it; nevertheless, he must pay for any damages it causes.Similarly, with regard to chametz, since one is forbidden to benefit from it, it is no longer considered in one's possession and cannot be sold, bartered, or given away. Nevertheless, the person retaining it is still liable for transgression of the prohibitions involved. found."[Therefore,] he is obligated to destroy it whenever he finds it. If he finds it on the day of a festival,6when the chametz is considered muktzeh, and hence cannot be moved. he should cover it with a utensil until the evening, and then destroy it.7This statement raises questions among many of the commentators. In Halachah 3, the Rambam also mentions covering chametz with a utensil. However, in that instance, the person had already nullified his possession of the chametz, and thus his possession of chametz violated only a Rabbinic prohibition.In contrast, this instance describes chametz that has not been nullified, and thus the violation of a Torah prohibition is involved. Nevertheless, the Rambam considers the Rabbinic prohibition against mukzteh as important enough to override the fulfillment of a Torah commandment. Furthermore, the Kessef Mishneh explains that since the person himself desires to destroy the chametz, and the only reason he fails to do so is the Rabbinic commandment, he is not considered to have violated the Torah's prohibitions against possessing chametz.This view is not accepted by all authorities. Many explain that since three Torah mitzvot (the two prohibitions against possessing chametz and the positive commandment to destroy chametz) are involved, their observance overrides the prohibitions of muktzeh. Others maintain that even if the prohibition against muktzeh must be observed, the chametz can be destroyed by burning it in the place where it is located.Nevertheless, in practice, the Magen Avraham (Orach Chayim 446:2), the Shulchan Aruch HaRav, and the Mishnah Berurah do not accept the latter view, and advise waiting to destroy the chametz until after the holiday. They explain that a person is allowed to light a fire on a festival only if doing so increases his festive joy. Hence, they prohibit burning the chametz in that manner. However, they mention that, if it is possible, a gentile may be asked to destroy the chametz. Furthermore, in the diaspora, a Jew is also allowed to destroy chametz he finds on the second day of a festival. [If the chametz] was consecrated property,8consecrated for use in the Temple; there is no need to cover it with a utensil, for regardless, everyone shies away from its use.9Property consecrated for use in the Temple may never be used for mundane purposes. (See Halachah 4:2.)
A person who left his house before the time for destroying chametz in order to fulfill a mitzvah1The Mishnah (Pesachim 49a) mentions a person who goes out to slaughter the Paschal sacrifice or circumcise his son. The Rambam postulates that the same applies to anyone who leaves his home to perform any mitzvah. or in order to partake of a feast associated with a mitzvah2Partaking of such a feast is also considered as equivalent to the fulfillment of a mitzvah. As an example of such a feast, the above Mishnah mentions a feast associated with a betrothal. - e.g., a feast associated with betrothal or marriage3In Judaism, marriage is a two stage process. Betrothal (אירוסין) involves the consecration of a woman as a wife. However, the new couple do not live together as man and wife until marriage (נישואין) (See Hilchot Ishut 10:1-2.) - and recalls that he possesses chametz at home. If it is possible for him to go back, destroy it, and then return to the fulfillment of the mitzvah, he should return.4home, and thus, fulfill the mitzvah of destroying chametz as required by the Sages. If not,5If returning home to destroy the chametz will cause him to neglect the fulfillment of the mitzvah with which he is involved, he should nullify [ownership over the chametz] in his heart.6for by doing so, he fulfills the mitzvah of destroying chametz according to Torah law.The above applies when the person can still nullify his ownership over the chametz. However, if the person recalls the possession of chametz after the beginning of the sixth hour, he must return to destroy his chametz even if he is involved in the performance of a mitzvah. The only exception is the burial of a corpse who has no one else to tend to him (Magen Avraham, Orach Chayim 444:11).Should he go out to save7people's lives from a troop of attackers, from a [flooding] river, from a fire, from [being buried] under fallen objects, all that is necessary is for him to nullify it in his heart.8The Maggid Mishneh explains that since human lives are at stake, one should not think of returning, but should nullify the chametz, since according to Torah law, that is all that is required. The Kessef Mishneh goes further and explains that saving the people's lives supersedes all matters. Hence, even if a person has time to return home to destroy the chametz, he should first deal with saving the lives, for that is the primary concern.Though the primacy of saving lives is accepted by all authorities, the Magen Avraham qualifies the matter. If the person knows for sure that he will be able to return home, destroy his chametz, and still have time to save the people's lives, he must destroy his chametz first. Should he go out for his own purposes9to deal with his own business affairs and remember that he possesses chametz at home, he must return immediately.10to destroy it. Even if he has already nullified it, the Sages required him to fulfill the mitzvah as they ordained.How much [chametz] must be present [to require] him to return? the size of an egg.11The prohibition against eating chametz applies regarding a size of an olive (one third the size of an egg, according to the Rambam). However, the Sages showed leniency, since the nullification of chametz is sufficient according to Torah law. They did not require a person to return to destroy chametz unless a quantity the size of an egg, the measure associated with ritual purity and impurity, was found. If there is less than the size of an egg, it is sufficient for him to nullify it in his heart.12as required by Torah law. The above applies when the person can still nullify his ownership over the chametz. However, beyond the beginning of the sixth hour, if the person has not nullified his chametz he must return to destroy even an amount the size of an olive. However, should he possess less than an olive's size of chametz, there is no need especially to destroy the chametz.
A person who put aside a rolled dough1a dough that was kneaded, but which had not yet risen. at home,2This halachah, a quote from Pesachim 7a, describes a situation which occurs after the sixth hour on the fourteenth of Nisan or later, when chametz has become forbidden. [forgot about it,] went out and remembered after he had left [home]: Should he be sitting before his teacher3and thus leaving would be a sign of disrespect to his teacher.This example is given by the Talmud. Nevertheless, when quoting this halachah, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 444:8) states: "Were he busy with other matters," implying that the law applies even when one's intent is not necessarily associated with a mitzvah. and fear that the dough will become leavened before he can come [home],4and bake it as matzah behold, he may nullify [ownership over the dough] in his heart before it becomes leaven.5Since the dough has not become leaven, its possession is still permitted. Hence, a person is still entitled to nullify his ownership of it.Once he has nullified his ownership of the dough, its presence in his house does not constitute a violation of the prohibitions against the possession of chametz, because it no longer belongs to him.At present, people very infrequently bake matzah on Pesach itself in Ashkenazic communities. However, it is customary to do so in certain Sephardic communities. When preparing the dough, the women always nullify their ownership of any small pieces of dough that become stuck to the kneading pin or bowl before they become leavened, so that they will not possess even the slightest amount of chametz. (See Hagahot Maimoni.)However, if [the dough] has already become leavened, his nullification is not at all effective,6just as one cannot nullify one's ownership of other chametz after the end of the sixth hour on the fourteenth of Nisan (Halachah 8). for he has already violated [the prohibitions]: "[leaven] shall not be seen" and "[leaven] shall not be found." He must destroy it immediately7or cover it with a utensil if this occurs on the day of the festival itself. when he returns home.8Furthermore, he must return home to do so as fast as possible.
How must chametz be destroyed?1Halachah 2:2 explains that the mitzvah "to destroy chametz" is fulfilled by nullifying one's ownership of it. This halachah refers to the Rabbinic prohibition to destroy all known chametz; alternatively, to the destruction of chametz discovered after the beginning of the sixth hour. It may be burned; crumbled and tossed to the wind; or thrown into the sea.2Other authorities (Tosefot, Pesachim 27b) explain that this applies only when destroying chametz before it becomes forbidden. Once it is forbidden, it can be destroyed only by burning. If the chametz is hard and the sea will not cause it to dissolve speedily, one should crumble it and then throw it into the sea.3In his commentary to the Mishnah (Pesachim 2:1), the Rambam writes that dried bread should be crumbled "a lot" before being thrown to the sea. Pesachim 28a records a debate among the Sages whether it is necessary to crumble all chametz before throwing it to the sea. There is extensive debate among the commentators regarding the Rambam's interpretation of this passage. Most halachic authorities (Taz, Orach Chayim 445:1) require chametz to be crumbled even before it is tossed into the sea.If other substances fell upon chametz and it was covered by three handbreadths or more of earth,4The Mishnah (Pesachim 31b) states this law applies when "a dog will no longer search for it." The Gemara explains that a dog will not search more than three handbreadths deep. it is considered as having been destroyed. [Nevertheless,] one must nullify [ownership over] it in one's heart if the sixth hour has not arrived.5Thus, even if the chametz is uncovered during Pesach, it will no longer be within one's possession (Rashi, Pesachim ibid.).A person who gave6or sold it to a gentile before the sixth hour need not destroy it.7Pesachim 5b notes that Exodus 13:7, the verse prohibiting the possession of chametz, states: "No chametz will be seen for you." The addition of the latter phrase implies that there is no prohibition against chametz that belongs to a gentile being found in one's domain during Pesach. The following chapter discusses this subject in depth.If one burns it before the sixth hour, he is permitted to benefit from the charcoal that remains during Pesach.8Tosefot, Pesachim 21a explains that once chametz has been burned to the extent that it is not fit for a dog to eat, there is no prohibition involved in its use. However, if he burns it from [the beginning of] the sixth hour and onward, since benefit may not be derived from it, it should not be used as fuel9while it is being burned. for an oven or range.10Shabbat 38b defines a range as an earthenware vessel in which coals can be placed, with two holes upon which to place two pots, and an oven as a larger structure. One may not bake or cook with it.11even after it becomes charcoal.If one did bake or cook [using the chametz as fuel], it is forbidden to derive benefit from that loaf or that dish.12Nevertheless, this prohibition applies only if there is enough charcoal from the chametz to sustain a fire sufficient to cook or bake by itself (Shulchan Aruch HaRav). Similarly, it is forbidden to derive benefit from the charcoal that remains from it, because it was burned after benefit from it became forbidden.13Temurah 34a states that we may benefit from the ashes of any substance that must be destroyed by burning. In contrast, if a substance may be destroyed by other means, we are prohibited from benefiting from its ashes.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
The Torah (Exodus 13:7) states: "No chametz shall be seen for you." Perhaps, if it were buried1because the chametz is not "seen." or entrusted to a gentile,2because ostensibly, the leaven is not "for you." he would not transgress the commandment? The Torah (Exodus 12:19) states: "leaven should not be found in your homes," [implying] even if it is buried or entrusted.3it is still "found in your homes." The place in which a watchman keeps an entrusted article is also considered "your homes."The prohibition against entrusting chametz to a gentile is not explicitly stated in the Talmud. It can be derived from the leniency allowing one to maintain possession of chametz belonging to a gentile mentioned at the conclusion of the Halachah. Some authorities explain that the Rambam derived the concept from the Mechiltah of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai.In his commentary on the Torah (Exodus 12:19), the Ramban differs with the concept in its entirety and states that a person does not transgress the prohibition against possessing chametz when it is entrusted to a gentile. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 440:4) accepts the Rambam's opinion. No later halachic authorities question the matter.Perhaps4if the latter verse were taken as the source of the prohibition he would only transgress [the commandment] when chametz is [found] in his house,5as that verse states but if it were outside his house, in a field or in another city, he would not violate [the commandment]?6Therefore, The Torah7includes the verse originally mentioned which states (Exodus 13:7): "[No leaven shall be seen for you] in all your territory"8i.e., in all your possessions -- in the totality of a person's domain. - i.e., in all your possessions.Perhaps a person will be obligated to remove from his property chametz that belongs to a gentile or that was consecrated?9for that is also "seen." Therefore, The Torah states (ibid.): "No [leaven] shall be seen for you."10From the addition of the latter phrase [We may infer]: You may not see your own [leaven]. However, you may see [leaven] belonging to others11for that is not "for you." The rules governing this concept are the major subject of this chapter. or which was consecrated.12for use in the Temple, or to be sold for the purposes of the Temple. Once an article has been consecrated, it no longer belongs to its original owner and becomes the property and responsibility of the Temple treasury. Property consecrated to be given to charity is not governed by these rules.
[From the above,] you can learn that chametz belonging to a Jew which was left in his possession, even though it is buried, is located in another city, or is entrusted to a gentile, causes him to violate [the commandments]: "[leaven] shall not be seen" and "[leaven] shall not be1for in each of these instances, chametz was present within a Jew's possession on Pesach. found."Chametz that either was consecrated or belongs to a gentile, and is located within a Jew's property, even if it was with him at2As evident from the following halachah, this law applies only when the Jew does not accept responsibility for the chametz. home—behold, this is permitted, for [the chametz] is not his.3the Jew's, Even if it belonged to a resident alien4Hilchot Melachim 8:10 and Hilchot Avodah Zarah 10:6 define this term as referring to a gentile who keeps the seven universal laws given to Noah's descendants. A gentile who accepts these rules of behavior may be granted the privilege of living in Eretz Yisrael. under the authority of the Jewish people,5Pesachim 5b emphasizes that even a gentile who lives in a Jew's home may keep chametz during Pesach. we need not force him6the Jew to remove the chametz from his property on Pesach.7Some manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah state: "We need not force him (i.e., the gentile) to remove his chametz from our property."Nevertheless, it is necessary to construct a partition at least ten handbreadths high in front of chametz belonging to a gentile,8A similar partition is not required when a gentile entrusts other forbidden objects to a Jew. As mentioned above, greater stringencies are taken regarding chametz than other forbidden substances, since the use of chametz is permitted during the entire year. lest one come to use it.9The Kessef Mishneh notes that in Halachah 3:8, the Rambam considers covering the chametz with a utensil as a sufficient measure to prevent the use of the chametz. Two explanations are offered why, in the present instance, a more stringent measure is required:a) the amount of chametz the gentile entrusted for safekeeping is probably too large to be covered by utensils;b) covering the chametz with a utensil is only a temporary measure, intended to be effective only until the end of the day of the festival. Once that day is concluded, the chametz must be destroyed. In contrast, in this instance the chametz will remain in the Jew's possession throughout the entire holiday. Hence, more severe measures must be taken.The Ramban and the Ba'al HaItur do not accept this requirement and maintain that if a Jew does not accept responsibility for the chametz, he is not obligated to construct a partition. All that is necessary is that the chametz be placed out of the way. Nevertheless, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 440:2) and the later halachic authorities all follow the Rambam's opinion. [With regard to chametz] that has been consecrated, this is unnecessary; everyone shies away from consecrated property, lest they infringe on [the prohibition of] מעילה.10Leviticus 5:15-16 describes the prohibition of מעילה, the misappropriation of consecrated property for personal use.
A gentile who entrusted his chametz to a Jew: Should the Jew accept the responsibility of1caring for the chametz as a watchman would, and paying for the worth of the chametz if it is lost or2due to factors other than his personal negligence. Rashi and Rabbenu Asher obligate a Jew to destroy any chametz belonging to a gentile for which he has accepted responsibility, even if his responsibility is less than that specified above. The Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Orach Chayim 440:13,16) and the Mishnah Berurah advise following the latter opinion. stolen—behold, he is obligated to destroy it.3before the sixth hour on the fourteenth of Nisan. Since he accepted responsibility for it,4and would have to pay for it if it is lost.Pesachim 5b offer two possible explanations why the chametz is considered as if it belongs to the Jew. One opinion maintains that throughout the Torah, an article that causes financial liability is considered as one's responsibility.Another opinion maintains that in this instance, since the Torah adds a special commandment "leaven should not be found," extra stringency must be taken. From this discussion, we see that the responsibility to destroy this chametz stems from the Torah itself, and is not merely a matter of Rabbinic decree. it is considered as though it were his.5and, hence, must be destroyed. Tosefot, Pesachim 6a maintains that if a Jew designates a specific place within his home for the gentile and tells him to place his chametz there, he is not obligated to destroy it even though he accepted responsibility for it. Rashi does not accept this position. From the Rambam's omission of the matter, we may assume he also follows Rashi's view (Lechem Mishnah).The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 440:1) quotes the Rambam and hence, requires the acceptance of the more stringent position. However, the Shulchan Aruch HaRav (440:16) and the Mishnah Berurah (440:3) mention certain leniencies based on Tosefot's position.If he did not accept responsibility for it,6the gentile's chametz he may keep it in his domain7without transgressing the prohibitions against possessing chametz and may eat from it after Pesach,8in contrast to chametz possessed by a Jew during Pesach which is forbidden to be used (Halachah 1:4) for it was in the gentile's possession.9Pesachim 6a mentions a situation where a gentile brings chametz that he wishes to entrust to a Jew, and the latter designates a particular portion of the house for him to put the chametz. Under such circumstances, there is no need to destroy the chametz.There are some authorities who explain that the Talmud is speaking about a situation in which the Jew accepted responsibility for the chametz. Nevertheless, since he told the gentile to put it in one specific place, it is considered as if that place belongs to the gentile, and thus the chametz is not found in the Jew's possession.The Rambam does not accept this interpretation and requires the gentile's chametz to be destroyed whenever a Jew accepts responsibility for it. Though the Shulchan Aruch HaRav and the Mishnah Berurah mention the more lenient opinion, they require that the more stringent approach be followed.
Should a gentile who forces his way upon people1a literal translation of the word אנס. Some editions of the Mishneh Torah use the expression אלם instead. However, the intention remains the same, regardless of which term is used. entrust his chametz to a Jew: If the Jew knows that if it is lost or stolen, [the gentile] will obligate him to pay for2This law is derived from the following passage (Pesachim 5b): Ravvah told the inhabitants of Mechuzah: "Destroy the chametz belonging to the king's soldiers." Since the army would hold the Jews responsible if it were stolen, it was considered their property. it—forcing and compelling him to pay even though he did not accept responsibility—he3In the previous halachah, the Rambam requires a Jew to destroy chametz only if he willingly accepts responsibility for it. Nevertheless, in this instance, is obligated to destroy it. It is considered as though it were his, for the gentile holds him responsible for it.4whether the Jew willingly accepts that responsibility or not. Certain opinions maintain that this law applies only when the secular law of the land would uphold the gentile's view, as in the instance cited from Pesachim, and not when a private individual takes the law into his own hands (Maggid Mishneh). Nevertheless, this differentiation is not accepted by most halachic authorities.
A Jew who gives his chametz to a gentile1before Pesach, transferring it into the latter's domain as security2The Aruch relates that the word רהן means security in Arabic. for a loan and tells him: "If I do not bring the money between today and such and such a date, you acquire the chametz [retroactively] from the present moment,"3This specific statement is required, because although a Jewish lender is considered to have acquired a certain degree of ownership over an article given him as security, this principle does not apply with regard to a gentile (Pesachim 31b, Maggid Mishneh). the chametz is considered as4payment for the loan. Hence, it is in the gentile's possession5In a responsa (no. 252), the Rambam writes that it is as if the Jew sold the chametz to the gentile outright. and is permitted to be used after Pesach.6as is all chametz that belonged to gentiles during the holiday. This applies if the date specified was before Pesach.7more specifically, before the sixth hour on the fourteenth of Nisan.The Ra'avad disagrees with this law and maintains that if this stipulation was included, the chametz is considered as belonging to the gentile even if the date mentioned is after Pesach. The Rambam maintains that since the Jew has the right to redeem his chametz during Pesach, it is still considered his (Rabbenu Ephraim). In this instance, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 441:1) accepts the Ra'avad's view.Nevertheless, this leniency applies only when the Jew willingly foregoes any right to the chametz and considers to have repaid his loan with it. Should the Jew decide to redeem his chametz after Pesach, he is retroactively considered the owner and is liable for possessing chametz throughout the holiday.However, if he did not tell him: "you acquire the chametz [retroactively] from the present moment,"8even if the day of payment is fixed before Pesach that chametz is9not considered as repayment for the loan. Rather, it is considered as an article entrusted to the gentile,10to ensure payment. Hence, it is still considered as the Jew's property and it is forbidden to benefit from it after Pesach.11as stated in Halachah 1:4.The Ra'avad disagrees with this point as well, maintaining that if the date mentioned is before Pesach, the chametz becomes the gentile's property, and the Jew does not transgress the prohibitions against possessing chametz.The difference between the Rambam and the Ra'avad revolves around the principle of Asmachtah, an agreement which was never intended to be fulfilled. The Ra'avad maintains that, generally, the fact that a borrower does not specify that the security would retroactively become the lender's property implies that he never really intended to sell it to him and always considers it as his own. Thus, were such a transaction to be carried out between Jews, the Ra'avad maintains that the security would never become the lender's property. However, he explains that this law applies only regarding business dealings carried out between Jews, and not to those involving gentiles. Therefore, in this instance, the chametz given as security becomes the gentile's property.In contrast, the Rambam does not consider such an agreement an Asmachtah. However, he does not accept a gentile's right to an article given as security. Hence, though the date for repayment passes before Pesach, he still considers the article as belonging to its original Jewish owner.In this matter, the Shulchan Aruch HaRav follows the more stringent view if the chametz is worth more than the loan, and forbids its use after Pesach. However, if it is not worth more than the loan, that text and, similarly, the Mishnah Berurah, require the Jewish borrower to redeem his chametz before Pesach. However, if he fails to so, they allow people to rely on the Ra'avad's opinion and benefit from the chametz.Different laws apply to chametz given to a Jew as security by a gentile or by another Jew. In the former instance, a Jew is considered the owner of the chametz if the agreement included the clause specifying retroactive ownership, even though the time for payment is not fixed until after Pesach. If the agreement lacked that clause, and the Jew is not held responsible for the chametz (see Halachah 3 above), the Jew is not liable for that chametz (Shulchan Aruch). Nevertheless, other authorities do not accept this decision.
A Jew and a gentile are traveling together in a ship,1This halachah is a quote from the Tosefta, Pesachim 2:6. Nevertheless, it is worthy of question why the Rambam quotes that source verbatim. Often, when mentioning such a law, the Rambam will eliminate particulars that are extraneous to the principle he wishes to communicate. and the Jew possesses chametz.2in the ship or in other places. When the fifth hour [on the fourteenth of Nisan] arrives—behold,3behold, he should sell it to the gentile -- Today, in many Jewish communities, the sale of chametz to gentiles is an almost indispensable element in the observance of Pesach. Nevertheless, the details of the sale and the legal provisions which,a) on one hand, ensure that the gentile is the sole legal owner of the chametz on Pesach, andb) assure the Jewish owner of receiving the goods in return, or their monetary equivalentare a technical matter which has been discussed by the Rabbis in their responsa over the generations. For this reason, it is not advisable for a person to sell his chametz himself. Rather, he should entrust the local Rabbi with the responsibility of carrying out the sale. he should sell it to the gentile or give it to him as a present.4Hilchot Avodah Zarah 10:4 states that we should not give presents to gentiles. However, in this instance, giving such a gift will prevent a Jew from violating a Torah prohibition. Hence, there is no objection.The halachic authorities emphasize that the sale or gift of chametz to the gentile must be formalized by a kinyan (legal transaction) recognized by both Torah and secular law. Thus, the gentile becomes its legal owner. He may return and buy it back from him after Pesach,5The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 448:3) states: "Even though the Jew who sells it to the gentile knows that he will not touch it at all, but will watch it for him until after Pesach and then return it to him, it is permitted." as long as he gives it to him as an outright present.6This expression excludes conditional gifts or sales, as explained in the following halachah.
The Jew may tell the gentile:1This is a continuation of the above Tosefta, ibid. 2:7. "Rather than buy a manah's worth [of chametz], come and buy two hundred [dinars'] worth [of chametz]...2i.e., don't buy a small amount from me; buy a larger quantity. Alternatively, some interpret this quote within the context of the circumstances mentioned in the Tosefta, and explain that the gentile was buying provisions for the journey for himself. The Jew tells him: "Don't buy enough only for yourself; buy for me as well." Rather than buy from a gentile, come and buy from a Jew.3i.e., from me Perhaps I will need [chametz] and will buy from you after4The halachic authorities even allow the Jew to promise the gentile a profit. These statement are permitted as long as the Jew does not make a binding commitment. The intimation that he will repurchase the chametz after Pesach is not considered significant.However, he cannot sell or give [chametz] to him on condition. — This includes all conditional agreements, not only those requiring the gentile to return the chametz after Pesach. Pesach."However, he cannot sell or give [chametz] to him on condition. If he does5behold, he transgresses [the prohibitions]: "[leaven] shall not be seen" and "[leaven] shall not be found." -- For until that condition is fulfilled, the Jew remains the owner of the chametz.The above restrictions apply even if the condition is phrased in a manner in which, once the gentile fulfills the condition, he retroactively becomes the owner of the chametz from the time the agreement was originally made. We fear that, perhaps, the gentile will not fulfill his commitment, and thus the Jew will remain the owner of the chametz. Hence, even though the chametz was in the physical possession of the gentile during Pesach, the Jew might be its legal owner. See also Radbaz, Vol. 5, Responsum 1416. so—behold, he transgresses [the prohibitions]: "[leaven] shall not be seen" and "[leaven] shall not be found."
[A person] who possesses a mixture of chametz transgresses [the prohibitions]: "[leaven] shall not be seen" and "[leaven] shall not be found" because of it;1As explained in Halachah 1:6, according to the Rambam a person who eats a mixture of chametz does not transgress the same Torah prohibition as one who eats chametz itself. Hence, he is not liable for the punishment of כרת. The Maggid Mishneh explains that the possession of these mixtures only violates the prohibitions against possessing chametz when they contain a substantial amount of chametz (at least the size of an olive in a quantity to be eaten בכדי אכילת פרס).Rav Moshe HaCohen maintains that even the possession of a smaller amount violates these prohibitions. Rav Yosef Caro supports this view in the Kessef Mishneh. Although he does not explicitly state so in the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 442:1) when discussing this law, the later authorities (Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Mishnah Berurah) accept this opinion as binding. for example: pickle-brine,2a mixture containing brine, fish-hash, flour, and sometimes wine. Babylonian kotach, and Median beer,3See Halachah 1:6 for a description of these substances. which are made from flour.4which are made from flour. [The same applies] to other similar substances which are eaten.5or drunk. However, a substance which contains a mixture of chametz, but is not fit to be eaten,6by human beings. may be kept on Pesach.7This is called חמץ נוקשה, "hardened chametz," and is permitted by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 447:12). See the following halachot. However, if the substance is originally intended for human consumption and then becomes spoiled, one is considered to have violated the prohibitions against possessing chametz until it becomes spoiled to the extent that it will not be eaten by a dog. (See Halachah 11.)
How is [the latter principle]1allowing one to keep chametz unfit for consumption applied? A tanner's trough into which one placed flour and animal hides:2The flour is useful in drying out the hides and absorbing their natural moisture. See also Shabbat 79a ("There are three hides"). Even if this was done one hour before [the time chametz must be] destroyed,3the end of the fifth hour on the fourteenth of Nisan one may keep it.4for as soon as the flour comes in contact with the hides, it is no longer fit for consumption. If one placed flour [in the trough] without animal hides three days before [the time chametz must be] destroyed, one may keep it, for the [chametz] has surely become spoiled and rotten.5from the residual moisture and odor left in the trough. If the chametz was placed in the trough Within three days,6of the end of the fifth hour on the fourteenth one is obligated to destroy it.7for it may not have spoiled.
Similarly, an eye salve, a compress, a plaster, or Tiriac into which chametz was placed may be kept on Pesach, for the nature of the chametz is spoiled.
Bread itself which has become moldy and is no longer fit for consumption by a dog,1in contrast to chametz which is not human food, as mentioned in the previous halachot, and is permitted once it is no longer fit for human consumption.Rav Chayim Soloveitchik (Hilchot Ma'achalot Asurot 15:1) differentiates between the two cases as follows. Chametz itself is a forbidden substance. Hence, it must be spoiled to the point that a dog cannot benefit from it. In contrast, the other substances are merely mixtures of chametz. They are only forbidden because they contain the taste of chametz. Hence, once that taste is no longer suitable for human consumption, there is no reason why they should remain forbidden.He continues relating that, as stated in Halachot 11 and 12, chametz that is obviously designated for purposes other than food can be used even though it has not become spoiled. Thus, one could explain that once the chametz in the above mixtures becomes unfit for human consumption, it is clearly not food. In contrast, bread which is originally made for that intent must spoil more. or a compress2This compress differs from the one mentioned in the previous halachah. It is made from wheat and figs that have been chewed, and is then applied to an infected area. (See Bava Kama 102a.) It is not mixed with bitter medications, and hence is generally fit to be eaten before it becomes spoiled. that has become spoiled,3beyond being fit for consumption by a dog. Rabbenu Manoach emphasizes that it must become spoiled before the prohibition against chametz takes effect. Otherwise, it must be destroyed. need not be destroyed.4for in its present form it is no longer considered useful.Clothes which were washed with starch5made from wheat and, similarly, papers which were stuck together with chametz, and other like cases, may be kept on Pesach.6This law is accepted by the Shulchan Aruch. However, the Ramah (Orach Chayim 442:3) states that if the chametz is visible as a separate entity, it must be destroyed. Their [possession] does not constitute a [violation of the prohibitions]: "[leaven] shall not be seen" and "[leaven] shall not be found," for they no longer have the form of chametz.7i.e., they are not in the form of food. Halachah 2:15 provides a similar example: a mound of yeast that has been set aside as a seat.
A substance which is not eaten by people or one which is generally not eaten by people,1even if it has not been spoiled to the point that it is unfit for human consumption (Rav Chayim Soloveitchik, ibid.) with which chametz has become mixed— e.g., Tiriac and the like, though one may keep it [during Pesach],2as stated in Halachah 10. eating it is prohibited3Though the mixture is generally not used for human consumption, the fact that an individual eats from it shows that he considers it as food. Hence, it is prohibited. until after Pesach.4Nevertheless, a person may benefit from it on Pesach (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 442:24, Mishnah Berurah). Even though it contains only the smallest amount of chametz,5less than the size of an olive בכדי אכילת פרס, as in Halachah 1:6. eating it is forbidden.6Nevertheless, in the case of danger to life or limb, one may use a remedy which is chametz in the midst of Pesach (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 466:5, Mishnah Berurah).

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
The prohibition against chametz applies only to the five species of grain. They include two species of wheat: wheat and spelt; and three species of barley: barley, oats, and rye.However, kitniyot - e.g., rice, millet, beans, lentils and the like - do not become leavened. Even if one kneads rice flour or the like with boiling water and covers it with fabric until it rises like dough that has become leavened, it is permitted to be eaten. This is not leavening, but rather the decay [of the flour].
With regard to these five species of grain: If [flour from these species] is kneaded with fruit juice alone1מי פירות literally means "the water of fruit." However, as the halachah explains, the practical application of the term is much broader. without any water, it will never become leavened. Even if [flour] is placed in [these juices] the entire day until the dough rises, it is permitted to be eaten [on Pesach],2This halachah is a matter of controversy among the commentators. In his commentary on the Mishnah (Pesachim 3:1), the Rambam makes similar statements. However, in the Oxford manuscript of that text, the words "permitted to be eaten" are crossed out and replaced with the words "one is not obligated for כרת." However, it appears that this emendation was made by Rav Avraham, the Rambam's son, and not the Rambam himself.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 462:1) permits the use of fruit juice. However, the Ramah (462:4) states that it is Ashkenazic custom not to use fruit juice for matzah on Pesach out of the fear that some water might perhaps be mixed together with it (see below). Nevertheless, he does allow leniency for people who are ill or sick and have difficulty eating normal matzah.Among the present day applications of this concept is commercially produced "egg matzah." According to the above guidelines, in the Ashkenazic community, such matzah:a) cannot be used in the Seder, as explained in the commentary to Halachah 6:2;b) must contain only eggs and fruit juice, with no water whatsoever;c) even so, should be eaten only by those with medical problems that prevent them from eating normal matzah. for fruit juice does not cause [dough] to become leavened.3and thus become chametz. Rather, It merely causes [the flour] to decay.4Nevertheless, dried out wine dregs which have fermented do cause the dough to become leavened (Tosefot, Pesachim 28b).The following are [included in the category] of fruit juice: wine, milk, honey,5The Hagahot Maimoni explains that this applies to both bee and date honey. olive oil, apple juice,6The dough is permitted even if the apple juice has begun to ferment. pomegranate juice and all other similar wines, oils, and beverages.7Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Orach Chayim 462:2) defines מי פירות as: "any liquid that is not derived from water... even if it does not come from produce."This applies so long as no water whatsoever is mixed with them. If any water is mixed with them, they cause [the flour] to become leavened.8Indeed, when water is mixed with these juices, the dough becomes leavened much faster than if it had been mixed with water alone. Generally, dough can be left eighteen minutes before it becomes leavened, but the limit for dough made from a mixture of these liquids and water is much less (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 462:2). See commentary to Halachah 20.
[On Pesach,] we should not cook wheat in water1Though raw wheat itself is not chametz, once wheat or flour is mixed with water, it becomes leavened within eighteen to twenty-four minutes. (See Halachah 12.) Less time is required when heat is applied to it. Hence, cooking or baking with wheat or flour on Pesach must be carried out under careful guidelines. - for example, cracked wheat2wheat served as a grain. - or flour [in water] - for example, dough balls.3A dish resembling kneidlach, but made with regular flour rather than matzah meal. If one cooks [either of the above]4behold, it is absolutely chametz - for the wheat or flour has become leavened. - behold, it is absolutely chametz. This applies5This clause obviously refers only to cooking wheat. if [the kernels] crack open within the dish.6the cracking open of the kernels is a sign that the wheat has expanded because of leavening.We may not fry dough7made with water in oil in a frying pan.8The Maggid Mishneh explains that oil is considered מי פירות and, hence, will cause the dough to become leavened. (See also Nodah BiYhudah, Vol. II, Responsum 57.) However, we may cook a loaf [of matzah]9Pesachim 39b states that once matzah has been baked, it can be cooked again without the fear of leavening. Similarly, it can be ground into meal, and then used as flour without the fear of becoming chametz. (See also Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 463:3.)This law is the basis of the widely practiced leniency of cooking and baking with matzah meal. Nevertheless, certain Ashkenazic communities refrain from using matzah meal because of the custom of שרויה, gebruks. Rav Shneur Zalman of Liadi (Responsum VI; see also Sha'arei Teshuvah, Orach Chayim 460:10) writes that it is possible that some of the dough was not baked thoroughly and some flour remaining in it could become chametz when cooked again. or roasted flour.10Once flour has become roasted, it will not become leavened. However, we must differentiate between roasted flour and flour made from roasted wheat; the latter flour may not be used on Pesach. (See Halachah 5.) The Pri Chadash even questions the leniency of using roasted flour. If one boiled a lot of water and, afterwards, placed flour into it11behold, it is permitted because it -- the flour - behold, it is permitted, because it is cooked immediately, before it could become leaven.12This practice was permitted only when the water was absolutely boiling at the time the flour was placed in it. [Nevertheless,] it is accepted custom in Babylonia, Spain, and the entire western [diaspora] to forbid this practice. This has been decreed lest one not boil the water well enough.13The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 454:3) states: "At present, there are none who know how to boil foods in this manner. Hence, all boiling is forbidden."
It is permissible to cook grain or flour in fruit juice.1Baking dough kneaded with מי פירות was discussed in Halachah 2. The present halachah explains that flour mixed with those liquids will not become leavened even when cooked or fried. Thus, dough which was kneaded with fruit juice, cooked with fruit juice, or fried with oil in a frying pan is permitted, for fruit juice does not cause leavening.2As explained above, it is Ashkenazic custom not to use dough or flour cooked with these liquids.
Roasted grain1Once wheat is roasted, flour that is made from it will never become leavened. which is singed in fire2lightly roasted in order to dry out any moisture. and then ground [into flour]: That flour should not be cooked with water, lest it has not been roasted well in the fire, and thus will become leavened when cooked.3Rabbenu Manoach explains that this law applies only to light roasting. If grain is roasted thoroughly, its flour may be used. However, in instances of this nature, the Rabbis would rather forbid such practices entirely than allow a loosely defined leniency. (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 463:3.)Similarly, when preparing new pots,4מלל, the word used by the Rambam, means "husk." In his dictionary, Rabbenu Tanchum of Jerusalem explains the derivation of this term:They take fresh barley, singe it, dry it, and grind it into flour. Afterwards, it is cooked until it is soft... and then, it is poured into new pots to reduce their porosity.In his commentary on the Mishneh Torah, Rav Kapach notes that such practices are still followed in Yemen today. we should not cook in them anything other than matzah that was baked and then ground into flour.5matzah meal. As explained in Halachah 4, once matzah has been baked, it will never become leavened. It is forbidden to do so with roasted flour, for perhaps it will not be roasted well, and thus may become leaven.6This statement is slightly problematic, for Halachah 4 mentioned that we may cook with roasted flour.
We do not stir barley in water on Pesach [to remove its husks],1Rabbenu Manoach explains that the kernels of grain were placed in hot water, stirred vigorously, and then crushed to remove the husks. because [the kernels] are soft and become leavened rapidly. If one did stir [barley] in water and [the kernels] softened to the point2The cracking open of the kernels would be the clearest sign that the grain had become leavened. However, even if the leavening process has reached the point that if they were placed at the opening to a roasting pan3Our translation of ביב follows Rav Yitzchak Alfasi and Rabbenu Chanan'el. See also Halachah 22. However, Rashi (Pesachim 40a) provides a different and more lenient interpretation. upon which loaves were usually baked, they would burst open - behold, they are forbidden.4This is a very stringent measure. Once barley kernels are exposed to water, they will burst open shortly after being exposed to heat of this nature. If they have not reached this degree of softness, they are permitted.
It is permissible to stir wheat [kernels] in water to remove the bran,1Wheat kernels are firmer than barley kernels. and then immediately2Once the grain has come in contact with water and it is left untended for the time it takes a person to walk a mil, it will become leavened. (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 467:2.) grind them, as is done when grinding fine flour.3The commentaries note that in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 12:20, the Rambam states that the grain used for the meal offerings was not stirred in water, lest it become leavened. Among the resolutions offered to this difficulty is that chametz is a severe prohibition, and greater care would be taken. [Nevertheless,] all Jews in Babylonia, Eretz Yisrael,4Gittin 57a explains why the term ארץ צבי is used as a reference for Eretz Yisrael. Spain, and the cities of the western [diaspora] have accepted the custom of not stirring wheat in water.5Rabbenu Manoach mentions that this custom was several hundred years old in his time (approx. 1200 CE). Pesachim 40a mentions that even in Talmudic times, a בעל נפש (a person precise in the observance of the commandments) would not use wheat that had been stirred. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 453:5) states that stirring wheat is "prohibited." This decree [was instituted] lest [the kernels] be left aside and become leavened.6i.e., the fear is not that the wheat will become leavened while the bran is being removed, but rather, that after it has been removed, it will be left to become leavened.
A dish that was cooked, and barley or wheat1Some authorities recommend more severe laws for wheat than for barley, but the Rambam equates the two. was discovered inside it:2One kernel of grain can create difficulties, for even the slightest amount of chametz that is mixed together with other foods causes them to be forbidden (Halachah 5 above). If the grains have cracked open,3they have surely become chametz. Hence, the entire dish is forbidden, for chametz has become mixed together with it.4Furthermore, the pot and utensils with which it was cooked are also forbidden during Pesach. If they have not cracked open,5Halachah 6 above mentions a more severe measure. However, that ruling concerns the kernels of grain themselves, while our law deals with their effect on another dish, which is merely a Rabbinic ordinance. Hence, greater leniency is shown (Maggid Mishneh). they6the barley or wheat itself must be removed and burned,7as if they were chametz but the remainder of the dish may be eaten.8The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 467:9) accepts this ruling. However, the Ramah and the other major Ashkenazic authorities forbid use of this dish. However, the Taz allows the dish to be sold to a gentile. [This ruling was given] because grain that has been stirred in water without cracking open is not actual leaven as forbidden by the Torah. It is only a Rabbinic [ordinance].
[Exodus 12:17] states: "Keep watch over the matzot"1Some ancient manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah include these two lines in the previous halachah, but all published texts follow this division. - i.e., be careful of the matzot and protect them from any possibility of becoming chametz.2Furthermore, as evident from Halachah 6:5, this verse also implies that the flour and the matzot made from it must be watched with the specific intent that they be used for the mitzvah of eating matzah on Pesach.The above is the source for the practice of eating shemurah matzah, matzah made from grain which has been watched to ensure that it did not become chametz and prepared with the intent that it be used for the mitzvah of eating matzah. The use of such matzah during the Seder is an absolute requirement (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 460), and it is advisable to use it throughout the holiday. Therefore, our Sages declared: A person must be careful regarding the grain which he eats on Pesach3Pesachim 40a relates that Ravvah would tell the harvesters cutting wheat for Pesach: "Have the intent that this grain be used for the mitzvah of matzah." and [make sure] that no water has come in contact with it4The chronicles of Jewish community life in both Eastern Europe and North Africa relate how the harvest of the wheat used for matzah was always begun at noontime, long after the morning dew had risen. after it has been harvested,5Based on the above passage from Pesachim, Rav Yitzchak Alfasi and the Rambam require that the grain be watched from the time of harvesting onward. Nevertheless, Rabbenu Asher follows a more lenient policy and does not require the wheat to be watched until it is ground. [Rabbenu Nissim explains that even Rav Yitzchak Alfasi only recommended watching the matzah from harvesting as a pious measure, and not as an absolute rule.]The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 453:4) explains that it is preferable to use grain that has been watched from harvesting; as a minimum requirement, one must use grain that has been watched from the time it has been ground into flour. If there is no other alternative, one may buy flour in the marketplace and begin watching from the time the dough is kneaded.The Mishnah Berurah clarifies the latter point explaining that where grain is washed or submerged in water before grinding it into flour, such grain may not be used for matzah. (This practice is still common in many communities.) In practice, most shemurah matzah made at present is watched from the time the grain was harvested. so that it will not have become chametz at all.6However, before the grain is cut, no precautions are ordinarily necessary. Nevertheless, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 467:5) mentions that if the wheat kernels have dried out and no longer need nurture from the land, they can become chametz.Grain which sunk in a river or7Pesachim 40b mentions a ship which sank carrying a cargo of wheat. After the ship was recovered, Ravvah allowed the wheat to be sold. From that example, we can derive concepts governing all instances where grain came in contact with water,8Rabbenu Manoach emphasizes that this halachah applies to wheat kernels that have not split open. Had they split open, a Jewish purchaser would immediately notice the fact and there would be no need to inform him. just as it is forbidden to eat from it [on Pesach], it is forbidden to keep [possession of] it.9Halachah 7 mentioned that one could stir wheat in water to remove the husks without it becoming chametz. Since the wheat was constantly being agitated, it would not become leavened. In contrast, this halachah contains a more stringent ruling, for the grain was left at rest (Tzafnat Paneach). Rather, he should10preferably sell it to a Jew11and not a gentile [before it becomes prohibited]12after the fifth hour on the fourteenth of Nisan and inform him [about its nature], so that he can eat it before Pesach.13If he does not inform him, it would be forbidden to sell the chametz to him, lest he keep possession of it on Pesach, and thus violate the commandment against owning chametz. If he sells it to a gentile before Pesach, he should sell a small amount to a number of individuals,14Most texts of Pesachim (ibid.) read: "He should sell small amounts to Jews." Apparently, the Rambam's text of the Talmud did not contain that phrase. If a Jew knows that the grain has become leavened, he will surely take the necessary precautions so that it will not remain in his possession on Pesach. so that it will be finished before Pesach, lest the gentile go and sell it to [another] Jew.15The later authorities (see Mishnah Berurah 467:3) question what to do if large amounts of grain come into contact with water on Erev Pesach, when it is not possible for the gentile to consume the entire amount before Pesach. They advise that it be sold to a gentile who will surely sell it back to the Jew after the holiday.
Grain1Most texts of Pesachim 39b, the source for this law, read "flour" instead of "grain." Similarly, when quoting this law, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 466:6) also states "flour." upon which [water] leaking [from the roof] has fallen: As long as [the leak] continues, drop after drop, it will not become chametz2The dripping of the water agitates the grain and prevents it from becoming chametz. even if [the leak continues] the entire day.3However, the grain must be made into flour and baked immediately after being taken from under the leak. Otherwise, it will become leavened (Shulchan Aruch). However, if [the leak] stops,4or the grain is moved if it remains [untouched] for the standard measure [of time]5the time it takes a person to walk a mil, as explained in Halachah 13 - behold, it becomes chametz.
We do not knead a large dough on Pesach, lest it become chametz.1Pesachim 48b relates that dough will not become chametz as long as it is being kneaded. However, a large dough is hard to manage. Hence, our Sages restricted a dough's size to insure that women kneading it will be able to continually agitate the entire dough.The Rokeach mentioned that in his age, baking conditions had changed from Talmudic times. More people were involved in the process and the ovens were larger and baked matzot more quickly. Therefore, leniency was taken as regards the restriction of the size of the dough. However, the Shulchan Aruch HaRav and the Mishnah Berurah both recommend adhering to the former practice. Rather, [the size of the dough] is confined to the measure for which one is obligated to separate Challah.2and a fifth eggs, as stated in the following halachah; approximately 73 fluid ounces, 9.125 cups, or 131.8 cubic inches in contemporary measure.We do not knead with hot water, with water heated in the sun, or with water that was drawn on the present day,3Rashi (Pesachim 42a) relates that the position of the sun in the spring causes the temperature of well and spring water to rise. Hence, matzah may be kneaded only with water that has4been drawn [preferably, either slightly before or directly after sunset on the day before the matzot are to be baked (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 455:1)], and rested for a day. A person who violates [this requirement] and kneads using one of the above5types of water whose use the Sages forbade; - behold, the [baked] loaf becomes forbidden.6There is no debate about the prohibition against using hot water. However, with regard to the prohibition against using water drawn that day, the Shulchan Aruch (455:3) quotes the Rambam's opinion, but states that in a difficult situation, one may use matzah that was inadvertently kneaded with water that was not drawn on the previous day. The Ramah and the Ashkenazic authorities are more lenient and allow the use of such matzah in all situations.
A woman should not sit in the sun and knead,1lest the sun's heat speed up the leavening process. nor [should she knead] under the open sky on a cloudy day, even in a place where the sun is not shining.2Yoma 28b states: "a cloudy day is all sun; the heat of a cloudy day is more severe than that of a sunny day."The Ramah (Orach Chayim 459:1) mentions that it is customary not to knead near a window. The Shulchan Aruch states that the kneading area of a bakery should be distant from the baking area, so that the heat of the oven should not affect the dough. [She should not] leave the dough3The Shulchan Aruch adds "even for a moment." and become involved in another matter.4the dough should not be left unattended. In his commentary on the Mishnah (Pesachim 3:4), the Rambam explains that preferably the preparation and baking of the matzah should be a speedy and uninterrupted process. See also the following halachah. If she both kneads and bakes,5The Sages feared that her hands would become hot from the oven, and thus speed up the leavening process when she kneads the dough. Hence, they required that she must have two containers of water,6the same water should not be used for both activities. one to smooth [the matzot]7Before the matzot are placed in the oven, the woman baking them would dip her hands in cold water and smooth and shape the loaves. and one to cool off her hands.8from the heat of the oven. It must be noted that Rashi (Pesachim 42a) maintains that the activity of kneading the dough itself heats up the hands. Thus, he requires that a woman dip her hands in water between doughs to cool off her hands, even when she is not baking. The Shulchan Aruch (459:3) follows Rashi's interpretation.If she violated [these instructions] and kneaded dough in the sun,9unless one can actually feel that the temperature of the dough has risen (Magen Avraham 559:15). or did not cool off her hands, or made a dough larger than the measure for which one is obligated to separate Challah, the loaf is permitted.10In these instances, the Sages did not feel that the leavening process would necessarily be speeded up if their instructions were not followed. Hence, בדיעבד (after the fact), they did not prohibit the use of matzot baked in this manner. What is the measure for which one is obligated to separate Challah? Forty-three and a fifth eggs of average size11Rabbenu Manoach notes that the numerical equivalent of Challah (חלה) is also 43. - by volume and not by weight.12A given volume of dough is much heavier than the same volume of eggs.In Hilchot Bikkurim 6:15, the Rambam elaborates further on this subject, by giving a measure according to weight as well. In modern measure, the figure he gives equals approximately 1.7 kilograms (close to 4 lbs.).
As long as a person is busy with the dough, even for the entire day, it will not become chametz.1As mentioned previously, as long as the dough is constantly being agitated it will not become leavened. If he lifts up his hand2from kneading and allows the dough to rest so that [it rises to the extent that] a noise will resound when a person claps it with his hand,3The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 459:2) mentions another sign; the appearance of cracks or folds in the dough. it has already become chametz4even if the time period explained below has not elapsed and must be burned immediately.5The Rambam is describing an instance when matzah is being baked on Pesach eve or during the holiday, when the possession of chametz is forbidden. If a noise does not resound6when the dough is clapped, the possibility still exists that the dough has become chametz. The time the dough has been left unattended is then calculated and7if the dough has lain at rest for the time it takes a man to walk a mil,8two thousand cubits; according to most authorities approximately a kilometer in modern measure. Most authorities (including the Shulchan Aruch and many later Rabbis with regard to halachah l'ma'aseh) define eighteen minutes as the accepted period of time in which an average man would walk this distance. However, the Rambam (Commentary on the Mishnah 3:2) quotes a more lenient figure, 24 minutes. it has become chametz and must be burned immediately.9The Shulchan Aruch and the Ramah suggest hurrying the process of kneading and baking matzah, because:a) the heat generated by working the dough may cause it to become leavened faster.b) though each particular hesitation may be less than eighteen minutes, the total of all hesitations may exceed that figure. (This point is not accepted by all authorities.)c) once dough is left unattended after having been kneaded thoroughly, it will become leavened very quickly.Similarly, if its surface has become wrinkled10Rabbenu Manoach interprets the Hebrew הכסיפו as "whitened." [to the extent that it resembles] a person whose hair stands [on end in fright]11behold -- this is a sign that the dough has begun to become leavened. Hence, - behold, it is forbidden to eat from it, but one is not liable for כרת [for eating it].12The commentaries question whether the Rambam's intent is to free the person from punishment entirely or whether he means that he is not liable for כרת, but receives a lesser punishment, lashes.
There were two doughs which people stopped kneading at the same time and left unattended.1for less than the time it takes a person to walk a mil. From one, a sound [resounded when clapped].2a clear sign the dough has become leavened, as stated in the previous halachah. From the other, no sound [resounded].3Nevertheless, since they both waited the same amount of time, we assume that a similar leavening process took place in both doughs. Hence, Both of them should be burned4behold, they are -- considered - behold, they are absolutely chametz.
We should not make thick loaves1Pesachim 37a allows thin loaves to be made with designs. Commenting on this statement, the Ramah (Orach Chayim 460:4) suggests never making thick matzot for Pesach. with designs2Rav Yitzchak ibn Giat writes that it was customary to make designs of fish, doves, and other animals. on Pesach, because a woman takes time making them.3However, there is no prohibition against making holes in their dough as is the common practice. On the contrary, this helps the matzah bake faster (Shulchan Aruch). Thus, [the dough] will become leavened during that time. Hence, professional bakers are allowed to make [such designs],4Pesachim (ibid.) records that Rabban Gamliel's household used such matzot, and hence was forced to make this differentiation. because they are skilled in their craft and quick in its execution.5Rashi (Pesachim, ibid.) adds that bakers usually have pre-cut forms.The Mishnah Berurah (Orach Chayim 460:14) forbids all designs, whether made by private people or professional bakers, whether on thick or thin loaves.[In contrast,] a private person is forbidden to make such a design, even if he does so using a [pre-cut] form.6which will not require time. [This stringency was instituted] lest others attempt to make [the designs] without using the forms, delay in their work, and cause [the dough] to become chametz.7Our Sages often instituted decrees uniformly, even though the reason for the decree did not apply in certain instances, lest people misinterpret the leniency and take total license.
The water used to wash one's hands and the kneading trough after the kneading [is completed]1The Mishnah (Pesachim 40b) uses the expression "water used by a baker." In his commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam defines that term as above. and, similarly, the water used when kneading2when shaping the dough or cooling off one's hands, as mentioned in Halachah 12. - behold, it should be poured out in a place which slopes downward, so it will not collect in one place3See Pesachim 42a. The Ramah (Orach Chayim 459:4) also gives instructions about cleaning the utensils used in preparing the matzah to ensure that no dough is allowed to remain stuck to them, and thus become chametz. and become leavened.4This halachah applies when matzah is prepared and baked after the prohibition against chametz has gone into effect (Shulchan Aruch). However, some later authorities (Bach, Taz) forbid such water to collect even beforehand.
We should not soak bran1The Mishnah Berurah 454:2 notes that there is a difference of opinion among halachic authorities if מורסן refers to the hard shell of the wheat kernels that falls off when the wheat is ground, or the soft shell, which is separated by sifting. in water and leave it in front of chickens,2without supervision, in contrast to the following halachah. lest it become chametz. However, we can boil bran for them,3As mentioned in Halachah 3, if grain products are placed directly in boiling water, they will never become chametz. and then place it before them. Nevertheless, the majority of people have already adopted the custom of not boiling [grain products], lest the water not be boiled thoroughly.4as explained in the above halachah and in the Shulchan Aruch and commentaries (Orach Chayim 454:3).
It is permitted to prepare bran or flour for chickens in water1Rabbenu Manoach and the Meiri state that the Rambam's statements are based on the Tosefta. However, no law of this nature is found in our text of the Tosefta.Perhaps this lack of a clear source is the reason the Rambam's opinion is not accepted by other halachic authorities. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 465:1) forbids placing bran in water under any circumstances. The Ramah cautions against placing any grain products in a place where there is a residue of moisture. if they are fed2and consume the food immediately, or if one places [the feed] before them and stands over them to ensure that the food will not stand3without any activity, as the Rambam continues more than the time it takes a person to walk a mil.4or 24 minutes, as explained in Halachah 13.As long as they peck at it or one turns it over by hand,5for, like dough (see Halachah 13), as long as it is agitated it will not become leavened. Once they finish eating, one should wash out the utensil in water and pour it out in a place which slopes downward.6as in Halachah 16. This halachah also applies only after chametz has become forbidden. Even the authorities who follow a more stringent view than the Rambam allow leniency before the prohibitions against possessing chametz take effect.
A woman should not soak bran which she intends to take to the bathhouse in water [beforehand].1The application of moist bran to skin renews the skin's natural moisture. Bran contains high quantities of Vitamin E and other natural cosmetics. However, she may rub dry bran on her skin.2even though her skin is moist with sweat, without fear of it becoming chametz (Rashi, Pesachim 39b). The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 465:2) forbids the practice entirely. A person should not chew wheat3for the spittle can cause the wheat to become leavened. and then place it on his wound,4as a poultice for it will become chametz.5Rabbenu Manoach notes that the Rambam writes (Hilchot Yesodai HaTorah 5:8) that, when there is danger to life or limb, it is permissible to use all substances as remedies, even if it is forbidden to benefit from them. That halachah specifically states that a sick person may be given chametz to eat as a remedy.Furthermore, that halachah explains that if the sick person does not benefit from the forbidden substance in the normal manner, it may be used as a remedy even if there is no danger to life or limb. The Rambam gives the example of including chametz in a compress.On that basis, Rabbenu Manoach questions why wheat cannot be used as a poultice as stated in our halachah. However, he resolves the issue by explaining that, in our case, the wheat would become chametz before it was applied to the wound.The Shulchan Aruch HaRav 466:5 (and the Mishnah Berurah) emphasize that it is permitted to use grain as a remedy for a wound only if there is a question of danger to life or limb. Furthermore, this leniency is qualified as follows:a) it must be an established medical fact that the remedy works;b) effort must be made to reduce the chance of the grain becoming leavened to the greatest extent possible (e.g., preparing grain by boiling it in fruit juice which does not become leavened).We should not place flour into charoset.6In his commentary on the Mishnah (Pesachim 10:3), the Rambam describes charoset as a mixture of dates, figs, spices, and vinegar. If one did so, he should burn it7The popular texts of the Mishneh Torah use the word ישפך - "pour it out." However, most of the original manuscripts state ישרף as in our text. This version implies that it is feared that the flour has already leavened and, hence, must be burnt. immediately,8as chametz because it will cause [the flour] to become leavened very fast.9In his commentary on the Mishnah (Pesachim 2:8), the Rambam explains that the vinegar in the charoset causes the flour to become leavened fast. We should not place flour in mustard.10The Ramah (Orach Chayim 464:1) states that Ashkenazic custom forbids the use of mustard on Pesach entirely, placing it in the category of kitniyot. If one did so, he should eat it immediately.11In contrast to other dips, the sharpness of mustard prevents the flour from leavening (Pri Chadash).
It is permissible to place spices,1Nevertheless, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 455:6) advises against placing spices in dough. The Ramah forbids matzah that was kneaded with pepper, maintaining that its sharpness causes the dough to become leavened. sesame seeds, poppy seeds,2The Shulchan Aruch HaRav explains that even the opinions which advise against using spices in matzah permit these substances to be used. They are not sharp and will not speed up the leavening process. and the like3Salt is not included in this category. The Shulchan Aruch (455:5) explicitly advises against placing salt into dough, and the Ramah considers matzah baked with salt as chametz. into dough.4for this mixture will not cause the dough to become chametz. In describing the meal offerings which cannot become leavened (Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 12:17), the Rambam also states that they may be seasoned in a similar manner.The Tosefta (Pesachim 2:13) and the Jerusalem Talmud (Pesachim 2:4) go further and state that such matzah may even be used at the Seder. Though some halachic authorities accept this opinion, the later authorities counsel against using such matzah on that occasion. Similarly, it is permissible to knead the dough with water and oil, honey or milk, or to baste with them.5This statement has raised controversy. In Halachah 2, when the Rambam described the use of מי פירות, he explained that they will not cause grain products to become leavened when used alone. However, if they are mixed with water, they can cause the grain products to become leavened. Indeed, the commentaries relate that the mixture of these liquids with water speeds up the leavening process.Therefore, the Ra'avad and other authorities question the leniency granted by the Rambam. In practice, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 462:2) advises against, but does not forbid, mixing these liquids with water. The Ramah (and accordingly, Ashkenazic custom) prohibits such a mixture entirely.It must be noted that the Maggid Mishneh's text of the Mishneh Torah substitutes the word יין (wine) for מים (water). According to such a rendition, there is no difficulty.On the first day,6more particularly, for the matzah used to fulfill the commandment of eating matzah on Pesach night; it is forbidden to knead or baste7even though basting the dough with other substances will not change its taste appreciably, the Rambam forbids this. See Or Sameach. [the matzot] with any other substance besides water;8Note the commentary on Halachah 6:5. not because of the prohibition against chametz,9for, as above, the dough will not necessarily become chametz, but rather so [the matzah] will be "poor man's bread."10Deuteronomy 16:3 states "For seven days eat matzah, poor man's bread." In contrast, dough mixed with these liquids is considered matzah ashirah, "rich matzah." It is only on the first day that the "poor man's bread" must be commemorated.11to recall the "poor man's bread" eaten by our ancestors when they were slaves in Egypt.
All earthenware vessels1In this and the following five halachot, the Rambam discusses how dishes and cooking utensils that were used for chametz during the entire year may be prepared for Passover use. It must be emphasized that in many communities, it is customary not to consider these options and to use separate sets of pots, dishes, and cutlery for the holiday. that were used for chametz while cold2Utensils absorb substances only when used together with both heat and liquid. Thus, in this instance, there is no fear that chametz is absorbed. Nevertheless, the utensil may3only be used for matzah while cold,4lest its use cause people to err and permit use of earthenware vessels that were used for chametz while hot (Maggid Mishneh). This safeguard was only instituted for earthenware vessels, since the chametz absorbed in substances of metal or wood may be purged through הגעלה.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 451:22) does not recognize this prohibition at all and allows such utensils to be used for matzah even when hot. However, this is merely from an abstract halachic perspective. In practice, that text continues to explain, Jews are accustomed not to use any earthenware utensils or dishes that had been previously used for chametz on Pesach. This custom was already accepted in the days of Rav Yitzchak Alfasi and Rabbenu Asher. except for the utensils5Leavening agents were placed directly in these utensils. Accordingly, even if they were made of other substances besides clay, more severe laws than usual apply regarding purging them from the chametz they absorbed. (See Magen Avraham 451:42.) in which yeast and charoset6This does not refer to the charoset used at the Seder, but to a similar mixture which was used throughout the entire year. The latter would frequently contain flour. were placed, for their leavening effect is powerful.7Yeast is a powerful leavening agent. Similarly, the vinegar in the charoset will cause leavening. Even though the utensil was cleaned thoroughly of these substances, we regard that some was absorbed in the utensil's walls and will have an effect on food placed within it on Pesach. Similarly, a kneading trough in which chametz is kneaded and left to become leavened is considered as a place where yeast is soaked, and we do not use it on Pesach.8lest the leavening agents that are absorbed cause the Matzah to become chametz.
An earthenware roasting pan on which loaves of chametz are baked during the entire year should not be used to bake matzah on Pesach.1The prohibition is obvious. It appears that this statement was included only as an introduction to the following halachah, which describes how such a utensil may be prepared for Pesach use. If it was filled with coals and kindled on the place2This practice, referred to as ליבון, burns up any chametz that may have been absorbed in the pan. where chametz was cooked, matzah it is permitted to be cooked on it.
Metal and stone utensils1In Hilchot Ma'acholot Asurot 17:3 and in his commentary on the Mishnah (Avodah Zarah 7:12), the Rambam equates glass utensils with those made of these substances. in which chametz was boiled in water as a כלי ראשון2The term כלי ראשון is a fundamental concept in the laws of kashrut and the laws of Shabbat. It refers to a pot or cooking vessel that was directly exposed to the heat of an oven or range. Such a pot is still considered as a כלי ראשון even after it has been removed from the cooking surface. - e.g., pots and stew pots3The Ramah (Orach Chayim 451:5) requires that the surface of the pot be smooth and free of nicks or cracks for this manner of purging to be effective. - should be placed inside a large utensil.4The process described below can be carried out only before chametz becomes forbidden. Once that prohibition takes effect, even the slightest amount of chametz can cause a larger mixture to be prohibited. (See Halachah 1:5.) Hence, were the process carried out at that time, the residue of chametz absorbed in the walls of the utensils would cause all the water to be considered as mixed with chametz. They should be covered with water, and the water should be boiled5The commentaries stress how the water must be bubbling because of the heat. with them inside6This process is referred to as הגעלה (purging) and is also used to prepare utensils that had been used for non-kosher food for kosher use. Thus, a similar description of this process is found in Hilchot Ma'achalot Asurot 17:4.The basic principle governing the kashering of utensils is כבולעו כך פולטו - "In the same manner as a [forbidden substance] is absorbed [by a utensil], so, too, is it released." Thus, since these utensils were used in hot water, the process of boiling is employed to cause them to release any chametz they might have absorbed. until they release [what they absorbed].7This phrase is taken from the halachot of Rav Yitzchak Alfasi. However, it is omitted in some of the Yemenite manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah. In practice, there is also debate about this issue. In his responsum, the Rashbah explains Rav Yitzchak Alfasi's view, stating that a person should leave the utensil submerged until he feels that all the absorbed chametz has been released. However, the Tur (Yoreh De'ah 121) and the Pri Chadash do not require waiting any substantial amount of time. Their view is accepted by the later authorities. (See Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Orach Chayim 452:4.) Afterwards, they should be washed off with cold water,8in order to cleanse them of any forbidden matter that might remain on their surface (Rabbenu Manoach). The source for this requirement is the description (Zevachim 97a) of the way the priests would purge the Temple pots used to cook the sin offerings after the previous day's service. Though some authorities do not require this stage, the Shulchan Aruch HaRav (452:5) states that it is customary to follow this practice. and [then] one may use them for matzah.9Hilchot Ma'achalot Asurot 17:7 states: "A person who acquires a knife from a gentile must burn it out in fire." A similar decision is rendered by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 121:7). Nevertheless, the authorities suggest that chametz may be purged from knives by boiling. However, they do not permit this leniency in the following instances:a) when the knives are rusty;b) when they have serrated edges;c) when the handle is separate from the blade and enclosed around it, allowing for the possibility for residue to collect between them.In the latter instance, even ליבון (exposing the knife to open fire) is insufficient. Since most knives today are made in this manner, they should not be kashered for Pesach or for ordinary use after having been used with prohibited foods. Both the Mishnah Berurah and the Shulchan Aruch HaRav state that purchasing new knives for Pesach is the most desirable manner of fulfilling the mitzvah.Similarly, [with regard to] knives, the blade and the handle should be boiled in a כלי ראשון.10as described above. Afterwards, one may use them for matzah.
Utensils of metal, stone, and wood which were used for chametz as a כלי שני1a utensil into which one pours water that had been cooked over a fire. - e.g., bowls or cups2can also be purged of chametz following the principle כבולעו כך פולטו - "In the same manner as a [forbidden substance] is absorbed [by a utensil], so, too, is it released." Thus, since these utensils absorbed chametz in a שני כלי, in order for them to release the chametz they absorbed, they - should be placed in a large utensil, and boiling water poured over them.3from a utensil that was heated on the fire. The Ramah (Orach Chayim 451:6) states that, at present, it is customary to boil all utensils on the fire itself (i.e., in a כלי ראשון), even though they were generally used as a כלי שני. They should be left in [the large utensil] until they release [the chametz they absorbed].4See the explanation of the similar phrase in the previous halachah. Afterwards, they should be washed off.5as explained in the previous halachah. [Then,] they may be used for matzah.
All earthenware utensils that were used for chametz in hot water,1In contrast to utensils made of other substances, the process of הגעלה cannot remove the forbidden matter absorbed in the walls of an earthenware vessel. Instead of all the absorbed matter being purged at once, it is released a small amount at a time, and there will always be a certain quantity of the previous substance contained in its walls.Pesachim 30b explains that this concept is derived from the Torah itself. Leviticus 6:21 states that any pot in which meat from a sin offering has been cooked must be broken. A sin offering can only be eaten for one day. Once that time has passed, the taste of the meat absorbed in the pot is considered as נותר (sacrificial meat which has been kept past its required time), and thus forbidden. Hence, the pot itself must be destroyed. whether as a2 כלי ראשון - for example, pots3or as a כלי שני - or as aכלי שני - for example, bowls4whether they were glazed and coated with lead so that they became like glass -- i.e., china. Based on these principles, the authorities have stated that china can never be kashered. However, they have suggested certain leniencies when the china is very expensive. - whether they were glazed and coated with lead so that they became like glass, or they were of simple earthenware:5As mentioned in Halachah 22, the Sages also forbade the use of ןוביל (exposing the utensil to fire), to remove chametz absorbed in most earthenware vessels, lest a person hesitate to expose them to the required heat out of fear that they would break. Thus, there is no way to prepare these utensils for Pesach use. Therefore, we do not use them for matzah.6There would be no halachic difficulty against using these dishes on Pesach for cold foods. Nevertheless, our Sages forbade their use entirely, lest a person err and use them for hot substances as well. Rather, we put them aside until after Pesach,7Though the taste of chametz is absorbed in the walls of these utensils, keeping them does not cause a person to violate the prohibition against possessing chametz on Pesach. Nevertheless, at present, when it is customary to sell chametz to gentiles, the Rabbis in charge of the sale usually sell this chametz as well. and then we may cook with them.8This line was added to negate the opinion of Rav (Pesachim 30a), who maintains that each Pesach, a person was required to destroy any earthenware vessels he possessed which were used for chametz while hot.
[A person possesses a utensil which is] a כלי ראשון and desires to boil it [in order to prepare it for Passover use],1and hence must be kashered by boiling water inside of it, as explained in Halachah 23. however, he cannot find a larger utensil into which [to place it] to boil it:2Thus, were he to boil water in the utensil itself, its entire top edge would not be exposed to the boiling water. Behold, he may place a border of clay around its [top] edge from the outside and fill it3the utensil with water until the water overflows its edge.4but is delayed in pouring out by the clay border. [Then,] he may boil the water in it, and this is sufficient.5for the entire utensil will have been exposed to the boiling water. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 452:6) offers an alternative suggestion. After boiling the water thoroughly, placing a very hot stone into the water will cause the water to flow over the edges of the utensil on all sides. Thus, the entire utensil will be exposed to the boiling water. Afterwards, he washes it off6with cold water, as explained in Halachah 23. and may use it for matzah.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
It is a positive commandment of the Torah to eat matzah on the night of the fifteenth [of Nisan], as [Exodus 12:18] states: "In the evening, you shall eat matzot." This applies in every place and at every time. Eating [matzah] is not dependent on the Paschal sacrifice. Rather, it is a mitzvah in its own right. The mitzvah may be fulfilled throughout the entire night.Throughout the other days of the festival, eating matzah is left to one's choice: If one desires, one may eat matzah. If one desires, one may eat rice, millet, roasted seeds, or fruit. Nevertheless, on the night of the fifteenth alone, [eating matzah] is an obligation. Once one eats the size of an olive, he has fulfilled his obligation.
A person who swallows matzah1gulping it down, without chewing or tasting it [without chewing it] fulfills his obligation.2for as long as the matzah touches his throat and is ingested, it has been eaten. Nevertheless, it is not desirable to fulfill one's obligation in this manner (Magen Avraham, Orach Chayim 475). A person who swallows maror3in the same manner [without chewing it] does not fulfill his obligation.4The Rashbam, Pesachim 115b explains that the maror was instituted to recall the bitterness with which the Egyptians afflicted our ancestors. Therefore, a person who does not taste that bitterness does not fulfill his obligation.Alternatively, certain texts of the Mishneh Torah (and Pesachim, ibid.) read "A person who swallows maror fulfills his obligation." The proponents of this text maintain that it is impossible to swallow a piece of maror the size of an olive without feeling some bitterness. Nevertheless, the Shulchan Aruch (475:3) quotes the former text. A person who swallows matzah and maror together fulfills the obligation of matzah,5as above. There is an added undesirable factor in eating matzah in this manner. Preferably, no other substances should be eaten with the matzah, so that only its taste will be sensed. (Indeed, were he to chew both the matzah and the maror, he would not fulfill his obligation (See Pesachim 115a). To insure that nothing negate the taste of the matzah, in many communities it is customary not to dip the matzah in salt when eating it at the seder). but not that of maror, for the maror is secondary to the matzah.6The Ra'avad raises a question, noting that the latter phrase is not an explanation why one does not fulfill the mitzvah of maror.The Maggid Mishneh explains that the Rambam's intention is to explain why the person fulfills the mitzvah of matzah. One might argue that the maror, like the fibers mentioned in the following clause, would prevent one from fulfilling the mitzvah of matzah. Therefore, the Rambam explains that "the maror is secondary..."It must be noted that according to the second version of the text mentioned above, the passage reads with no difficulty whatsoever. If he wrapped them in fibers or the like and swallowed them,7the matzah, maror, and fibers he does not even fulfill the obligation of matzah.8for unlike the maror, the fibers are considered as an interruption between the person's digestive system and the matzah. The fibers are placed in this category because they are not food in their own right. (A similar concept is stated in Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTum'ah 3:5.) In contrast, all other foods are considered secondary to the matzah and, hence not an interruption (Pri Chadash).
A person who eats matzah without the intention [to fulfill the mitzvah]1This halachah touches on a question left unresolved by the Talmud (see Pesachim 114b), and which has become a source of debate and discussion among the Rabbis in subsequent generations. Does a person who performs the deed of a mitzvah, without the intention to carry out God's command, fulfill his obligation, or not? - e.g., gentiles or thieves force him to eat2The source for the Rambam's statements is Rosh HaShanah 28a, which states that when "Persians force a person to eat matzah, he fulfills his obligation." - fulfills his obligation.3It appears that the Rambam does not require a person to have the intention to fulfill a mitzvah, for in this instance the only reason the person ate the matzah was the coercion of the gentiles. Nevertheless, the commentaries qualify the Rambam's statements, based on Hilchot Shofar 2:4:A person who occupies himself with blowing shofar to learn does not fulfill his obligation... one does not fulfill his obligation until both the person hearing [the shofar] and the one sounding it intend to fulfill the obligation.In resolution, the Maggid Mishneh states that to fulfill his obligation, the person being forced to eat the matzah must know that today is Pesach, that he is obligated to eat matzah, and that it is matzah which he is eating. Rabbenu Nissim, the Kessef Mishneh, and Rabbenu Manoach follow a different line of reasoning. They differentiate between eating matzah and hearing a shofar. In the former case, a person's body benefits from the activity regardless of his intention. To support this thesis, they draw a parallel to the following passage from Keritot 19b.Generally, the Torah frees a person from liability if he commits a transgression while being only מתעסק (performing a deed without any thought). However, a person who eats forbidden foods or engages in forbidden sexual relations in this manner is liable, because he derived pleasure from his activities.Similarly, in the present context, since the person derived physical satisfaction from eating the matzah, even though he was forced to do so, the action is attributed to him. In contrast, since his body did not benefit from hearing the shofar, he does not fulfill his obligation until he hears the shofar blown in the proper manner.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 475:4) quotes the Maggid Mishneh's opinion as regards halachah l'ma'aseh, and the Shulchan Aruch HaRav adds the explanation mentioned in the name of the Kessef Mishneh. (It must be noted that the Pri Chadash and other commentaries do not accept this decision). In Orach Chayim 589:8, the Shulchan Aruch quotes the Rambam's decision concerning blowing the shofar, stating that a מתעסק does not fulfill the mitzvah. Similar decisions are rendered concerning kriat shema (Orach Chayim 60) and lulav and etrog (Orach Chayim 651).A person who ate a כזית matzah in delirium, while possessed by an epileptic fit, and afterwards recovered,4This does not imply that he was necessarily healed of epilepsy entirely, but rather that the seizure was concluded and he was able to return to normal functioning. is obligated to eat another [כזית].5to fulfill the mitzvah because The consumption of [the first כזית] took place while he was free from the obligation to perform any mitzvot.6because he was not in control of himself. Thus, his actions in that state do not obligate him for any transgressions he violates, nor does he receive full credit for any mitzvot he performs.
A person does not fulfill the obligation of eating matzah unless he partakes [of matzah made] from one of the five species1wheat, rye, barley, oats, and spelt, as stated in Halachah 5:1. [of grain],2The Ramah (Orach Chayim 453:1) states that it is customary to use matzot made from wheat. as [Deuteronomy3In his commentary on the Mishnah (Challah 1:2), the Rambam cites two verses while explaining this principle: Exodus 12:18, "in the evening, you shall eat matzot" and the verse cited here. Similarly, certain manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah contain both verses. The fact that the mitzvah to eat matzah is derived from the verse in Exodus and not the verse in Deuteronomy tends to support the text which quotes both verses. However, Pesachim 35a, the source for the exegesis of this verse, only mentions one verse. 16:3] states: "Do not eat chametz upon it... eat matzot for seven days."[From the verse's association of chametz and matzah, we may derive:] substances which can become leavened4that would become leavened if left unattended for the required period. may be eaten as matzah to fulfill one's obligation.5as evident from the following halachah, the actual dough used to make the matzah need not have the potential to become leavened. However, the species of grain used as flour must be fit to become leavened. (See Lechem Mishneh, Halachah 5.) In contrast, other substances6e.g. rice, millet, and kitniyot - cannot be used to fulfill the obligation of matzah, for they can never become leavened -- rather they spoil, as stated in Halachah 5:1. - e.g., rice, millet, and kitniyot - cannot be used to fulfill the obligation of matzah, for they can never become leavened.
A person who makes dough from wheat and rice:1combining the two species in one matzah if it has the taste of grain,2Based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Challah 3:5), the Ramban and Rabbenu Asher maintain that as long as the matzah tastes of grain, one may fulfill one's requirement even though the amount of wheat flour is not sufficient to produce a כזית (size of an olive) of wheat flour in כדי אכילת פרס (a quantity equivalent in volume to three eggs according to the Rambam, two eggs according to other authorities; see the commentary on Halachah 1:6).They explain that when mixed with wheat, rice takes on the taste of the wheat to the point that its own flavor is not noticeable at all. Hence, there is no limit to the quantity of wheat required. In contrast, other kitniyot do not "accept" the flavor of wheat so easily (nor does rice "accept" the flavor of the other four species of grain). Hence, if they are mixed with wheat, there has to be a sufficient quantity of wheat (a כזית within פרס כדי אכילת) for one to fulfill his obligation.The Ra'avad and the Rashbah do not accept the principle explained by the Ramban, and require a כזית in פרס כדי אכילת even when a dough is made of rice and wheat. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 453:2) quotes the Rambam's words exactly. The commentaries infer that this implies acceptance of the Ramban's view. The later authorities quote the Ra'avad's opinion and suggest adhering to it, though theoretically, they find the Ramban's view more acceptable. one may fulfill his obligation with it.3as if it were made of wheat alone. Dough made as food for dogs:4In his commentary on the Mishnah (Challah 1:8), the Rambam describes this as coarse bread mixed together with bran. if the shepherds also eat from it,5and thus, it is also considered human food one may fulfill his obligation with it. If the shepherds do not eat from it,6and use it merely to feed the animals, it is not forbidden. Were it to be chametz, it would not be permitted to be used for that purpose since no benefit may be derived from chametz during Pesach. Nevertheless, one cannot fulfill his obligation7to eat matzah the first night of Pesach by eating it, for it is not watched for the sake of eating matzah.8as explained in Halachah 5:9, the matzah used to fulfill the mitzvah must be "watched" so that it does not become chametz. Furthermore, every stage of its preparation should be carried out with the intent that it be used to fulfill the mitzvah. Since this dough was made to be used only as food for dogs, surely this intent was lacking.Matzah that was kneaded with fruit juice,9Fruit juice itself will not cause flour to become leavened, as stated in Halachah 5:2; nevertheless, one may fulfill one's obligation with it on Pesach.10because the species of grain can become leavened. As mentioned above, it is Ashkenazic custom not to use such matzah on Pesach unless the person is incapable of eating ordinary matzah. However, [the dough] should not be kneaded with wine, oil, honey, or milk, because of the requirement for poor man's bread, as explained above.11in Halachah 5:20. There is a slight difficulty with this statement. The halachah cited states that only water should be used for the matzah. The Radbaz (Vol. III, Responsum 1074) states that only the four liquids mentioned here may not be used, for only they change the taste of the matzah appreciably. However, the Ra'avad and the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 462:1) forbid the use of matzah made with any liquid other than water for use at the seder. A person who kneaded [dough with one of these liquids] does not fulfill his obligation.12Pesachim 36a relates that Rabbi Yehoshua told his sons to make him matzah kneaded with milk throughout Pesach, except on the first night.One cannot fulfill his obligation with matzah made from thin bran or14It is abnormal to make bread from bran alone. Therefore, Challah need not be separated from such a loaf, nor may it be used for the mitzvah of matzah. See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 454:1. coarse13as mentioned above, there is a debate among the Rabbis which Hebrew term is appropriate to which type of bran. bran. However, one may knead flour together with its bran and make it into a loaf and fulfill one's obligation with it.15for then, the flour is considered of primary importance. Similarly, a loaf made with very fine flour16Pesachim 36b states "even if it is like King Solomon's matzah." is permitted, and a person may fulfill his obligation with it. We do not say: this is not poor man's bread.
[One may fulfill his obligation] with matzah baked in either an oven1as is usually done or a roasting pot.2as is occasionally the case. The dough is prepared as if for baking in an oven, and then placed in a roasting pot or frying pan. In his commentary on the Mishnah (Challah 1:6), the Rambam explains that even when bread is baked in this fashion, one is obligated to separate Challah. Hence, such a loaf is also considered as bread with regard to matzah. This applies whether the dough was stuck to the roasting pot and then the [pot] was heated,3The Rambam uses the word הרתיח, which is generally translated as "boiled." However, in this instance, all commentators agree that no water can be used. or whether the [pot] was heated and then the [dough] stuck to it.4In the latter instance, the Ra'avad agrees with the principle that such matzah is considered as bread and is able to be used for the mitzvah of matzah. However, he objects to this manner of preparation out of fear that perhaps the dough will become chametz. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 461:2) suggests adhering to his opinion. Even if the dough was baked in the ground, one may fulfill his obligation with it.5Berachot 38a describes the process of baking bread in a pit in the ground and states that one may use it as matzah for the seder.Similarly, even if the matzah was not thoroughly baked,6Within the context of this law, the Ramah (Orach Chayim 461:3) counsels against removing dough prematurely from the oven and then returning it. During the time it is outside the oven, it can become chametz. one may fulfill his obligation with it, provided strands of dough will not extend from it when broken.7פורסה usually means sliced. Our translation follows Rabbenu Manoach's commentary and Rashi, Pesachim 37a. A person8This law is relevant to a person who is old or sick and cannot eat the required amount (כזית) of matzah in the normal manner, as mentioned in Halachah 10. Nevertheless, its application is not solely restricted to these persons. None of the commentaries has placed any restrictions against healthy people fulfilling their obligation in this manner. (As mentioned in Halachah 5:5, some Ashkenazi authorities forbid soaking matzah in water after it has been baked.) may fulfill his obligation with a cake [of matzah]9which after being baked, has been soaked10As mentioned in Halachah 5:5, once matzah has been baked thoroughly, it will not become chametz even when exposed to water. [in other substances],11In his commentary on Pesachim 41a, the source for this law, Rashi allows one to soak matzah in cooked foods with a taste of their own. Similarly, Rabbenu Manoach mentions matzah dipped in wine. Nevertheless, the Ra'avad and others maintain that other foods would nullify the taste of matzah, and they permit soaking the matzah only in water. They draw support from the Rambam's statements in Halachah 10 and maintain that he also accepts this restriction.The Magen Avraham and the other Ashkenazic authorities favor the latter opinion. However, they do maintain that a sick person who could not eat a sufficient quantity of matzah soaked in water may soak his matzah in wine. so long as it has not dissolved.12at which point it would no longer be considered as bread, and the HaMotzi blessing would no longer be recited over it. However, a person cannot fulfill his obligation with matzah that has been cooked,13even if cooked in water alone, for it does not have the taste14or the form of bread.
A person cannot fulfill his obligation by eating matzah which is forbidden to him; for example, a person who ate [matzah made from] tevel,1produce from Eretz Yisrael from which the agricultural requirements — separation of the terumah (a portion given to priests), ma'aser rishon (the first tithe), and ma'aser sheni (the second tithe) — have not been fulfilled. [matzah made from] the first tithe from which terumat [ma'aser] had not been separated,2After receiving the tithe from the Israelites, the Levites were obligated to separate a second tithe, as commanded in Numbers 18:26. or [matzah] that was stolen.3The Jerusalem Talmud, Challah 1:9, states:Matzah that was stolen: one may not recite a blessing upon it. Rav Oshiah states: This is derived from Psalms 10:3: "The greedy's blessing revolts God."However, one might think this is true only in the beginning; ultimately (i.e., after eating the matzah), he is obligated to pay him money (and thus the matzah itself is no longer the property of the original owner.)Rabbi Yochanan states: "A mitzvah is not a sin." Rabbi Yossi states: "A sin is not a mitzvah." Rabbi Illa said: "Only when the mitzvot are performed as prescribed are they mitzvot."The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 454:4) quotes the Rambam's statements exactly. Nevertheless, Rabbi Akiva Eiger maintains that since the stolen object no longer belongs to the original owners once it has been eaten, one may fulfill the mitzvah of matzah in this manner. All authorities agree that a person who stole grain or flour can fulfill his obligation with matzah made from it.Rabbenu Manoach maintains that this instance is not dependent on the general rulings governing mitzvot performed with forbidden objects. Rather, Pesachim 38a draws an analogy between the mitzvot of matzah and Challah. Since there is an explicit teaching requiring a person to own the dough he uses for Challah, it thus follows that the matzah he uses must also be his undisputed property.This is the governing principle: All [matzah] upon which the grace after meals is recited4even though there are certain halachic difficulties regarding eating it, as explained in Hilchot Berachot 1:20. may be used to fulfill one's obligation.5to eat matzah on Pesach. If the grace after meals may not be recited upon it, it may not be used to fulfill one's obligation.6In Hilchot Berachot 1:19, the Rambam states: "Anyone who eats a forbidden food, whether intentionally or unintentionally, does not recite a blessing over it." This includes even foods prohibited by Rabbinic law alone.
The priests1and their households may fulfill their obligation with [matzot made from] Challah2Numbers 15:20 commands that a portion of every dough be separated and given to the priests. This portion of dough is called Challah and is governed by all the rules pertaining to Terumah. or terumah3Numbers 15:19, 18:12 commands that before tithes are given to the Levites, a certain portion of the grain should be separated and given to the priests. This portion, referred to as terumah, may be eaten only by the priests and their households. even though it is matzah which is not suited to be eaten by all people.4Thus, Israelites cannot fulfill their obligation by eating such matzah. Pesachim 35b states that matzot whose consumption involves any prohibition may not be used to fulfill the mitzvah of matzah. (See the previous halachah.) Similarly, a person may fulfill his obligation with matzah [made] from ma'aser sheni5Deuteronomy 14:22-23 commands: "Take a [second] tithe of all the crops... You must eat this before God, your Lord, in the place that He will choose (Jerusalem)." [if he is] in Jerusalem.6but not outside the holy city. It must be noted that certain Talmudic Sages do not accept this principle. The Rambam's statements follow the opinion of Rabbi Akiva, whose statements are generally accepted as halachah. However, one7a priest, for only the priests are allowed to partake of the bikkurim, may not fulfill his obligation with matzah made from bikkurim8Numbers 18:13 requires that the first fruits be given to the priests. Deuteronomy 26:2-10 explains more details of that obligation, among them that the first fruits must be taken to Jerusalem and given to the priests in the Temple. even [if he is] in Jerusalem.9and the wheat from which he made matzah had been properly given to him as bikkurim.[The difference is] because there is no permissible way of eating bikkurim in all [Jewish] settlements.10rather, they may be eaten only by the priests within the limits of Jerusalem. [In contrast,] ma'aser sheni can be redeemed and eaten in all [Jewish] settlements.11Deuteronomy 14:24-26 states:If the journey is too great for you... you may redeem this tithe in silver... which you can bring to the place God, your Lord, will choose. You may spend the money on anything you desire [to eat]...Thus the actual produce separated as ma'aser sheni need not be taken to Jerusalem, but may be eaten elsewhere. [Our Sages12Pesachim 36a interpreted Exodus 12:20,] which states: "Eat matzot in all of your settlements," [to imply that] only matzah that is fit to be eaten in all settlements may be used to fulfill one's obligation.13Thus, bikkurim are excluded, but not ma'aser sheni.
Loaves from the thanksgiving offering1as explained in Leviticus 7:12 and commentaries, the thanksgiving offering was accompanied by forty loaves of bread. Thirty were matzah, and thus were kosher for use on Pesach. and cakes from the Nazirite offering,2Numbers 6:15 specifies that a Nazirite must bring a basket of matzot as part of the sacrifices associated with the completion of his vow. which an individual made for his personal use,3i.e., to offer as a sacrifice. may not be used to fulfill one's obligation,4to eat matzah on Pesach night. [as can be implied] from the statement [Exodus 12:17]: "And you shall watch the matzot."5Halachah 5:9 states that this verse teaches that matzah must be prepared with the intention that it be used to fulfill the mitzvah of eating matzah. Pesachim 38b extends the scope of that requirement, stating: Matzah which is watched with the sole intention [that it be used to fulfill the mitzvah] of matzah may be used to fulfill one's obligation. However, this matzah6from the thanksgiving or Nazirite offerings is also watched with the intention of [being used for a] sacrifice.7Hence, it may not be used to fulfill the mitzvah of matzah. Those8matzot made for the thanksgiving or Nazirite offerings that were made to be sold in the marketplace,9for others to use [the baker] has the intention that if they are not sold, he will eat them. Therefore, while he was making them10implicit in his intention was that he [also] watched for the sake of matzah.11Therefore, they may be used to fulfill the mitzvah of matzah.Rabbenu Manoach and other commentators note that the matzot for these sacrifices would have to be prepared before the thirteenth of Nisan. (A thanksgiving sacrifice could not be brought on the fourteenth, because of the ten breads that were chametz.) From this, he draws support for the practice of preparing matzot before Pesach, even though the common custom in his day was to bake them on the afternoon of the fourteenth. The need to find support for this practice may seem strange for members of many communities today whose matzot may be prepared in the heart of winter.
All are obligated to [fulfill the mitzvah to] eat matzah,1As mentioned above, the Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 10) notes that even though the Torah restricted an uncircumcised person or someone who is impure from bringing a Paschal sacrifice, they must partake of matzah on Pesach night. even women and slaves.2Though these individuals are usually relieved of the observance of mitzvot limited to a specific time, Pesachim 43b makes an exception in this case. Deuteronomy 16:3 states: "Do not eat chametz upon it... eat matzot for seven days," establishing an analogy between the two mitzvot. Since women are obligated to fulfill the prohibition against eating chametz (for they are liable for the observance of all the Torah's prohibitions), they must also fulfill the positive commandment of eating matzah. A minor [old enough to eat bread] should be trained in [the fulfillment of] mitzvot3From the Rambam's phraseology, we learn that the mitzvah of training one's children to fulfill mitzvot is incumbent upon the parents. Neither the Torah nor the Sages placed any responsibilities on the children themselves. Rather, the parents are charged with teaching their children to follow the Torah's guidelines (Kessef Mishneh). and be given an olive's size of matzah4the same measure given an adult. to eat. [For] a sick or elderly person who cannot eat,5a full כזית of matzah in any other fashion, we can soak a cake [of matzah] in water and feed it to him, provided it does not dissolve.6See Halachah 6 and commentary.
It is a Rabbinic ordinance that nothing at all is eaten after the matzah,1As explained in Halachah 8:9, the Rambam is referring to the afikoman, which was instituted in place of the Paschal sacrifice. not even roasted seeds, nuts, or the like.2The Mishnah (Pesachim 119b) states: "No afikoman is served after the Paschal sacrifice." In his commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam defines afikoman as "fruits served as dessert after the meal, such as roasted seeds, figs, raisins, almonds, and the like." Rather, even though one ate matzah3to begin one's meal and to fulfill the mitzvah of eating matzah and afterwards, ate other foods, fruit, and the like,4in the course of the meal one returns and eats a second olive's size of matzah at the end [of the meal]5as the afikoman and ceases [eating].6so that the taste of the matzah will remain in one's mouth. See Halachah 8:9.
The Sages forbade a person from eating matzah1This applies only to matzah that is fit to be used at the Seder. However, matzah that is made with wine, oil, or honey may not be used to fulfill the mitzvah, and hence may be eaten at this time. (As mentioned above, such matzah is generally not eaten in the Ashkenazic community.) on Pesach eve,2the fourteenth of Nisan. Some authorities explain that this prohibition only applies from midday, the time when chametz becomes forbidden. However, the Rambam appears to consider the prohibition as applying during the entire day (Maggid Mishneh). in order for there to be a distinction between [partaking of it as food] and eating it on the evening [of the fifteen as a mitzvah.]3The Jerusalem Talmud (Pesachim 10:1) states that a person who eats matzah on the day before Pesach can be compared to a man who has relations with his betrothed in her father's house before the wedding. Whoever eats matzah on Pesach eve is given "stripes for rebellion"4מכת מרדות, the punishment given those who break a Rabbinic commandment. The Jerusalem Talmud (ibid.) explains that such a punishment is given to a man who acts immodestly with his betrothed. Hence, it is appropriate that a person who eats matzah on Pesach eve be given a similar penalty. until his soul expires.5This phrase has provoked much controversy among the commentators. The Tashbaytz (Vol. II, Responsum 51) states:This is a wondrous statement... If the intention is that after he eats, he should be beaten... a Rabbinic prohibition will be punished more severely than a Torah prohibition... for such a penalty is not found with regard to a Torah prohibition.Indeed, some commentaries advise striking this phrase from the text, maintaining that it was a later addition which was not made by the Rambam himself. Nevertheless, Rabbenu Manoach justifies this phrase, explaining that it refers to a situation where a person obstinately refuses to accept the prohibition. As long as he does not promise to obey the Sages' decree, the authorities must continue administering punishment.Similarly, it is forbidden to eat6a meal with matzah (even matzah kneaded with wine, which is not included in the prohibition mentioned above) on Pesach evening from slightly before the time of Minchah,7The Sages defined this time as nine hours after the beginning of the day. (The time of Minchah is nine and a half hours after the beginning of the day.) in order that one will approach eating matzah with appetite. However, one may eat some fruit or vegetables,8or other similar foods that do not satiate one's appetite but should not fill up on them.9for then, one will not eat the matzah with relish.The Sages of the former generations would starve themselves on Pesach eve10Pesachim 108a relates that Rav Sheshet would fast the entire day even though he was not a firstborn. so that they would eat matzah with appetite, and thus hold the mitzvot as dear. In contrast, on the eve of Sabbaths or other festivals,11The Rambam's statements require some explanation: In Hilchot Yom Tov 6:16, the Rambam states:It is proper for a person not to dine on the day before a festival from the time of Minchah onward, as on the day before the Sabbath.The latter phrase is a reference to Hilchot Shabbat 30:4, which states:A person may eat and drink [on Friday] until nightfall. Nevertheless, as part of the honor given to the Shabbat, a person should refrain from scheduling a meal from the time of Minchah onward.Thus, on the day before the Sabbath and other festivals, a person should not schedule an important meal. However, he may partake of a casual meal and continue eating. On Pesach, even the latter is forbidden. one may continue eating until darkness.12at which time one is required to cease eating. However, a person who desires to continue eating may cover his food with a cloth, recite Kiddush, and return to his meal, as explained in Hilchot Shabbat 29:12.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
It is a positive commandment of the Torah1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 157), Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 21) to relate2Hilchot Kri'at Shema 1:3 mentions that it is a mitzvah to recall the Exodus from Egypt twice daily. The Rambam makes no further mention of that mitzvah in the Mishneh Torah, nor does he mention it in Sefer HaMitzvot. There is a basic difference between these two obligations. Throughout the year, a brief recollection is all that is required. On Pesach night, we must elaborate, relating the entire story of the Exodus. the miracles and wonders wrought for our ancestors in Egypt on the night3In Sefer HaMitzvot (ibid.), the Rambam states "the beginning of the night," implying that we should begin telling the story of the Exodus in the first portion of the night. of the fifteenth of Nisan,4the night of the plague of the firstborn, when Pharaoh gave the Jews permission to leave Egypt. as [Exodus 13:3] states: "Remember this day,5the fifteenth of Nisan on which you left Egypt,"6implying that we are commanded to commemorate the day of the Exodus. just as [Exodus 20:8] states: "Remember the Sabbath7This addition is a quote from the Mechiltah and Shemot Rabbah. Nevertheless, the commentators have questioned its necessity. Some explain that the word זכור does not follow the grammatical form usually used for commandments, and hence the comparison with the Sabbath is valuable.Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 21, explains that Shemot Rabbah states that the remembrance of the Sabbath is זכר למעשה בראשית, "a commemoration of the work of creation." The remembrance of the exodus, it continues, must also emphasize the wonders and miracles that God performed.What is the common point between the Sabbath and the exodus? Both emphasize how God is above nature and, hence, can change nature according to His will.This quality is also reflected in our service. At the very beginning of Hilchot Shabbat, the Rambam emphasizes how the observance of the Sabbath is connected with a positive mitzvah: rest. A Jew steps beyond his weekday activities and devotes his energies to spiritual activites bond with God.Similarly, the recollection of the exodus from Egypt must take us beyond our everyday activities to the extent that as stated in Halachah 7:6 "He presents himself as if he, himself, is leaving the slavery of Egypt." day."From where [is it derived that this mitzvah is to be fulfilled on] the night of the fifteenth? The Torah teaches [Exodus 13:8]: "And you shall tell your son on that day,8relating the story of the Exodus saying: 'It is because of this...'9The Mechiltah interprets this as a reference to matzah and maror. Thus, the verse is [implying that the mitzvah10of relating the story of the exile is to be fulfilled] when matzah and maror are placed before you.11i.e., on the night of the fifteenth of Nisan, when it is a mitzvah to eat matzah, as explained in Halachah 6:1.[The mitzvah applies] even though one does not have a son.12This clause is necessary because from the expression "and you shall tell your son," one might imply that the mitzvah only applies to a person with children. Even great Sages are obligated to tell about the Exodus from Egypt.13to quote the Haggadah: "Even if we are all wise, all men of understanding, all Sages, all knowledgeable about the Torah, it is a mitzvah incumbent upon us to relate the Exodus from Egypt." Many commentaries explain that the story the Haggadah quotes concerning Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Yehoshua, and the other Sages is brought to demonstrate and prove this point. Whoever elaborates concerning the events which occurred and took place is worthy of praise.14Sefer HaMitzvot (ibid.) praises: "Whoever adds further statements and elaborates more on the greatness of what God did for us and the wickedness and violence with which the Egyptians treated us, and how God took His revenge upon them..."
It is a mitzvah to inform one's sons even though they do not ask, as [Exodus 13:8] states: "You shall tell your son."A1Though Exodus 13:14 states: "And it shall come to pass that your son will ask you:...," the verse quoted demonstrates that the father's explanations need not necessarily come in response to his son's questions (Mechiltah d'Rashbi). father should teach his son according to the son's knowledge:2Commenting on this statement, the Ramah (Orach Chayim 473:6) relates that if a person's family is unable to understand the Haggadah in Hebrew, he should translate it into a language they do understand. How is this applied? If the son is young or foolish, he should tell him: "My son, in Egypt, we were all slaves like this maidservant or this slave. On this night, the Holy One, Blessed be He, redeemed us and took us out to freedom."If3To this author's knowledge, this phraseology is the Rambam's original choice of words. He attempts to provide us with an easily applicable example of how to fulfill this mitzvah. the son is older and wise, he should inform him what happened to us in Egypt and the miracles wrought for us by Moses, our teacher;4The Haggadah (based on the Mechiltah) also explains that a wise son should be taught the halachot of Pesach. everything according to the son's knowledge.5The latter phrase, a quote from Pesachim 116a, is interpreted differently by some other commentators. They maintain that the father teaches the son how to ask relevant questions, whose nature depends on the son's ability to understand. The Shulchan Aruch HaRav (473:40,42) combines both these interpretations.
He1the father or person conducting the seder should make changes on this night so that the children will see2have their curiosity piqued and will3thus, remain awake and [be motivated to] ask: "Why is this night different from all other nights?"4The question מה נשתנה and, similarly, three of the four questions asked by the children are mentioned in the Mishnah, Pesachim 116a. until he replies to them: "This and this occurred; this and this took5relating the story of the Exodus by reciting the Haggadah. place."What changes should be made? He should give them roasted seeds and nuts;6Pesachim 109a notes that Rabbi Akiva would follow this practice. the table should be taken away before they eat;7Pesachim 115b relates that one Pesach, Abaye was sitting before Rabbah, and the latter suddenly picked up the table as if he had finished eating. Abaye exclaimed: "We have not begun to eat and you have already picked up the table!" (See also Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 473:6. See Halachah 8:2.) matzot should be snatched from each other8The Rambam's statements are quoted from Pesachim 109a. However, Rashi, the Ra'avad, and others interpret חוטפים מצות to mean that the matzot are eaten hurriedly. The Rambam's interpretation is the source for the custom of stealing matzah at the Seder. and the like.9The custom of pouring the second cup of wine directly after reciting הא לחמה עניא is cited by the Shulchan Aruch (ibid.:7) as another practice instituted to arouse curiosity.When a person does not have a son, his wife should ask him.10The Sages stressed that the Haggadah should be recited as a response to questions. We show greater interest in learning about a subject when questions have first been raised in our minds. If he does not have a wife, [he and a colleague] should ask each other: "Why is this night different?" This applies even if they are all wise.11as mentioned in the previous halachah. A person who is alone should ask himself: "Why is this night different?"12Since the question and answer approach is the most desirable way to recite the Haggadah, everyone must follow this pattern, even if he must ask himself the questions.
One must begin [the narrative describing our ancestors'] base [roots] and conclude with [their] praise.1This principle is taken from the Mishnah, Pesachim 116a. The commentaries offer several rationales in its explanation. Among them:a) The contrast between our nation's humble roots and the majestic level they reached through the Exodus make us more conscious of God's great kindness (Tosefot Rid).b) Mention of our roots prevents us from becoming overly haughty (Maharshah). What does this imply? One begins relating how originally, in the age of Terach,2Abraham's father our ancestors denied [God's existence]3The Rambam is alluding to the passage "Originally, our ancestors were idol-worshipers." and strayed after vanity, pursuing idol worship.4See Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 1:1-3. One concludes with the true faith:5The redemption from Egypt representing the birth of the Jews as a nation and the beginning of their service of God as a people. how the Omnipresent has drawn us close to Him, separated us from the gentiles, and drawn us near to His Oneness.6by giving us the Torah.Similarly, one begins by stating that we were slaves to Pharaoh in Egypt and [describing] all the evil done to us,7The Rambam's statements are based on Pesachim 116a, which mentions a debate between Rav and Shmuel concerning the interpretation of "One must begin [the narrative describing our ancestors'] base [roots] and conclude with [their] praise."Rav maintains that it is proper to begin from "Originally, our ancestors were worshipers of idols," placing the emphasis on our degrading spiritual roots. Shmuel (according to the Maggid Mishneh, Ravvah) maintains that we should begin from "We were slaves to Pharaoh, stressing the humble material origins from which our people stem. Customarily, we follow both opinions in our recitation of the Haggadah (Rav Yitzchak Alfasi), and hence the Rambam includes both opinions in this halachah.There is, nonetheless, a certain difficulty with the Rambam's statements. All texts of the Haggadah begin with "We were slaves," and then relate the passage "Originally, our ancestors were idol worshipers." Here, the Rambam reverses that order. Perhaps he made this choice because the Talmud uses this order when mentioning these two opinions. Alternatively, chronologically, our ancestors' worship of idols preceded the Egyptian exile. and concludes with the miracles and wonders that were wrought upon us, and our freedom.8relating the story of the Exodus.This [implies] that one should extrapolate9bringing other verses to explain and clarify the statements of this passage as found in the Haggadah. [the passage beginning] from [Deuteronomy 26:5]: "An Aramean sought to destroy my ancestor..."10This passage served as the statement of thanksgiving recited by the farmers bringing bikkurim (the first fruits) to the Temple. The Mishnah (Pesachim 116a) mentions that it was instituted as the basis of the Haggadah. until one concludes the entire passage.11i.e., until Deuteronomy 26:8. Whoever adds and extends his extrapolation12beyond the accepted text of this passage is praiseworthy.
Whoever does not mention these three matters on the night of the fifteenth has not fulfilled his obligation. They are: the Paschal sacrifice, matzah, and maror.The Paschal sacrifice: [It is eaten] because the Omnipresent passed over the houses of our ancestors in Egypt as [Exodus 12:27] states: "And you shall say: 'It is the Paschal sacrifice to God.'The bitter herbs: [They are eaten] because the Egyptians embittered the lives of our ancestors in Egypt.The matzah: [It is eaten] because of the redemption. These statements are all referred to as the Haggadah.
In each and every generation, a person must present himself1Pesachim 116b explains that the mitzvah of relating the story of the Exodus cannot remain on the intellectual level alone. Rather, it must affect a person to the extent that he personally feels that he is leaving Egypt.There is a slight difficulty with the Rambam's statements. Pesachim (ibid.), the commonly accepted text of the Haggadah, and even the Rambam's own text of the Haggadah, read לראות (see himself), and not להראות (present himself) — i.e., show others that he feels this way. Why does the Rambam alter the text here?Likkutei Sichot, Vol. XII, notes that the following halachot emphasize how the obligation of recalling the Exodus applies, not only to the recitation of the Haggadah, but to all the practices performed on Pesach. Since we must recite the Haggadah to others, as implied by the question-and-answer approach required by Halachah 3, the manner in which a person performs all the other Passover practices must also demonstrate to others his personal experience of the Exodus. as if he, himself, has now2the words, "himself" and "now" are also additions to the Mishnah. left the slavery of Egypt,3Here, also, the Rambam alters the text, adding the words "the slavery." Since the Rambam is addressing people who may never have seen the physical land of Egypt, it is not possible to demand that they feel as if they left that country, but rather, that they left backbreaking slavery as experienced by our people in Egypt. as [Deuteronomy 6:23] states: "He took4This and the verse quoted below were stated forty years after the redemption from Egypt, to the Jews who were prepared to enter Eretz Yisrael. They had not tasted Egyptian slavery. us out from there."5This verse is quoted by Ravvah, Pesachim 116b. However, the Mishnah (and our text of the Haggadah) derive this concept from Exodus 13:8: "And you shall tell your son...: 'It is because of this, that God acted for me ...' Nevertheless, the Rambam's text of the Mishnah and the Haggadah do not include that verse. Regarding this manner, God commanded in the Torah: "Remember that you were a slave [Deuteronomy 5:15]"6It is necessary to quote this verse in addition to the one mentioned previously. The previous verse teaches us that the redemption from Egypt is a continuous activity, affecting us at present as well. This verse emphasizes that we are obligated to recognize and recall that fact. - i.e., as if you, yourself,7even though physically, you did not experience this slavery. were a slave and went out to freedom and were redeemed.
Therefore, when a person feasts on this night,1The meal served at the Seder should be festive. The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 472:2, states that a person should set the table with the most attractive utensils he can afford. he must eat and drink2The Talmud mentions two practices as characteristic of freedom: reclining and drinking four cups of wine. The Rambam mentions the general principles applying to these obligations in this halachah, and explains each of the practices in particular in the following halachot. while he is reclining3on couches in the manner of free men.4In his commentary on the Mishnah (Pesachim 10:1), the Rambam relates that this was the practice of "kings and great people."The commentaries quote the Rambam's expression as a proof that reclining (הסיבה) is not merely a particular law, describing the manner in which the matzah and the four cups of wine must be eaten and drunk, but rather a unique requirement on its own. Therefore, as explained in the following halachah, it is praiseworthy for a person to eat the entire Seder meal while reclining. Each and every one,5Even a person who has difficulty drinking wine must observe this practice. Nedarim 49b relates that Rabbi Yehudah bar Illai would have to bind his sides from Pesach to Shavuot because of the aftereffects of the four cups of wine he drank at the Seder. Nevertheless, each year he fulfilled the mitzvah. both men and women,6Generally, woman are not bound to fulfill any mitzvot that have a specific time limitation. However, an exception to this principle is made regarding the mitzvot associated with the Seder night. Since the women had a full share in the miracles of the Exodus - indeed, Sotah 11b states that the redemption came about because of their merit - they must participate fully in the commemoration of the Exodus (Pesachim 108b).It is curious that the Rambam does not mention whether wine should be given to children below Bar-Mitzvah age. Many authorities maintain that it is unnecessary for the Rambam to mention this fact, for we can assume that the all-encompassing obligation to educate one's children in Torah practice applies in this regard as well. (See Shulchan Aruch 472:15 and Shulchan Aruch HaRav 472:25)Other commentaries, however, maintain that the omission is significant. They note that in Hilchot De'ot 4:12, the Rambam writes that wine is harmful to young children. Hence, they maintain, the Rabbis would not require a father to train his children in Torah practice at the expense of their health. must drink four7The Jerusalem Talmud, Pesachim 10:1 explains that these four cups of wine are associated with the four promises of redemption given to the Jews in Egypt (Exodus 6:6-7). Alternatively, it is suggested that they refer to:the four cups mentioned in the narrative of Pharaoh's butler;the four exiles in which the Jews will suffer;the four cups of retribution God will force the gentiles to drink in the Messianic age; and,the four cups of consolation He will offer to the Jews after their redemption.In Halachah 8:10, the Rambam also mentions a fifth cup of wine. See the commentary on that halachah. cups of wine8Most halachic authorities require that this wine have some alcoholic content. Hence, grape juice alone should not be used. on this night. [This number] should not be reduced.9However, during certain portions of the Seder, it is possible to drink additional cups of wine. Even a poor person who is sustained by charity should not have fewer than four cups.10Just as the Jewish community must supply him with his physical needs, they must also provide him with the necessities required to fulfill his halachic obligations. The size of each of these cups11i.e., the amount of liquid they must contain should be a quarter [of a log].12There is some controversy about the conversion of that figure into modern measure. The most commonly accepted figure is 3.35 fluid ounces. Some authorities require even larger cups.
Even one of Israel's poor should not eat until he [can] recline.1The word "even" is used to include people who one would presume would not be obligated. Tosefot, Pesachim 99b, explains that it obligates even a poor person who cannot afford a couch or pillows to lean on. He also must try to recline to the best of his ability - e.g., leaning on a colleague's side. See Magen Avraham, Orach Chayim 472:3. A woman need not recline.2Rabbenu Manoach and other commentators explain that this refers only to a woman in the presence of her husband. The Sh'eltot d'Rav Achai (Tzav 77) states that it applies to all women, since women do not generally recline. If she is an important woman, she must recline.3The Ramah, Orach Chayim 472:4, and other Ashkenazic authorities write: "All our women are considered important. Nevertheless, it is not customary for them to recline." [Even] a son in the presence of his father or an attendant in the presence of his master must recline.4A son is obligated to honor his father, and thus it would not be respectful to recline in his presence. However, we may assume that the father foregoes his honor in this regard. This applies even if the father is also his tutor in Torah studies.Though an attendant is bound to fulfill the duties required of him by his master, the obligations required of him by God take precedence. However, a student before his teacher5i.e., one who teaches him Torah should not recline6for a person's fear of his teacher must parallel his fear of God (Pesachim 22b). unless his teacher grants him permission.7Should he desire to do so, a teacher may forego the honor due him. In such an instance, a student must recline.Reclining on one's right side is not considered reclining.8This refers to a right-handed person. Since he must eat with his right hand, it would be uncomfortable for him to recline on that side (Rashbam, Pesachim 108a). Alternatively, this refers to all people for reclining in this manner is dangerous, lest the food go down the windpipe rather than the esophagus (Ramah 472:3). Neither is reclining on one's back or forwards.9Pesachim 108a explains that פרקדן is not considered as a desirable manner of reclining. Most commentaries explain that refers only to leaning on one's back. However, even leaning forward is not acceptable, since this is not a comfortable manner of eating and cannot be regarded as a symbol of freedom and liberation.10When must one recline? when eating the כזית11At present, this obligation applies also to eating the korech (sandwich of matzah and maror) and the afikoman. When must one recline? when eating the כזית of matzah and when drinking these four cups of wine.12for these were ordained particularly to celebrate the redemption from Egypt.The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 472:7, writes that a person who ate matzah or drank from the four cups of wine without reclining is not considered to have fulfilled his obligation and must repeat the act.The Ramah qualifies this law, explaining that since, in the Ashkenazic community, certain opinions do not require reclining at present, one need not drink another cup of wine if the third and fourth cups of wine were drunk without reclining. However, he suggests that a person repeat the eating of matzah and the drinking of the first two cups of wine if they were consumed without reclining. The Magen Avraham (and the subsequent authorities) declare that the drinking of the first cup should also not be repeated. While eating and drinking at other times:13during the Seder meal if one reclines, it is praiseworthy;14for, as mentioned in the previous halachah, reclining is one of the signs of freedom and liberation, and thus, has an importance of its own, independent of its connection to the eating of matzah and the drinking of the four cups of wine. if not, there is no requirement.15for, in particular, reclining was obligated only for those acts that were specifically instituted as symbols of our liberation. One should not recline while eating the maror, for it was ordained as a remembrance of our people's oppression and not of their liberation (Pesachim 108a).
These four cups [of wine] should be mixed with water so that drinking them will be pleasant.1In Talmudic times, the wines were very strong and had to be mixed with water before being drunk. At present, most commercially produced wines have already been diluted with water. Nevertheless, in many communities, it is customary to mix a small amount of water with the wine when pouring the cup, to fulfill the obligation of mixing the wine with water oneself. [The degree to which they are mixed] all depends on2the strength of the wine and the preference of the person drinking.3Nevertheless, the Sages placed some limits on the extent to which wine may be diluted. [Together,] these four [cups] should contain at least a quarter [of a log] of pure wine.4i.e., the sum total of pure wine contained in all four cups must be at least a quarter of a log at least 3.35 fluid ounces, as explained above. A person may thus add three times this quantity of water to the wine to produce four cups, each containing a quarter of a log of mixed wine.We may not dilute the wine any further. Shabbat 77a states: "Any wine that is less than a third of the quantity of the water [mixed in] is not considered wine."This factor is significant at present, when the wines commercially produced are substantially diluted with water in the factories. Hence, when adding water to them at the table, one must take care not to exceed the above limits. A person who drank these four cups from wine which was not mixed [with water]5In Hilchot Mamrim 7:4, the Rambam writes that drinking wine in this manner is considered as an accidental occurrence, and no one, not even a glutton, will continue doing this. has fulfilled the obligation to drink four cups of wine, but has not fulfilled the obligation to do so in a manner expressive of freedom.6i.e., he has not fulfilled the mitzvah in its proper manner. However, as stated above, at present many commentaries do not require further dilution with water.A person who drank these four cups of wine mixed [with water] at one time7without waiting to drink them as prescribed in the Haggadah has fulfilled the obligation to drink wine in a manner expressive of freedom, but has not fulfilled the obligation of four cups of wine.8The Rabbis ordained that the cups be drunk in the prescribed order. (Note the following halachah.) A person who does not drink them in this order does not fulfill his obligation.A person who drank the majority [of the cup] from each of these [four] cups has fulfilled his obligation.9The Taz (472:7) explains that it is desirable for a person to drink the entire cup of wine if possible. Accordingly, the Magen Avraham suggests using smaller cups, so that it is easy to drink the entire contents. Some opinions maintain that even if a person is using a very large cup, he is obligated to drink the majority of the cup. However, the prevailing opinion (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 472:19) is that for the first three cups, it is sufficient to drink the majority of a quarter of a log (i.e., at least 1.68 fluid ounces of wine). For the final cup, one should drink an entire quarter of a log.The source of the latter law is Pesachim 108a, which mentions a person who drinks wine from his cup and then gives to his children and the members of his household. The Talmud concludes that he fulfills his obligation if he drinks the majority of the cup. The Rambam quotes only the conclusion of this statement, for he maintains that all adult members of the household, both men and women, should be given their own cups of wine and he does not mention the obligation of giving wine to children. (See Halachah 7.)
On each of these four cups, one recites a blessing of its own.1i.e., one recites the blessing בורא פרי הגפן, blessing God for creating wine, before partaking of each cup of wine. Generally, when one continues drinking wine in one sitting, only one blessing is recited in the beginning. However, in this instance, since each of the four cups was ordained as a specific mitzvah, it requires a blessing of its own.The Ma'aseh Rokeach quotes Rav Avraham, the Rambam's son, as stating that after each of the four cups, his father also required the recitation of the blessing על הגפן (the blessing recited after drinking wine). Nevertheless, both Sephardic and Ashkenazic custom today is to recite על הגפן only once, at the end of the Seder (Ramah 474:1). In addition:2each of the four cups is associated with another blessing(s).On the first cup, one recites the kiddush pertaining to the day;On3as on every Sabbath and festival, as stated in Halachah 8:1. the second cup, one reads the Haggadah;On4and concludes with the blessing אשר גאלנו, which praises God for redeeming us, as stated in Halachah 8:5. the third cup, one recites the grace after meals;On5which, throughout the year, should be recited over a cup of wine, as the Rambam writes in Hilchot Berachot 7:14 and as stated in Halachah 8:10 below. the fourth cup, one concludes the Hallel6which is begun before partaking of the meal, as stated in Halachah 8:5. and recites the blessing for songs [of praise].7i.e., the blessing יהללוך, generally recited after the Hallel, as stated in Halachah 8:10.Between these cups, should one desire to drink, one may.8However, the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 473:3, recommends not drinking between the first and second cups. The Darchei Mosheh states that this is the accepted Ashkenazic custom. See also Mishnah Berurah 473:13-15.No restrictions are placed on drinking between the second and third cups, since this is the time of the Seder meal. Between the third and the fourth cup, one should not drink.
The charoset is a mitzvah ordained by the words of the Sages,1This statement represents a change of opinion by the Rambam. Pesachim 10:3 states: "The charoset is not a mitzvah. Rabbi Eliezer ben Tzadok declares: 'It is a mitzvah.' In his commentary on that Mishnah, the Rambam writes:According to Rabbi Eliezer ben Tzadok, who maintains that charoset is a mitzvah, one is obligated to recite a blessing "...who sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us regarding the eating of charoset." This is not the halachah.A change of opinion of this nature is not extremely uncommon. However, the question can be raised: why does the Rambam not require a blessing to be recited over the charoset? Among the answers given is that the charoset is considered secondary (טפל) to the substances which are dipped in it. Hence, we follow the principle of reciting a blessing upon the essential item (the maror or the matzah) and not on the charoset (Lechem Mishneh). to commemorate the clay2i.e., mortar. Pesachim 116a offers a second opinion: "to commemorate the apple trees" - i.e., the manner in which the Jewish women made themselves attractive to their husbands and convinced them to continue rearing children. They would then hide in the apple orchards and give birth to their children without difficulty (Rashbam). with which [our forefathers] worked in Egypt.3making bricks. How is it made?We take dates, dried figs, or raisins and the like, and crush them,4The Shulchan Aruch HaRav (473:32) suggests using apples, nuts, or pomegranates and fruits used as metaphors for the Jewish people in the Bible. add vinegar to them,5The Ramah (473:5) suggests using red wine to recall the Jewish blood spilled by the Egyptians. and mix them with spices,6ginger or cinnamon (However, in certain communities, it is customary not to use these spices on Pesach). Pesachim (ibid.) quotes Rabbi Eliezer ben Tzadok as saying "the spice-merchants of Jerusalem would call out: 'Come and get spices for the mitzvah.' as clay is mixed into straw.7to commemorate the making of bricks. This is placed on the table8according to our custom, on the Seder plate on [the first two] nights of Pesach.
According to the Torah, the eating of bitter herbs is not a mitzvah in its own right,1In contrast to matzah, concerning which there is a separate commandment (Exodus 12:18 : "On that evening, eat matzot," there is no specific Biblical commandment to eat bitter herbs alone.Rav Chayim Soloveitchik explains that, accordingly, when eating the maror together with the Paschal sacrifice, there is no obligation to eat aכזית. That measure is required only according to the Sages, who established a separate mitzvah to eat maror. Therefore, as in all other cases where eating is required, one must consume a כזית. However, since there is no Torah mitzvah to eat maror, merely that one should use it to embellish the Paschal sacrifice, that measure is not required by the Torah.[Perhaps, this thesis may be questioned on the basis of Halachah 8:6, which requires a separate blessing for maror when it is eaten alone. As in Halachah 8:2, a blessing would not be required on a measure less than a כזית.] but rather is dependent on the consumption of the Paschal sacrifice.2as Exodus 12:8 commands: "eat it together with matzot and bitter herbs." (See Halachah 8:6.) It is one positive commandment to eat the meat of the Paschal sacrifice together with matzah and bitter herbs.3Just as the four species taken on Sukkot are one mitzvah, similarly, although the Paschal sacrifice should be eaten with these three elements, it is considered only one mitzvah.Furthermore, in Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 56), the Rambam explains that if it is impossible to obtain bitter herbs, it is still a mitzvah to partake of the Paschal sacrifice. However, there is no mitzvah to partake of bitter herbs alone. (See also Hilchot Korban Pesach 8:2.) According to the words of the Sages, [it is a mitzvah]4and thus, as mentioned in Halachah 8:8, we recite a blessing praising God for commanding us "concerning the eating of maror." to eat the bitter herbs alone5in contrast to our practice of eating them together with matzah (see Halachah 8:8), which is only a custom on this night even if there is no Paschal sacrifice.
The bitter herbs referred to by the Torah are Romaine lettuce,1Pesachim 39a explains that even though the leaves of this species are sweet, it is preferable to fulfill the mitzvah of bitter herbs with this species than with any other. Just as the Egyptian exile began in a favorable way and ended in bitter oppression, similarly the leaves of this plant are sweet, but its root bitter. Furthermore, its Aramaic name, חסא, also means compassion and alludes to God's mercy for our people. From a halachic perspective, it is easiest to consume the required measure of maror when using this species. endives, horseradish, date ivy,2the precise English term for the latter species is a matter of question. In his commentary on the Mishnah (Pesachim 2:6), the Rambam identifies it with the Arabic "Kretzanah." wormwood.3an extremely bitter tasting herb. All of these five species of vegetable are called maror. If a person ate a כזית4As mentioned in the commentary on Halachah 1:1, there is a debate between the commentators if a כזית is considered as one third the size of a ביצה, or one half. Hence, in regard to questions of Torah law, the more stringent opinion should be followed. However, in questions of Rabbinic law, the more lenient opinion can be relied upon.Since the consumption of maror is a Rabbinic commandment, the more lenient view - in terms of modern measurements, between 16.6 and 24 grams, depending on different halachic opinions - may be relied upon. of any one of these [species] or of all five [species] combined, he has fulfilled his obligation.5of any one of these [species] or of all five [species] combined, he has fulfilled his obligation.This applies while they6their leaves are still moist. One may fulfill one's obligation with their stem7The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 473:5, excludes the use of roots. However, the Magen Avraham (473:11) maintains that the main root extending from them stem may also be used. Indeed, the most common custom in European communities where Romaine lettuce was difficult to obtain, was to use a horseradish root. even if it is dry. One cannot fulfill one's obligation if they are boiled,8these three activities detract from the vegetable's bitter taste pickled,9in vinegar; alternatively, left in water for more than a day. Many have the custom of using horseradish as maror, but soak it before the Seder to minimize its sharpness. Based on this halachah, it is preferable for them to use one of the less bitter species of bitter herbs than to follow this practice. or cooked.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
The order of the fulfillment of these mitzvot1the mitzvot of eating matzah, maror, and charoset, and of relating the story of the Exodus. on the night of the fifteenth [of Nisan]2and in the Diaspora, on the night of the sixteenth of Nisan is as follows: In the beginning,3It is customary to begin the Seder as soon as possible after nightfall, in order that the children will be able to remain awake and participate in the Seder. a cup [of wine] is mixed4with water, as stated in Halachah 7:9. for each individual.5See Halachah 7:7. They recite the blessing,בורא פרי הגפן and the kiddush of the day on it, and the blessing, shehecheyanu.6which is recited whenever a person fulfills a mitzvah that is not performed frequently. Though this blessing is instituted for the fulfillment of the mitzvah of celebrating the holiday of Pesach, one should also have the intention of including the other mitzvot mentioned above. Then, they drink [it].7while reclining, as in Halachah 7:8.Afterwards, one recites the blessing, על נטילת ידים, and washes one's hands.8in preparation for eating the vegetable dipped in charoset, as mentioned in the following halachah. In Hilchot Berachot 6:1, the Rambam writes that one must wash one's hands before partaking of any food dipped in a liquid. However, the present custom is not to recite a blessing before this washing. (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 473:6, Taz). See also Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 158:4. A set table is brought,9In the Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah, Pesachim 1:3, he writes that the table is brought before kiddush. This is also the custom in most homes today, where the Seder plate is brought to the table before kiddush. on which are10all the objects to be used during the Seder: maror, another vegetable,11to dip in the charoset as karpas, matzah, charoset, the body of the Paschal lamb, and the meat of the festive offering of the fourteenth of Pesach.12The Paschal sacrifice should be eaten after one has been satisfied from eating other foods. Therefore, another sacrifice, a חגיגה (festive offering) was also brought to make up the main body of the festive meal. (See Hilchot Korban Pesach 10:12-14.) At present,13when the Temple has not yet been rebuilt and we do not bring the Paschal sacrifice we bring two types of meat on the table: one in commemoration of the Paschal sacrifice14The Chidah mentions that it is customary that the meat designated in commemoration of the Paschal sacrifice be roasted in the way that sacrifice was roasted. Rabbenu Manoach writes that it is customary to take the front leg or shank-bone of a lamb as a reference to God's "outstretched arm."It is forbidden to designate an animal as a sacrifice at present. Hence, since many of the common people might think that the shank-bone was actually a Paschal sacrifice, many authorities suggested using a bone from a chicken, a species which was never offered as a sacrifice. Similarly, we are warned not to eat the shank-bone.and one in commemoration of the festive offering. -- The custom of bringing a type of meat to commemorate the festive offering is one of the opinions mentioned in Pesachim 114b. Our custom is to use an egg for that purpose. The Maggid Mishneh writes that the latter practice was commonly observed in his day as well. In contrast to the shank-bone, the egg may be eaten. Indeed, it is customary in many communities to begin the Seder meal by eating it. and one in commemoration of the festive offering.
He1the person leading the Seder begins and recites the blessing, בורא פרי האדמה,2recited before partaking of a vegetable. It is proper to have the intention to include also the maror, which is eaten later. takes the vegetable,3Rabbenu Manoach writes that it is customary to use כרפס (parsley).This practice is instituted in order to pique the curiosity of the children. (See Halachah 7:3.) They see us beginning to eat without continuing to do so. dips it in charoset,4This custom is also mentioned in the Haggadot of Rav Saadia Gaon and Rav Amram Gaon. However, Rabbenu Tam and many Ashkenazic authorities object to it. Hence, it is our practice to dip the vegetable in salt water or vinegar. (See Beit Yosef, Orach Chayim 473.) and eats a כזית. He and all those eating together with him, each and every one, do not eat less than a כזית.5The Rambam requires that a כזית be eaten, because the Rabbis instituted the custom of eating the vegetable. The use of the term "eating" in halachah implies a minimum of a כזית (Maggid Mishneh). Nevertheless, this opinion is not accepted. The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 473:6, states that less than a כזית should be eaten, in order that no question arise as to whether or not one is obligated to recite a blessing afterwards.6Despite the fact that a כזית is eaten, the Rambam does not require the recitation of the blessing, בורא נפשות, after eating the vegetable. This is surely true according to our custom, in which less than a כזית is eaten. Afterwards, the table is taken away7to arouse the children's curiosity, as explained in Halachah 7:3. from the person reciting the Haggadah alone.8This was customary when people sat on couches with small tables in front of them. At present, it is customary to remove the Seder plate. The second cup [of wine] is mixed.9This also is intended to pique the children's curiosity, for though the wine is poured, it is not drunk until later. Here is where the son asks, and the one reciting [the Haggadah]10Some versions of the Mishneh Torah omit the latter phrase, which implies that the questions are not asked by the children. Others interpret the passage as follows: the children ask without necessarily phrasing the questions precisely, and then the leader recites the standard text. Perhaps this is the source for the custom followed by many, where, after the child recites the four questions, the leader of the Seder, and, at times, each of the assembled, also recites the questions. says:Why is this night different from all other nights?On all other nights, we are not required to dip even once. On this night, we dip twice?11The first three of these four questions are recorded in the Mishnah. It must be noted that the commonly accepted text of the Haggadah follows a different order, quoting that mentioned in the Babylonian Talmud, Pesachim 116a. The order mentioned by the Rambam is found in the Jerusalem Talmud and the codifications of Rabbenu Asher and Rav Yitzchak Alfasi.Perhaps, the reason for this order is that the first three questions follow the pattern the child sees at the Seder: first we dip (karpas,) then we eat matzah, and then we eat maror.It must be noted that the expression "twice" represents somewhat of a question to the Rambam, who also requires the matzah and the sandwich to be dipped in charoset.On all other nights, we eat chametz (leaven) or matzah. On this night, only matzah?On all other nights, we eat roasted, boiled, or cooked meat. On this night we eat only roasted?12referring to the Paschal sacrifice, which was roasted. As mentioned in the following halachah, this question is not recited at present.On all other nights, we eat any type of vegetables. On this night, we eat maror (bitter herbs)?On13In contrast to the question regarding matzah, we do not say only bitter herbs, for other vegetables are allowed (and even required: for use in the karpas) on Pesach. all other nights, we eat either sitting upright or reclining. On this night, we all recline?14This question is not mentioned in the Mishnah. Some commentaries maintain that it was not recited in that period for it was customary for many to eat reclining throughout the year. Thus, doing so on Pesach was not a unique phenomenon. Nevertheless, this question is found in as early a Haggadah as that of Rav Amram Gaon.Others maintain that, by including it in this halachah, the Rambam expresses his opinion that it was mentioned while the Temple was standing. Thus, at that time, five questions were recited.
At present,1until the sacrifices can be brought one does not recite [the question], "on this night, only roasted," for we do not have a2Paschal sacrifice.3leaving us with the four questions customarily asked.One begins [describing our people's] base [origins]4See Halachah 7:4. and recites until one concludes expounding on5i.e., quoting other verses in explanation, using the text found in the Sifri. the entire passage that begins "An Aramean sought to destroy my father."6Deuteronomy 26:5-8. This is the main body of the Haggadah, as explained in Halachah 7:4.
The table is returned before him and he says: This Paschal sacrifice which we eat [is] because the Omnipresent passed over the houses of our ancestors in Egypt, as [Exodus 12:27] states: "And you shall say: 'It is a Paschal sacrifice unto God.'"He lifts up the maror in his hands and says: This maror that we eat [is] because the Egyptians made the lives of our forefathers bitter in Egypt, as [Exodus 1:14] states: "and they embittered their lives."And he lifts up the matzah in his hand and says:This matzah which we eat [is] because the dough of our ancestors was not able to leaven before the Holy One, blessed be He, was revealed to them and redeemed them immediately, as [Exodus 12:39] states: "And they baked the dough which they took out of Egypt [as cakes of matzah]."At present, he says: "This Paschal sacrifice, which our ancestors would eat when the Temple was standing, [is] because the Holy One, blessed be He, passed over the houses of our ancestors..."
And he1The following passage is also a quote (with some emendations) from the Mishnah, Pesachim 116b. says:Therefore, we are obliged to thank, praise, laud, glorify, adore, exalt, magnify, and give eternal honor to the One who did all these miracles for us and took us out from slavery to freedom, from sorrow to joy, from deep darkness to great light.2It must be noted that the phraseology used by the Rambam here differs from Pesachim, ibid., and also from the text of the Haggadah which he composed himself. [Therefore,] let us recite before Him: Halleluyah![He continues, beginning the Hallel,3Psalms 113-118. The Hallel was recited while the Paschal sacrifice was being offered and while it was eaten during the Seder. Our Sages explain that the Jews recited these verses of praise as they left Egypt. The commentaries explain that since we interrupt the recitation of Hallel with the Seder meal, no blessing is recited beforehand. reciting from] "Halleluyah! Servants of God4offer praise;" until "the flintstone into a stream of water." -- Only this portion of the Hallel is recited before eating. Pesachim 118a explains that these verses of praise refer to the miracles of the Exodus from Egypt, the splitting of the Red Sea, and the giving of the Torah. In contrast, the latter chapters of Hallel allude to the miracles that will precede the Messianic redemption. - offer praise;" until "the flintstone into a stream of water." He concludes:5The following blessing is also mentioned in the Mishnah (ibid.). It is recited while holding a raised cup of wine.Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who redeemed us and redeemed our ancestors from Egypt and has enabled us to reach this night so that we may eat matzah and bitter herbs upon6It appears from the text of the Mishnah that while the Temple was standing, the blessing was concluded in this manner, without the final line: "Blessed are You, God, who redeemed Israel." it."At present, he adds:7a prayer for redemption from the present exile and the rebuilding of the Temple. The text is quoted by the Mishnah in the name of Rabbi Akiva.So too, God, our Lord and Lord of our fathers, enable us to reach other festivals and holidays that will come to us in peace, celebrating in the rebuilding of Your city8Jerusalem and rejoicing in Your service.9in the Temple. Then, we shall eat of the sacrifices10the festive offering which is eaten before the Paschal sacrifice, as explained in Halachah 8:7. and of the Paschal offerings whose blood shall be sprinkled on the wall of Your altar to be graciously accepted. Then, we shall offer thanks to You [with] a new song for our redemption and for the deliverance of our souls. Blessed are You, God, who redeemed Israel.He recites the blessing, בורא פרי הגפן,11Even though he has not diverted his attention from drinking wine after making kiddush, he recites a new blessing. As mentioned in Halachah 7:10, each of the four cups of wine is given a unique importance of its own. and drinks the second cup.
Afterwards, he recites the blessing, al netilat yadayim,1Thus, according to the Rambam, this blessing is recited twice at the Seder. and washes his hands a second time,2as is necessary before partaking of bread. Even though the hands were washed before partaking of the vegetable, a second washing is required for he diverted his attention [from his hands] during the time he was reciting the Haggadah.3and accidentally touched an unclean portion of his body (Rashi, Pesachim 115b). In general, the Sages postulate הידים עסקניות, "a person's hands are constantly busy," and imply that a person is not necessarily conscious of what he touches. Hence, the possibility exists that, in their activity, the hands touched a portion of the body or another substance which requires one to wash.He takes two cakes [of matzah],4On Pesach, as on all Sabbaths and festivals, it is customary to have lechem mishneh, two loaves (Hilchot Shabbat 30:9). divides one of them,5for the reason to be explained. places the broken half inside the whole [cake]6for their matzot, like many Sephardic matzot today could be folded, and recites the blessing, hamotzi lechem min ha'aretz.7but does not eat from the matzah until after reciting the second blessing.Why does he not recite a blessing on two8whole loaves, as on other festivals?9See Hilchot Shabbat, ibid. because [Deuteronomy 16:3] states "the bread of poverty." Just as a poor man is accustomed to eating a broken [loaf], so, too, a broken loaf should be used.10Our custom is to use three loaves. One is broken for this purpose early in the Seder (yachatz), and the other two are kept for lechem mishneh.There is an advantage to our practice; Pesachim 115b plays on the relationship between the words ענה (poverty) and עונה (answer), and describes matzah as the bread on which many answers are given. To emphasize this point, the broken matzah is exposed throughout most of the Seder.Afterwards,11See Halachah 8:8 for the present custom. he wraps matzah and maror together as one,12This halachah refers to a seder as it was conducted while the Temple was standing. Hence, the matzah and the bitter herbs are eaten together, as implied by Exodus 12:8: "eat it (the Paschal sacrifice) together with matzot and bitter herbs."The above follows the opinion of the Sage, Hillel. Pesachim 115a mentions other opinions which did not require the matzah and maror to be wrapped together, but merely to be eaten at the same sitting. However, since the latter opinion also accepts Hillel's practice, when partaking of the Paschal sacrifice, it is preferable to eat them wrapped together. dips it in charoset13Pesachim 116a quotes an opinion which explains that dipping the maror in charoset was intended to kill any insects that might be present on it. However, as mentioned in Halachot 7:11 and 8:8, the Rambam considers the charoset a mitzvah in its own right; and, therefore, requires that it be included when the Paschal sacrifice or other foods associated with the mitzvot of the night are eaten. and recites the blessing:Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us regarding the eating of matzah and bitter herbsand eats them. If he eats matzah separately and maror separately, he14as permitted by the Sages who differ with Hillel recites a blessing for the former15the matzah in its own right and the latter16the marorin its own right. -- The mention of a separate blessing for maror is slightly problematic in view of Halachah 7:11 (and in particular, in the light of Rav Chayim Soloveitchik's commentary mentioned there). If eating maror is not a mitzvah, why is a blessing recited for it? in its own right.
Afterwards, he recites the blessing:Blessed1because partaking of the Chaggigah offering is a mitzvah and requires a blessing. are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us regarding the eating of the sacrifice2It must be noted that in his commentary on the Mishnah, Pesachim 10:9, the Rambam suggests a different text for this blessing: "who has... commanded us to eat the sacrifice."and first,3The Chaggigah offering is eaten before the Paschal sacrifice, in order that the Paschal sacrifice be eaten when one is already satisfied. partakes of the meat of the Chaggigah offering of the fourteenth [of Nisan].4See Hilchot Korban Pesach, Chapter 8, for the details of this offering.[Then,] he recites the blessing:Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us regarding the eating of the Paschal sacrifice5In this instance as well, in his commentary on the Mishnah (ibid.), the Rambam offers a different version for this blessing: "who has... commanded us to eat the Paschal sacrifice."and eats6In contrast to Rashi (Pesachim 116a) and, similarly, in contrast to our text of the Haggadah, the Rambam does not explicitly state that the Paschal sacrifice was eaten as a sandwich with the matzah and the bitter herbs. from the body of the Paschal sacrifice.7The Rambam uses the expression, "the body of the Paschal sacrifice" in contrast to the "meat of the Chaggigah" because, as stated in Halachah 8:1, the entire Paschal sacrifice is brought to the Seder table. The blessing for the Paschal sacrifice does not free one of [the obligation of the blessing8The commentaries question the need for this halachah, because the Chaggigah offering is eaten before the Paschal sacrifice. The Emek HaSh'eylah explains that if one forgot to recite a blessing over the Chaggigah, one might think that the blessing recited over the Paschal sacrifice would suffice for the previous mitzvah as well. Hence, this opinion must be negated. for] the [Chaggigah] offering. [Conversely, the blessing for the Chaggigah] offering9This follows the opinion of Rabbi Akiva. Nevertheless, Pesachim 121a quotes Rabbi Yishmael, who offers an alternate opinion.Pesachim (ibid.) explains these Sages' difference of opinion as follows: The blood of the Paschal sacrifice is to be poured out against the base of the Temple altar. In contrast, the blood of the Chaggigah should be sprinkled on the two opposite corners of the altar.Rabbi Yishmael maintains that בדיעבד (after the fact), were a person to pour the blood of the Chaggigah offering on the base of the altar, he would be considered to have fulfilled his obligation. Hence, the blessing for the Pesach offering can apply to the Chaggigah as well.In contrast, Rabbi Akiva maintains that even "after the fact," the Chaggigah offering is not acceptable if its blood is not sprinkled on the altar as prescribed. Accordingly, the blessing for the Pesach offering has no connection to the Chaggigah at all.The Lechem Mishneh questions the Rambam's decision. In Hilchot P'sulei HaMukdashim 2:2, the Rambam writes: "Whenever [blood] is prescribed to be presented [on the altar] by sprinkling, and it was presented by pouring, one has fulfilled his obligation," accepting the opinion of Rabbi Yishmael. If so, his acceptance of Rabbi Akiva's opinion here appears to present a contradiction.Rav Yechezkel Landau (Tz'lach, Pesachim ibid.) attempts to resolve the issue, explaining that the Rambam follows the interpretation of Rav Chayim HaCohen (Tosefot, Pesachim ibid.), who favored a different text of the Talmud and, accordingly, an alternate interpretation of the difference in opinion between the two Sages.Rav Chayim maintains that Rabbi Yishmael considers the Chaggigah offering as secondary to the Paschal sacrifice. (See also Jerusalem Talmud, Pesachim 10:7.) Hence, reciting a blessing over the Paschal sacrifice, the essential element (עיקר) of the evening, also fulfills the requirement for the secondary element (טפל), the Chaggigah. Indeed, regarding the blessings recited over food, the Rambam writes (Hilchot Berachot 3:5) that whenever there are two foods, one essential and one secondary, it is only necessary to recite a blessing over the essential food. A blessing is not required for the secondary item.This interpretation itself presents a question: Since the Chaggigah offering was instituted only for the sake of the Paschal sacrifice and is not an obligation in its own right, it can be considered as "secondary" to the Pesach sacrifice. If so, what is the rationale for Rabbi Akiva's opinion?It can be explained that Rabbi Akiva never considers one mitzvah as secondary to another. We may use the labels "primary" and "secondary" in regard to matters dependent on our will, but not in regard to mitzvot which we fulfill in obedience to God's desires. Therefore, though the Chaggigah offering was instituted because of the Paschal sacrifice, once it has been instituted, it must be considered as a mitzvah in its own right, with its own importance. Hence, it requires a unique blessing of its own (R. Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the Lubavitch Haggadah). does not free one of [the obligation of the blessing for] the Paschal sacrifice.10Both Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Yishmael agree with this decision.This law can also be explained within the context of the discussion of "primary" and "secondary" mentioned above. Since the Paschal sacrifice follows the Chagigah offering, for the Paschal sacrifice should be eaten when satisfied, one might presume that it is considered as "secondary" to the Chagigah. Hence, the Sages must negate this presumption.
At present, when there is no [Paschal] sacrifice,1Note the opinions mentioned on p. 34 of the Moznaim edition of Hilchot Beit HaBechirah, which question whether the Paschal sacrifice can be offered on the Temple Mount even before the Temple is rebuilt. after one recites the blessing, hamotzi lechem,2holding a complete matzah and the broken half, as explained in Halachah 6. According to our custom, this blessing is recited while holding three matzot: two complete ones, and the broken half. one then3According to our present custom, the lowest matzah is returned to the Seder plate at this point, so that the following blessing is recited when holding only one complete matzah and the broken half. recites the blessing, al achilat matzah, dips the matzah in charoset,4The Rambam's statements have aroused much question, because generally, the charoset is associated only with the maror. Though the Ra'avad curtly dismisses these words as "emptiness," the Tur and the Maggid Mishneh quote previous authorities, Rav Amram Gaon and Rav Yitzchak ibn Giat, who also require dipping the matzah in charoset.The Tzafnat Paneach explains the difference between the Rambam and the Ra'avad as follows: As mentioned in Halachah 7:11, charoset is a mitzvah commemorating the mortar used by our ancestors. Hence, the Rambam maintains that it should be eaten together with both the matzah and the maror.The Ra'avad maintains that matzah commemorates two different qualities: the "bread of poverty" eaten in Egypt and the matzot our ancestors carried out from Egypt after being redeemed. In contrast, maror and charoset are both symbols of slavery.While the Temple was standing, the Ra'avad did not object to the matzah being dipped in charoset, because, as above, it also commemorates our ancestors' slavery. However, after the Temple's destruction and the negation of the mitzvah of maror, we may assume that the other symbols of the enslavement are also negated. Hence, the only mitzvah is the commemoration of the redemption associated with the matzah. Accordingly, it should not be mixed with charoset, which recalls the slavery. and eats it.5at least a כזית, while leaning on the left side, as prescribed above.Afterwards,6All opinions agree that at present, the matzah is not to be eaten together with the maror. While the Temple was standing, they could be eaten together - since they were both mitzvot, partaking of one mitzvah could not negate another. However, even at present, matzah is a Torah command, while maror, in the present age, is only of Rabbinic origin. Hence, eating the maror will negate the taste of the matzah (Pesachim 115a). one recites the blessing, al achilat maror, dips the maror in charoset and eats it.7without reclining. One should not leave [the bitter herbs] in the charoset for a prolonged period, lest their8bitter taste be negated, since [eating the maror] is a mitzvah ordained by the Sages.9For this reason, it is customary in many communities to shake the charoset off the maror after dipping.Afterwards, one should wrap matzah and maror together,10as was the custom of Hillel, dip them in the charoset, and eat them without reciting a blessing, to recall the Temple.11We follow this practice by eating the korech at the Seder.
Afterwards, one continues the meal, eating whatever one desires to eat and drinking whatever one desires to drink.1The Seder meal should be festive, with the finest foods being served. At its conclusion, one eats from the Paschal sacrifice,2a second time even [as small a portion as] a כזית,3However, a כזית is required as in all requirements concerning eating. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 477:3) states that if possible, it is desirable to eat two portions of that size, one commemorating the Chagigah and one, the Paschal sacrifice. and does not taste anything afterwards.4It was customary to eat dessert (afikoman in Greek) after a meal. The Mishnah prohibits eating such dessert after eating from the Pesach sacrifice a second time (Pesachim 119b).At present, one eats a כזית of matzah5which we refer to as the afikoman. Shemurah matzah, matzah watched with the intention that it be eaten to fulfill the mitzvah, should be used. (See Halachah 8:13.) The afikoman must be eaten while leaning on the left side. and does not taste anything6with the exception of the remaining two cups of wine and water, as mentioned in the following halachah. Rabbenu Asher also allows nonalcoholic beverages to be consumed. When there is a great necessity, his opinion may be relied upon (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 478:1). afterwards,7so that, after the completion of the meal, the taste of the meat of the Paschal sacrifice or the matzah will [remain] in one's mouth -- See also Halachah 6:11. so that, after the completion of the meal, the taste of the meat of the Paschal sacrifice or the matzah will [remain] in one's mouth, for eating them is the mitzvah.
Afterwards, he washes his hands1After eating a meal, we are required to wash with water, mayim achronim, before reciting grace (Hilchot Berachot 6:1). and recites the grace after meals over a third cup [of wine]2as is customary for grace, Hilchot Berachot 7:14. and drinks it.3after reciting the blessing, borey pri hagefen, as mentioned in Halachah 7:10. The cup is drunk while reclining on the left side.Afterwards, he pours out a fourth cup and completes the Hallel4begun before the meal over it,5as our Sages commented: "Song is recited only over wine." reciting upon it6at the conclusion the blessing of song—i.e.,7Psalm 136, beginning "May all Your works praise You, God..."8The Mishnah, Pesachim 10:7, quotes a difference of opinion on this matter. However, the Rambam chooses the blessing which is customarily recited after Hallel.This represents a change from the Rambam's statements in his commentary on the Mishnah, where he writes:"the blessing of song" - this is "Nishmat kol chay" until its conclusion. "May all Your works praise You, God..." until its conclusion is also called the blessing of song. If one joins the two together, it is praiseworthy.At present, we follow the custom of joining both blessings together. - recites the blessing, borey pri hagefen, [and drinks the wine].9reclining on the left side. Afterwards, he does not taste anything,10neither food or drink. Note commentary on the previous halachah with the exception of water,11for the water will not wash away the taste of the matzah or the wine. throughout the entire night.12throughout the entire night.It is permissible to mix a fifth cup13Rabbenu Yitzchak Alfasi quotes a version of Pesachim 118a, which states: "Rav Tarfon declares: 'On the fifth cup, he recites the great Hallel.'" (The accepted text of the Talmud states: "On the fourth cup...") and recite upon it "the great Hallel"14From this statement, Rabbenu Manoach derives that otherwise drinking additional cups of wine is forbidden. - i.e., from "Give thanks to God, for He is good" until "By the rivers of Babylon." This cup is not an obligation like the other cups.15Rabbenu Nissim writes that drinking a fifth cup fulfills the mitzvah in the most complete manner. However, the Ma'aseh Rokeach quotes the Rambam's son, Rav Avraham, as relating that his father would always recite Psalm 136 after the Hallel prayers, and then conclude with the blessing without drinking a fifth cup. Accordingly, the Ma'aseh Rokeach concludes that although it is permissible to drink a fifth cup, it is not proper to do so.Likkutei Sichot, Vol. XXVII, suggests a different interpretation of this halachah, noting that the Rambam does not mention that the fifth cup is drunk. A fifth cup is mixed and placed on the table, and the "great Hallel" is recited over it. However, that cup should not be drunk. Thus, the fifth cup is not included as one of the four. Rather, it is a separate and independent obligation.The Vilna Gaon (see Ta'amei HaMinhagim 551) associates the fifth cup with the cup of Elijah. The Talmud concludes the discussion of many unresolved questions with the statement: תיקו. Literally, the term is a shortened form of the word תיקום, "let it remain". However, it is also interpreted as an acrostic for the expression תשבי יתרץ קושיות ואביעות - "The Tishbite (Elijah) will answer all questions and difficulties."Since the requirement of the fifth cup remains an unresolved question, the fifth cup is left for Elijah in the hope that he will come soon and resolve this question as well.The homiletic aspects of this comment notwithstanding, from a halachic perspective a differentiation must be made between the two. The fifth cup is of Talmudic origin and may be poured for each individual. In contrast, Elijah's cup is an Ashkenazic custom of later origin, and a single cup is used for the whole family. Indeed, they are mentioned by halachists in different chapters of the Shulchan Aruch: the fifth cup by the Ramah in Chapter 481 and Elijah's cup by the Chok Ya'akov in Chapter 480.One may complete the Hallel wherever one desires, even though it is not the place where one ate.16A number of different halachic questions would arise should a person decide to leave the home in which he is holding the Seder from the kiddush until the conclusion of the grace after meals. However, once grace is concluded, no such problems exist.The Ra'avad does not accept this opinion and maintains that all four cups should be drunk in the same place. Hence, he does not allow a person to leave the home in which he begins the Seder until its conclusion. Nevertheless, the Ramah quotes the Rambam's view as halachah in Orach Chayim 481:1.
In a place where it is customary to eat roasted meat on Pesach night, one may eat. [However,] in a place where it is customary not to eat [roasted meat],1The Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Orach Chayim 476:1 states that the accepted Ashkenazi custom is not to eat roasted meat on Pesach night. one should not eat it,2The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 476:2 states that this prohibition refers even to the meat of calves or fowl, "any creature that requires slaughter." lest it be said: "this is the meat of the Paschal sacrifice."In3for the meat resembles the Paschal sacrifice which had to be roasted. As mentioned above, for this reason the Zeroa is not lifted up while the passage concerning the Paschal sacrifice is recited, and, in some communities, certain restrictions are made concerning its preparation. all places,4whether the custom of eating other roasted meat is accepted or not it is forbidden to eat a whole sheep5the animal used for the Paschal sacrifice that has been roasted in its entirety6as was the Paschal sacrifice, see Halachah 8:1. on this night, for it would appear as though one were eating sacrificial animals outside [the area prescribed for them].7The Paschal sacrifice must be slaughtered in the Temple and eaten within Jerusalem. If it has been cut in pieces, is lacking a limb,8for the Pesach sacrifice was served all as one or one of the limbs attached to it has been boiled,9it is forbidden to eat any portion of the Paschal sacrifice prepared in this fashion, see Hilchot Korban Pesach 8:4. it is permitted in a place where [roasted meat] is customarily [eaten].
A person who does not have any wine1However, if he has only one cup, he should use it for kiddush (Magen Avraham 483:1). on the nights2the plural usage of this term could be employed to include the second seder, held outside Eretz Yisrael. of Pesach recites the kiddush on bread,3i.e., matzahas he would do on the Sabbath. — Rav Yitzchak Alfasi and the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 483:1 state that one must recite the al achilat matzah blessing before partaking of the matzah.The Ramah (and the other Ashkenazic authorities) suggest that in such an eventuality, one should use mead or other highly regarded beverages (חמר מדינה) for kiddush and the other three cups. as he would do on the Sabbath. [Afterwards,] he carries out all the [above] matters according to this order.4Thus, matzah is eaten a second time. However, a blessing is not recited for it. The hands need not be washed for Urchatz. The commentators question whether the hands are washed a second time before partaking of the matzah again.A person who has no other vegetable besides bitter herbs: At the outset,5for Karpas. See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 475:2. he recites two blessings over the bitter herbs: borey pri ha'adamah and al achilat maror,6Though this is not the place to eat maror, one must recite the blessing and eat the maror with the intention of fulfilling the mitzvah. There is no way one could eat a full portion of maror now and recite the blessing afterward. and partakes of them.7after dipping them in vinegar or salt water, as mentioned in Halachah 8:2. When he concludes the Haggadah,8The Rambam defines the Haggadah as the text beginning with Hah lachmah anya and ending with the blessing, asher ge'alanu. he recites the blessing over the matzah and eats it. Afterwards, he eats from the bitter herbs9dipping them in charoset without reciting a10second blessing.11to fulfill the mitzvah of maror. The Mishnah Berurah (475:28) mentions other opinions which suggest reversing the order and first dipping the maror in charoset, and the second time in salt water. The Shulchan Aruch HaRav states that there is much controversy over this matter. Hence, one should try hard to find other vegetables to use for karpas and thus, avoid the issue.
A person who has only a single1the minimum measure necessary to fulfill the mitzvah. See Halachah 6:1. כזית of shemurah2matzah that has been watched to ensure it has not become chametz and has been prepared for the purpose of being used to fulfill the mitzvah. See Halachot 5:8 and 6:5. matzah: When he concludes [eating] his meal from matzah3should begin his meal by reciting hamotzi over matzah that has not been watched. The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 482:1, states that after the meal is begun, the maror should be eaten. which was not watched,4Rabbenu Manoach emphasizes that one should not overeat in order that eating the shemurah matzah will not be גסה אכילה, undignified eating. he recites the blessing, al achilat matzah, eats that כזית5as the afikoman and does not taste anything afterward.6in order that the taste of matzah, a food that is a mitzvah, will remain in his mouth, as stated in Halachah 8:9. This reason is important enough to take prominence over the importance of eating the matzah designated for the mitzvah at the beginning of the meal.
A person1holding a Seder alone who slept in the midst of the meal and then woke up, does not begin to eat again.2This law is derived as follows: The Paschal sacrifice must be eaten together with a company of people (חבורה), organized before the sacrifice was slaughtered. It is forbidden to take the meat outside of this company. A person who eats the Paschal sacrifice alone is considered as the sole member of his company. Should he fall asleep in the midst of eating, it is considered as if he has changed from one company to another and he is forbidden to eat again.Since the afikoman was instituted as a commemoration of the Paschal sacrifice, similar laws apply to it. Accordingly, Pesachim 120b records a discussion between Abaye and Rabbah concerning this law.The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 478:2 quotes the Rambam's statements verbatim. The Ramah states that since the law is derived from the laws of the Paschal sacrifice, it applies only with regard to the consumption of the afikoman. However, if a person fell asleep in the midst of the meal beforehand, he may resume eating. This opinion is accepted by the later Ashkenazic authorities. [However,] if some members of a company slept in the middle of a meal,3Since the other members of the company remained awake, they may eat again.4They need not recite new blessings over the food, as explained in the Shulchan Aruch, Chapter 178. If they all fell into a sound slumber5and hence the eating of the entire company has been interrupted. and then awoke, they should not eat.6for the reasons explained above. If they all [merely] dozed,7i.e., though drowsy, they would be able to respond to questions, the eating of the company is not considered to have been interrupted, and they may eat.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
The text of the Haggadah which Israel is accustomed [to use] at the time of the Exile is like this: He begins over the second cup and says:
We left Egypt in frenzy. This is the bread of poverty that our ancestors ate in the land of Egypt. Anyone who is famished should come and eat; anyone who is in need to have the Passover sacrifice should come and partake of the Passover sacrifice. Now we are here, next year we will be in the Land of Israel; this year we are slaves, the year that is coming we will be free people.
What differentiates this night from all [other] nights? On all other nights we don't dip even once; but tonight twice. On all other nights we eat chamets and matsa; but tonight it is all matsa. On all other nights we eat other vegetables; but tonight it is all bitter herbs. On all other nights we eat whether sitting or reclining; but tonight we are all reclining
We were slaves to Pharaoh in the Land of Egypt. And the Lord, our God, took us out from there with a strong hand and an outstretched forearm. And if the Holy One, blessed be He, had not taken our ancestors from Egypt, we and our children and our children's children would [all] be enslaved to Pharaoh in Egypt. And even if we were all sages, all discerning, all elders, all knowledgeable about the Torah, it would [still] be a commandment upon us to tell the story of the exodus from Egypt. And anyone who speaks at length about the exodus from Egypt, behold he is praiseworthy.
It happened once [on Passover] that Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Yehoshua, Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah, Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Tarfon were reclining in Bnei Brak and were telling the story of the exodus from Egypt that whole night, until their students came and said to them, "The time of reciting the morning Shema has arrived."
Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah said to them, "Behold I am like a man of seventy years and I have not merited [to understand why] the exodus from Egypt should be said at night until Ben Zoma expounded it, as it is stated (Deuteronomy 16:3), 'In order that you remember the day of your going out from the land of Egypt all the days of your life' - 'the days of your life' [indicates that the remembrance be invoked during] the days; 'all the days of your life' [indicates that the remembrance be invoked also during] the nights." But the Sages say, "'The days of your life' [indicates that the remembrance be invoked in] this world, 'all the days of your life' [indicates that the remembrance be invoked also in] the days of the Messiah."
Blessed be the Place [of all], Blessed be He; Blessed be the One who Gave the Torah to His people Israel, Blessed be He. Corresponding to four sons did the Torah speak; one [who is] wise, one [who is] evil, one who is innocent and one who doesn't know to ask.
What does the wise [son] say? "'What are these testimonies, statutes and judgments that the Lord our God commanded you?' (Deuteronomy 6:20)" And accordingly you will say to him, as per the laws of the Passover sacrifice, "We may not eat an afikoman (a dessert or other foods eaten after the meal) after [we are finished eating] the Pesach sacrifice (Mishnah Pesachim 10:8)."
What does the evil [son] say? "'What is this worship to you?' (Exodus 12:26)" 'To you' and not 'to him.' And since he excluded himself from the collective, he denied a principle [of the Jewish faith]. And accordingly, you will blunt his teeth and say to him, "'For the sake of this did the Lord do [this] for me in my going out of Egypt' (Exodus 13:8)." 'For me' and not 'for him.' And if he had been there, he would not have been saved.
What does the innocent [son] say? "What is this?" (Exodus 13:14) And you will say to him, "'With the strength of [His] hand did the Lord take us out from Egypt, from the house of slaves' (Exodus 13:14).'"
And [regarding] the one who doesn't know to ask, you will open [the conversation] for him. As it is stated (Exodus 13:8), "And you will speak to your son on that day saying, for the sake of this, did the Lord do [this] for me in my going out of Egypt." "And you will speak to your your son " - it could be from Rosh Chodesh [that one would have to discuss the Exodus. However] we learn [otherwise, since] it is stated, "on that day." If it is [written] "on that day," it could be from while it is still day [before the night of the fifteenth of Nissan. However] we learn [otherwise, since] it is stated, "for the sake of this." I didn't say [this] except [that it be observed] when [this] matsa and bitter herbs are resting in front of you [meaning, on the night of the fifteenth].
From the beginning, our ancestors were idol worshipers. And now, the Place [of all] has brought us close to His worship, as it is stated (Joshua 24:2-4), "Joshua said to the whole people, so said the Lord, God of Israel, 'Over the river did your ancestors dwell from always, Terach the father of Abraham and the father of Nachor, and they worshiped other gods. And I took your father, Abraham, from over the river and I made him walk in all the land of Canaan and I increased his seed and I gave him Isaac. And I gave to Isaac, Jacob and Esau; and I gave to Esau, Mount Seir [in order that he] inherit it; and Jacob and his sons went down to Egypt.'"
Blessed be the One who keeps His promise to Israel, blessed be He; since the Holy One, blessed be He, calculates the end [of the exile,] to do as He said to Abraham, our father, in the Covenant between the Pieces; as it is stated (Genesis 15:13-14), "And He said to Abram, 'you should surely know that your seed will be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and they will enslave them and afflict them four hundred years. And also that nation for which they shall toil will I judge, and afterwards they will go out with much property.'"
And it is this that has stood for our ancestors and for us; since it is not [only] one [person or nation] that has stood [against] us to destroy us, but rather in each generation, they stand [against] us to destroy us, but the Holy One, blessed be He, rescues us from their hand. Go out and learn what Laban the Aramean sought to do to Jacob, our father; since Pharaoh only decreed [the death sentence] on the males, but Laban sought to uproot the whole [people]. As it is stated (Deuteronomy 26:5), "An Aramean was destroying my father; so he went down to Egypt and resided there" - [this] teaches that Ya'akov, our father, didn't go down to settle in Egypt, but rather [only] to reside there, as it is stated (Genesis 47:4), "And they said to Pharaoh, 'To reside in the land have we come, since there is not enough pasture for your servant's flocks, since the famine is heavy in the land of Canaan, and now please grant that your servants should dwell in the Land of Goshen.'"
"As a small number" - as it is stated (Deuteronomy 10:22), "With seventy souls did your ancestors come down to Egypt, and now the Lord, your God, has made you as numerous as the stars of the sky."
"And he became there a nation" - [this] teaches that Israel [became] distinguishable there. "Great, powerful" - as it is stated (Exodus 1:7), "And the Children of Israel multiplied and swarmed and grew numerous and strong, most exceedingly and the land became full of them."
"And numerous" - as it is stated (Ezekiel 16:7), "I have given you to be numerous as the vegetation of the field, and you increased and grew and became highly ornamented, your breasts were set and your hair grew, but you were naked and barren;" "And I passed over you and I saw you wallowing in your blood, and I said to you, 'You shall live in your blood,' and I said to you, 'You shall live in your blood'" (Ezekiel 16:6).
"And the Egyptians did bad to us and afflicted us and put upon us hard work" (Deuteronomy 26:6). "And the Egyptians did bad to us" - as it is stated (Exodus 1:10), "Let us be wise towards him, lest he multiply and it will be that when war is called, he too will join with our enemies and fight against us and go up from the land."
"And afflicted us" - as is is stated (Exodus 1:11); "And they placed upon him leaders over the work-tax in order to afflict them with their burdens; and they built storage cities, Pitom and Ra'amses."
"And put upon us hard work" - as it is stated (Exodus 1:11), "And they enslaved the children of Israel with breaking work."
"And we cried out to the Lord, the God of our ancestors" - as it is stated (Exodus 2:23); "And it was in those great days that the king of Egypt died and the Children of Israel sighed from the work and yelled out; and their supplication went up to God from the work."
"And the Lord heard our voice" - as it is stated (Exodus 2:24); "And God heard their groans and God remembered His covenant with Abraham and with Isaac and with Jacob."
"And He saw our affliction" - this [refers to] the separation from the way of the world, as it is stated (Exodus 2:25); "And God saw the Children of Israel and God knew."
"And our toil" - this [refers to the killing of the] sons, as it is stated (Exodus 1:24); "Every boy that is born, throw him into the Nile; and every girl you shall keep alive."
"And our duress" - this [refers to] the pressure, as it is stated (Exodus 3:9); "And I also saw the duress that the Egyptians are applying on them."
"And the Lord took us out of Egypt" - not through an angel and not through a seraph and not through a messenger, but [directly by] the Holy One, blessed be He, in His glory, as it is stated (Exodus 12:12); "And I will pass through the Land of Egypt on that night and I will smite every firstborn in the Land of Egypt, from men to animals; and with all the gods of Egypt, I will make judgments, I am the Lord."
"With a strong hand" - this [refers to] the pestilence, as it is stated (Exodus 9:3); "Behold the hand of the Lord is upon your herds that are in the field, upon the horses, upon the donkeys, upon the camels, upon the cattle and upon the flocks, [there will be] a very heavy pestilence."
"And with an outstretched forearm" - this [refers to] the sword, as it is stated (I Chronicles 21:16); "And his sword was drawn in his hand, leaning over Jerusalem."
"And with great awe" - this [refers to the revelation of] the Divine Presence, as it is stated (Deuteronomy 4:34), "Or did God try to take for Himself a nation from within a nation with enigmas, with signs and with wonders and with war and with a strong hand and with an outstretched forearm and with great and awesome acts, like all that the Lord, your God, did for you in Egypt in front of your eyes?"
"And with signs" - this [refers to] the staff, as it is stated (Exodus 4:17); "And this staff you shall take in your hand, that with it you will preform signs."
"And with wonders" - this [refers to] the blood, as it is stated (Joel 3:3); "And I will place my wonders in the skies and in the earth; blood and fire and pillars of smoke."
Another explanation: "With a strong hand" [corresponds to] two [plagues]; "and with an outstretched forearm" [corresponds to] two [plagues]; "and with great awe" [corresponds to] two [plagues]; "and with signs" [corresponds to] two [plagues]; "and with wonders" [corresponds to] two [plagues]. These are [the] ten plagues that the Holy One, blessed be He, brought on the Egyptians in Egypt and they are: Blood; Frogs; Lice; [The] Mixture [of Wild Animals]; Pestilence; Boils; Hail; Locusts; Darkness; Slaying of [the] Firstborn. Rabbi Yehuda was accustomed to giving [the plagues] mnemonics: Detsakh [the Hebrew initials of the first three plagues], Adash [the Hebrew initials of the second three plagues], Beachav [the Hebrew initials of the last four plagues].
Rabban Gamliel says, "Anyone who has not said these three things on Passover has not fulfilled his obligation - and these are them: the Passover sacrifice, matsa and bitter herbs."
The Passover sacrifice that our ancestors were accustomed to eating when the Temple existed, for the sake of what [was it]? For the sake [to commemorate] that the Holy One, blessed be He, passed over the homes of our ancestors in Egypt, as it is stated (Exodus 12:27); "And you shall say: 'It is the Passover sacrifice to the Lord, for that He passed over the homes of the Children of Israel in Egypt, when He smote the Egyptians, and our homes he saved.’ And the people bowed the head and bowed."
This matsa that we are eating, for the sake of what [is it]? For the sake [to commemorate] that our ancestors' dough did not have time to become leavened before the King of the kings of kings, the Holy One, blessed be He, revealed [Himself] to them and redeemed them, as it is stated (Exodus 12:39); "And they baked the dough which they brought out of Egypt into matsa cakes, since it did not rise; because they were expelled from Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they made for themselves provisions."
These bitter herbs that we are eating, for the sake of what [is it]? For the sake [to commemorate] that the Egyptians embittered the lives of our ancestors in Egypt, as it is stated (Exodus 1:14); "And they made their lives bitter with hard service, in mortar and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field; in all their service, wherein they made them serve with rigor."
And in each and every generation, a person is obligated to show himself as if he left Egypt, as it is stated (Exodus 13:8); "For the sake of this, did the Lord do [this] for me in my going out of Egypt." Not only our ancestors did the Holy One, blessed be He, redeem, but rather also us [together] with them did He redeem, as it is stated (Deuteronomy 6:23); "And He took us out from there, in order to bring us in, to give us the land which He swore unto our fathers."
Therefore we are obligated to thank, praise, laud, glorify, exalt, aggrandize, lavish, and extol He who made all these miracles for our ancestors and for us: He brought us out from slavery to freedom, from sorrow to joy and from darkness to great light. And let us say before Him, Halleluyah! 
Halleluyah. Servants of the Lord, praise, praise the name of the Lord! Let the name of the Lord be blessed... (Psalms 113:1-2) until "a rock to a spring of water' (Psalms 114:8)." 
Blessed are You, Lord our God, King of the universe, who redeemed us and redeemed our ancestors from Egypt, and brought us to this night to eat matsa and bitter herbs. So too, Lord our God, and God of our ancestors, bring us to other appointed times and holidays that will come to greet us in peace, joyful in the building of Your city and happy in Your worship; and we shall eat there from the offerings and from the Passover sacrifices, the blood of which shall reach the wall of Your altar for favor, and we shall thank You with a new song upon our redemption and upon the restoration of our souls. Blessed are you, Lord, who redeemed Israel.
According to the order that we recite blessings and read the Haggadah on the night of the first  holiday of Passover, so [too] do we recite blessings and read on the second night of the exiles. And likewise are we obligated about the four cups - and the other things that are done on the first night - on the second night.
