=== 1 | The Second Part of the Chronicle of Peru ===
2^<  "


h


.*-*


WORKS    ISSUED    BY


CJje  IfaftlttKt   ^ort'rtg.


THE    SECOND    PART


CHRONICLE     OF     PERU


No.  LXVTTT.


/


THE


SECOND    PART


CHRONICLE  OF  PERU.


PEDRO  DE  CIEZA  DE  LEON.


TRANSLATED    AND    EDITED,

8KBit!)  i^otfs  ant)  an  Intiotmction,

CLEMENTS  R.  MARKHAM,  C.B.,  F.R.8.


LONDON :
PRINTED    FOR   THE    HAKLUYT   SOCIETY.


MDCCCLXXXIII


LONDON :
WHITING    AND    COMPANY,    LIMITED,    SARDINIA    STREliT,    LINCOLN's-INN-FIELDS.


WtGBTY  CENTER

immy


COUNCIL


THE    HAKLUYT    SOCIETY.


Colonel  H.  YULE,  C.B.,  President.

HUNE,  C.B.         •)

■  Vice-Presidehis.


Admiral  C.   R.  DRINKWATER    BETHUNE,  C.B.         )

I1


Major-General  Sir  HENRY  RAWLINSON,  K.C.B.     j

W.  A.  TYSSEN   AMHERST,  Esq.,  M.P.

Ret.  Dr.  G.  P.  BADGER,  D.C.L.

J.  BARROW,  Esq.,  F.R.S.

WALTER  DE  GRAY  BIRCH,  Esq.,  F.S.A.

Captain  LINDESAY  BRINE,  R.N.

E.  H.  BUNBURY,  Esq.

The  Earl  of  DUCIE,  F.R.S.

Captain  HANKEY,  R.X.

Lieut.-Genebal  Sir  J.  HENRY  LEFROY,  C.B.,  K.C.M.G.

R.  H.  MAJOR,  Esq.,  F.S.A.

Rear-Admiral  MAYNB,  C.B.

E.  DELMAR  MORGAN,  Esq.

Admiral  Sir  ERASMUS   OMMANNEY,  C.B.,  F.R.S.

Lord  ARTHUR   RUSSELL,  M.P.

The  Lord  STANLEY,  of  Alderlet.

B.  F.  STEVENS,  Esq.

EDWARD  THOMAS,  Esq.,  F.R.S.

Lievt.-Gen.  Sir  HENRY  THUILLIER,  C.S.I.,  F.R.S.

CLEMENTS  R.  MARKHAM,  C.B.,  F.R.S,  Honorary  Seckeiakv.


TABLE     OF     CONTENTS,


Dedication  to  General  Caceres       -•_.'.     xiii

Introduction       -  -  -  -  -  -  -       xv

Note  oil  the  ancient  Ynca  Drama    -  xxix

Peruvian  Love  Story  -  -  -  -  -        lv

Fragment  of  Chapter  III  ------         1

Chap.  IV. — Which  treats  of  wliat  the  Indians  of  this  kingdom  say
touching  the  state  of  things  before  the  Incas  were  known,  and  how
they  had  fortresses  in  the  hills,  whence  they  came  forth  to  make  war
one  with  another  ......         2

Chap.  V. — Touching  what  these  natives  say  concerning  the  Ticivira-
cocha;  of  the  opinion  held  by  some- that  an  Apostle  passed  through
this  land,  aud  of  the  temple  there  is  in  Ctichan  ;  also  what  happened
there        -.-.-.  5

Chap.  VI. — How  certain  men  and  women  appeared  in  Pacarec  Tampu,
and  what  they  relate  touching  their  proceedings  after  they  came  forth
from  there  -  -  .  -  -  -  11

Chap.  VII. — How  the  brothers,  being  in  Tampu-Quiru,  beheld  him
whom  they  had  shut  up  in  the  cave  by  deceit,  come  forth  with  wings  ;
and  how  he  told  them  that  he  went  to  found  the  great  city  of  Cuzco  ;
and  how  they  departed  from  Tampu-Quiru         -  -  -16

Chap.  VIII. — How  Manco  Capac,  when  he  saw  that  his  brothers  had
been  turned  into  stones,  went  to  a  valley  where  he  met  some  people ;
and  how  he  founded  and  built  the  ancient  and  very  rich  city  of
Cuzco,  which  was  the  capital  of  the  whole  empire  of  the  Incas       22

Chap.vIX. — In  which  notice  is  given  to  the  reader  of  the  reason  that
the  author,  leaving  the  account  of  the  succession  of  the  kings,  prefers
to  explain  the  government  of  the  people,  their  laws,  and  customs      24

Chap.  X. — How  the  lord,  after  he  had  assumed  the  fringe  of  sove-
reignty, was  married  to  his  sister  the  Coya,  which  is  the  name  of  the
Queen,  and  how  it  was  permitted  that  he  should  have  many  women,
although  among  them  all  the  Coya  alone  was  the  legitimate  and  prin-
cipal wife  -  -  -  -  -  -  -       26


Vlll  TABLE    OF    CONTENTS.

Chap.  XI. —  How  it  was  the  custom  among  the  Incas  that  they  cele-
brated in  their  songs,  and  by  making  statues  of  those  who  were
valorous  and  extended  the  bounds  of  the  empire,  and  performed  any
other  deed  worthy  of  memory ;  while  those  who  were  negligent  or
cowardly  received  little  notice    -  -  -  -  -      28

Chap.  XI. I — How  they  had  chroniclers  to  record  their  deeds,  and  of
the  Quipos,  what  they  were,  and  what  we  see  of  them  -      32

Chap.  XIII. — How  the  lords  of  Peru  were  beloved  on  the  one  hand,
and  feared  on  the  other,  by  all  their  subjects;  and  how  no  one,  even  a
great  lord  of  very  ancient  lineage,  could  come  into  the  presence,
except  with  a  burden,  in  token  of  great  obedience  -  -       36

Chap.  XIV. — How  the  riches  possessed  by  the  king  were  very  great,
and  how  the  sons  of  the  lord  were  ordered  always  to  be  in  attendance
at  court  -  -  -  -  -  -  39

Chap.  XV. — How  they  built  the  edifices  for  the  lords,  and  the  royal
road  along  which  to  travel  over  the  kingdom      -  -  -       42

Chap.  XVI. — How  and  in  what  manner  they  made  the  royal  hunts  for
the  lords  of  Peru  -  -  -  -  -  -       45

Chap.  XVII. — Which  treats  of  the  order  maintained  by  the  Incas,  and
how  in  many  parts  they  made  the  waste  places  fertile,  by  the  arrange-
ments they  made  for  that  purpose  -  -  -  -       47

Chap.  XVIII. — Which  treats  of  the  order  they  adopted  in  the  pay-
ments of  tribute  by  the  provinces  to  the  kings,  and  of  the  system  by
which  the  tribute  was  regulated  -  -  -  51

Chap.  XIX. — How  the  kings  of  Cuzco  ordered  that  every  year  an
account  should  be  taken  of  all  persons  who  died  and  were  born
throughout  their  dominions  ;  also  how  all  men  worked,  and  how  none
could  be  poor  by  reason  of  the  storehouses         -  -  -       57

Chap.  XX. — How  governors  were  appointed  to  the  provinces ;  and  of
the  manner  in  which  the  kings  visited  their  dominions,  and  how  they
bore,  for  their  arms,  certain  waving  serpents  with  sticks  -       59

Chap.  XXI. — How  the  posts  of  the  kingdom  were  arranged        -       64

Chap.  XXII. — How  the  Mitimaes  were  established,  and  of  the  dif-
ferent kinds  of  them,  and  how  they  were  highly  esteemed  by  the
Incas    "-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -67

Chap.  XXIII. — Of  the  great  preparations  that  were  made  when  the
lords  set  out  from  Cuzco  on  warlike  expeditions  ;  and  how  robbers
were  punished     -  -  -  -  -  -  -       72


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS.  IX

Chap.  XXIV. — How  the  Incas  ordered  the  people  to  form  settled
towns,  dividing  the  lands  concerning  which  there  was  any  dispute,
and  how  it  -was  ordered  that  all  should  speak  the  language  of
Cuzco      -.---...       75

Chap.  XXV. — How  the  Incas  were  free  from  the  abominable  sin,  and
from  other  evil  customs  which  have  been  seen  to  prevail  in  the  world
among  other  princes        -  -  -  -  -  78

Chap.  XXVI. — How  the  Incas  employed  councillors  and  executors  of
justice,  and  of  their  method  of  reckoning  time  -  -       81

Chap.  XXVII. — Which  treats  of  the  riches  of  the  temple  of  Cuii-
cancba,  and  of  the  veneration  in  which  the  Incas  held  it  -       83

Chap.  XXVIII. —  Which  treats  of  the  other  principal  temples,  and  of
their  names  -  -  -  -  -  -  -       87

Chap.  XXIX. — How  the  Capacocha  was  made,  and  to  what  extent  it
was  practised  by  the  Incas  ;  by  which  is  to  be  understood  the  gifts
and  offerings  that  were  made  to  idols     -  -  -  -       91

Chap.  XXX. — How  they  made  great  festivities  and  sacrifices  at  the
grand  and  solemn  feast  called  Hatun  Iiaymi      -  -  -       9i

Chap.  XXXI. — Of  the  second  king  or  Inca  who  reigned  in  Cuzco,
named  Sinchi  Roca  -  -  -  -  -  -       99

Chap.  XXXII. —  Of  the  third  king  who  reigned  in  Cuzco,  named
Lloque  Yupanqui  ......     I(j2

C  hap.  XXXIII. — Of  the  fourth  king  who  reigned  at  Cuzco,  named
Mayta  Capac,  and  of  what  happened  during  his  reign  -  -     105

Chap.  XXXIV. — Of  the  fifth  king  who  reigned  at  Cuzco,  named  Capac
Yupanqui  ----.-•,-     107

Chap.  XXXV. — Of  the  sixth  king  who  reigned  in  Cuzco,  and  of  what
happened  in  his  time  ;  and  of  the  fable  or  history  they  relate  touching
the  river  that  passes  through  the  midst  of  the  city  of  Cuzco       -     111

Chap.  XXXVI. — Of  the  seventh  king  or  Inca  who  reigned  in  Cuzco,
named  Inca  Yupanqui    -  -  -  -  -  -     115

Chap.  XXXVII. — How,  when  this  Inca  wanted  to  make  war  in  the
province  of  Collao,  a  certain  disturbance  arose  in  Cuzco ;  and  how
the  Chancas  conquered  the  Quichuas,  and  got  possession  of  their
dominions  -  -  -  -  -  -  -     117

Chap.  XXXVIII. — How  the  Orejones  considered  who  should  be  Inca,
and  what  passed  until  Viracocha  Inca  assumed  the  fringe,  who  was
the  eighth  Inca  that  reigned       -  -  -  -  -120


X  TABLE    OF    CONTENTS.

Chap.  XXXIX. — How  Viracocha  Inca  threw  a  stone  of  tire  with  a
sling  at  Caitomarca,  and  how  they  made  reverence         -  -     124

Chap.  XL. — How  a  tyrant  rose  up  in  Cuzco,  and  of  the  disturbance
lie  caused.  Of  the  chastisement  of  cei-tain  Mamaconas  for  having,
contrary  to  their  religion,  used  their  bodies  uncleanly ;  and  how
Viracocha  returned  to  Cuzco       -  -  -  -  -     127

Chap.  XLI. — How  ambassadors  from  the  tyrants  of  Collao  came  to
Cuzco,  and  of  the  departure  of  Viracocha  Ioca  for  the  Collao  -     130

Chap.  XLII. — How  Viracocha  Inca  passed  by  the  province  of  the
Canches  and  Canas,  and  marched  until  he  entered  the  territory  of
the  Collao,  and  of  what  happened  between  Cari  and  Zapana     -     133

Chap.  XLIII. — How  Cari  returned  to  Chucuito ;  of  the  arrival  of  the
Inca  Viracocha ;  and  of  the  peace  that  was  agreed  to  between
them       --------     136

Chap.  XLIV. — How  Inca  Urco  was  received  as  supreme  ruler  of  the
whole  empire,  and  assumed  the  crown  at  Cuzco,  and  how  the  Chancas
determined  to  come  forth  and  make  war  on  those  of  Cuzco       -     138

Chap.  XLV. — How  the  Chancas  arrived  at  the  city  of  Cuzco  and
pitched  their  camp  there,  and  of  the  terror  of  the  inhabitants,  and  the
great  valour  of  Inca  Yupanqui  -  141

Chap.  XLVI. — How  Inca  Yupanqui  was  received  as  king,  the  name  of
Inca  being  taken  from  Inca  Urco ;  and  how  the  new  sovereign  made
a  peace  with  Hastu  Huaraca      -----     144

Chap.  XL VII. — How  Inca  Yupanqui  set  out  from  Cuzco,  leaving
Lloque  Yupanqui  as  Governor,  and  of  what  happened  -  -     147

Chap.  XLVIII. — How  the  Inca  returned  to  Vilcas.  and  besieged  the
rocky  fastness  where  the  enemy  had  taken  refuge  -  -    150

Chap.  XLIX. — How  Inca  Yupanqui  ordered  Lloque  Yupanqui  to  pro-
ceed to  the  valley  of  Xauxa,  and  to  bring  under  his  dominion  the
Huancas  and  the  Yauyos,  their  neighbours,  with  other  nations  in
that  direction      -------     153

Chap.  L. — How  the  captains  of  the  Inca  left  Xauxa,  and  what  hap-
pened ;  and  how  Ancoallo  departed  from  among  them  -  -     156

Chap.  LI. — How  the  Royal  House  of  the  Sun  was  founded  on  a  hill
overlooking  Cuzco  towards  the  north,  which  the  Spaniards  usually
call  the  Fortress  ;  and  its  wonderful  construction,  and  the  size  of  the
stones  that  are  to  be  seen  there  -  -  -  -  -     160

Chap.  L1I. — How  Inca  Yupanqui  set  out  from  Cuzco  and  marched  to
the  Collao,  and  of  what  happened  there  -  -     165


TABLE    OF    CONTEXTS.  XI

Chap.  LIII. — How  Inca  Yupanqui  set  out  from  Cuzco,  and  what  be
did  ...-.--.     168

Chap.  LIV. — How  the  Inca  Yupanqui,  having  grown  very  old,  resigned
the  government  of  the  kingdom  to  Tupac  Inca,  his  son  -     171

Chap.  LV. — How  the  Collas  asked  for  peace,  and  how  the  Inca  granted
it  and  returned  to  Cuzco  _..._-     174.

Chap.  LVI. — How  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui  set  out  from  Cuzco,  and  how
he  conquered  all  the  country  from  thence  to  Quito;  and  touching  his
great  deeds  -  -  -  -  -  -  -     177

Chap.  LYII. — How  the  Inca  sent  from  Quito  to  know  whether  his
commands  had  been  obeyed,  and  how,  leaving  that  province  in  good
order,  he  set  out  to  go  to  the  valleys  of  the  Yuncas        -  -182

Chap.  LVIII. — How  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui  marched  by  the  coast  val-
leys, and  how  all  the  Yuncas  came  under  his  dominion  -  -     185

Chap.  LIX. — How  Tupac  Inca  again  set  out  from  Cuzco,  and  of  the
tierce  war  he  waged  with  those  of  Huarco  ;  and  how,  after  he  had
conquered  them,  he  returned  to  Cuzco   -  189

Chap.  LX. — How  Tupac  Inca  once  more  set  out  from  Cuzco,  and  how
he  went  to  the  Collao  and  from  thence  to  Chile,  subjugating  the  na-
tions in  that  direction ;  and  of  his  death  ...     194

Chap.  LXI. — How  Huayna  Capac  reigned  in  Cuzco,  who  was  the
twelfth  King  Inca  --_-._     197

Chap.  LXII. — How  Huayna  Capac  departed  from  Cuzco,  and  what  he
did         -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -     199

Chap.  LXIII. — How  Huayna  Capac  again  ordered  that  an  army  should
be  assembled,  and  how  he  set  out  for  Quito       -  -  -     204

Chap.  LXIY. — How  Huayna  Capac  entered  the  country  of  the  Braca-
moros,  and  returned  flying,  and  of  the  other  events  that  happened
until  he  arrived  at  Quito  -  -  -  -  -     2()8

Chap.  LXY. — How  Huayna  Capac  marched  through  the  coast  valleys,
and  what  he  did  -  -  -  -  -  -     211

Chap.  LXYI. — How,  when  Huayna  Capac  was  about  to  march  from
Quito,  he  sent  forward  certain  of  his  captains,  who  returned  flying
before  the  enemy,  and  what  he  did  in  consequence         -  -     214

Chat.  LXYII. — How  Huayna  Capac  assembled  all  his  power,  gave
battle  to  his  enemies,  and  defeated  them  ;  and  of  the  great  cruelty
with  which  he  treated  them  ....  217


Xll  TABLE    OF    CONTENTS.

Chap.  LXVIII. — How  the  King  Huayna  Capac  returned  to  Quito ;
and  how  he  knew  of  the  arrival  of  the  Spaniards  on  the  coast ;  and  of
his  death  -  -  -  -  -  -     220

Chap.  LXIX. — Of  the  lineage  and  character  of  Huascar  and  Ata-
hualpa   --------     224

Chap.  LXX. — How  Huascar  was  acknowledged  as  king  in  Cuzco,  after
the  death  of  his  father  ------     226

Chap.  LXXI. — How  the  differences  between  Huascar  and  Atahualpa
began,  and  how  great  battles  were  fought  between  them  -     229

Chap.  LXXII. — How  Atahualpa  set  out  from  Quito  with  his  army
and  captains,  and  how  he  gave  battle  to  Atoc  in  the  villages  of
Ambato  -  -  -  -  -  -  -     231

Chap.  LXXIII. — How  Huascar  sent  new  captains  and  troops  against
his  enemy ;  and  how  Atahualpa  arrived  at  Tumebamba,  where  he  per-
petrated great  cruelties;  also  what  happened  between  him  and  the
captains  of  Huascar        .---..     283

Index.

Names  of  Places  and  Tribes          -  237

Quichua  words       -------  240

Names  of  Indians  and  Gods           -  242

Names  of  Spaniards           ------  244

General  Index       -------  245

[In  the  Index,  "i"  refers  to  the  volume  containing  the  First  Part  of
the  Chronicle  of  Cieza  de  Leon;  and  "ii",  to  the  present  volume.]


DEDICATION


TO

ANDRES   AVELINO   CACERES

{General  of  Brigade  in  the  Peruvian  Army),

And  to  his  gallaut  companions  in  arms,  now  heroically  defending
their  native  country  against  fearful  odds,  I  dedicate  this  edition
of  the  narrative  of  that  scholarly  soldier,  Pedro  de  Cieza  de  Leon,
who  warmly  sympathised  with  the  people  of  the  land  of  the
Yncas,  advocated  their  cause,  and  denounced  their  wrongs.

The  natives  of  the  valley  of  Xauxa,  descendants  of  the  Huancas
mentioned  by  Cieza  de  Leon,  have  suffered  most  cruelly  from  the
inroads  of  the  Chilian  soldiery,  and  on  this  classic  ground  the
brave  Caceres  and  his  little  army  have  striven  to  protect  these
people  from  robbery  and  outrage.  Cieza  de  Leon  mentions  a  fact
relating  to  the  Huancas  of  the  Xauxa  valley,  which  gives  us  a
high  estimate  of  their  civilization.  The  cruelties  and  robberies  of
the  Spanish  conquerors,  whose  deeds  are  now  outdone  by  their
Chilian  imitators,  would  have  led  to  the  complete  destruction  of
the  natives  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  excellent  order  and  concert
of  their  polity.  They  made  an  agreement  among  themselves  that
if  an  army  of  Spaniards  passed  through  any  of  their  districts,
and  did  such  damage  as  would  be  caused  by  the  destruction  of
growing  crops,  by  the  sacking  of  houses,  and  other  mischief  of
still  worse  kinds,  the  accountants  should  keep  careful  records  of
the  injury  done.  The  accounts  were  then  examined  and  checked  :
and  if  one  district  had  lost  more  than  another,  those  which  had


XIV

suffered  less  made  up  part  of  the  difference  ;  so  that  the  burden
was  shared  equally  by  all.1

It  is  among  the  descendants  of  these  Huancas  that  the  Chilians
are  now  committing  havoc.  With  the  Peruvians,  with  the  men
who  are  fighting  in  the  noblest  of  all  causes — the  defence  of
their  Fatherlaud — with  General  Caceres  and  his  companions  in
arms,  must  be  the  hearty  sympathies  and  best  wishes  of  all  who
hate  wrong  and  love  patriotic  devotion.  Through  that  devotion,
through  the  sacrifices  and  self-denials  entailed  upon  the  unfor-
tunate people  of  the  land  of  the  Yncas,  may  be  seen  those  rays  of
light  which  break  the  black  cloud  now  hanging  over  the  country
and  the  race  described  by  Cieza  de  Leon  in  the  following  pages.

May  his  naiTative  excite  the  interest  of  many  readers,  and
so  enlist  sympathy  for  the  descendants  of  that  people  whose  story
he  tells  so  well.

1  See  p.  34.

June  1883.


I  NTKODUOTION.


The  present  volume,  which  has  been  selected  for
issue  by  the  Hakluyt  Society,  contains  the  Second
Part  of  the  Chronicle  of  Peru,  by  Pedro  de  Cieza
de  Leon.  The  First  Part  formed  one  of  the  Society's
volumes  for  1864,  having  been  translated  from  the
Antwerp  edition  of  1554.

When  I  translated  and  edited  the  First  Part,  no
other  had  been  printed.  I  then  had  reason  to
believe  that  the  author  completed  the  second  and
third  parts  of  his  Chronicle,  and  that  one  of  these
parts  had  come  into  the  possession  of  Mr.  Lenox  of
New  York,  in  manuscript.  I  lamented  the  disap-
pearance of  the  Second  Part,  and  referred  to  it  as
one  of  the  greatest  losses  that  had  been  sustained
by  South  American  literature.1

It  has  now  been  discovered  that  the  manuscript
narrative  which  Mr.  Prescott  frequently  refers  to,  in
his  History  of  the  Conquest  of  Peru,  as  "Sarmiento",
and  which  he  considered  to  be  one  of  the  most  valu-
able of  his  authorities,  is  in  reality  the  Second  Part
of  the  work  of  Cieza  de  Leon.  Mr.  Prescott  quotes
the  title  in  his  critical  notice,2  "para  el  III  mo  Senor
Dn.  Juan  Sarmiento,  Presidente  del  Consejo  Rl.  de
Indias",  and  assumes  that  this  Don  Juan  Sarmiento

1   Introduction,  p.  xviii.  -  History,  i,  p.  161.


XVI  INTRODUCTION.

was  the  author,  who,  after  having  travelled  in  all
parts  of  Peru  and  diligently  collected  information
from  the  Ynca  nobles,  subsequently  became  Presi-
dent of  the  Council  of  the  Indies.  In  reality,  the
word  para  means  "for",  and  not  "by",  and  the
manuscript  is  simply  addressed  to  Dr.  Sarmiento,
who  never  crossed  the  Atlantic  in  his  life,  and  who
only  held  the  post  of  President  of  the  Council  of
the  Indies  for  twenty  months.1

Mr.  Prescott  made  much  use  of  both  parts,  and
considered  them  to  be  works  of  great  merit.  If
what  he  says  in  praise  of  the  author  he  supposed
to  be  Sarmiento,2  is  added  to  what  he  says  of  Cieza
de  Leon,3  it  will  at  once  be  seen  that  the  latter,
really  the  only  author,  is  a  very  important  authority
indeed.

It  is  with  a  feeling  of  reverential  regret  that  the
present  editor  refers  to  any  mistake,  even  one  so
slight  as  this,  of  the  illustrious  American  historian.
Some  of  my  brightest  and  happiest  memories  are  of
the  ten  days  I  spent  at  Pepperell  with  Mr.  Prescott,
when  I  was  on  the  eve  of  commencing  my  studies  in
the  land  of  the  Yncas.  He  it  was  who  encouraged
me  to  undertake  my  Peruvian  investigations,  and  to

1  The  Spanish  editor  accounts  for  Mr.  Prescott's  mistake  by
supposing  that  the  person  employed  to  copy  the  manuscript  had
written  por  (by)  instead  of  para  (for).  But  this  is  not  so,  as  Mr.
Prescott  himself  quotes  the  word  para  (i,  p.  161).  The  Spanish
editor  refers  to  a  life  of  Sarmiento  in  the  Historia  del  Colejio  Yiejo
de  San  Bartolome  Mayor  de  la  celehre  U niversidad  de  Salamanca,
2d  edicion,  Primera  Parte,  p.  336.

'2  Conquest  of  Peru,  i,  160-62.  3  Ibid.,  ii,  297-99.


INTRODUCTION.  XV11

persevere  in  them.  To  his  kindly  advice  and  assist-
ance I  owe  more  than  I  can  say,  and  to  him  is  due,
in  no  small  degree,  the  value  of  anything  I  have
since  been  able  to  do  in  furtherance  of  Peruvian  re-
search.

The  evidence  that  the  work  attributed  by  Pres-
cott  to  Sarmiento  is  in  reality  the  Second  Part  of
the  Chronicle  of  Cieza  de  Leon  is  quite  conclusive.
There  are  no  less  than  ten  occasions  on  which  the
author  of  the  Second  Part  (Prescott's  "  Sarmiento")
refers  to  passages  in  his  First  Part,  which  occur  in
the  First  Part  of  Cieza  de  Leon.1  In  one  place
there  is  a  reference  in  the  Second  Part  to  the
actual  number  of  the  chapter  in  the  First  Part.2
In  the  Second  Part,  the  author  mentions  having
gone,  to  Toledo  to  present  the  First  Part  of  his
Chronicle  to  the  Prince  Don  Felipe  ;3  and  this  state-
ment is  equivalent  to  having  signed  his  name.  For
only  one  First  Part  of  a  chronicle  relating  to  the
Indies  was  dedicated  to  the  Prince,  namely  that  of
Cieza  de  Leon.  The  author  of  the  Second  Part  also
mentions  having  been  to  Bahaire,  near  Cartagena,
and  to  the  province  of  Anna — places  visited  by
Cieza  de  Leon,  and  mentioned  in  his  First  Part.

The  manuscript  of  the  Second  Part  was  preserved
in  the  library  of  the  Escurial,4  in  a  bad  copy  dating

1  Cronica,  ii,  pp.  25,  44,  45,  51,  131,  160,  173,  180,  193,  212.

2  Ibid.,  ii,  p.  212,  reference  to  chapter  liii  (liv  in  the  incorrectly
numbered  Antwerp  edition)  of  the  First  Part.  See  my  Transla-
tion, p.  192.  3  Page  84.

4  Biblioteca  de  Escorial,  codice  L,  j,  5  from  folio  1  to  130
inclusive.

b


XV111  INTRODUCTION.

from  the  middle,  or  end,  of  the  16th  century.  The
first  sheet  is  missing,  and  the  second  begins  in  the
middle  of  a  sentence  towards  the  end  "of  the  third
chapter.  Thus  the  two  opening  chapters  and  part
of  the  third  are  lost.

The  text  of  the  Escurial  manuscript  has  been
printed  by  two  accomplished  scholars — the  Peruvian
Dr.  Manuel  Gonzalez  de  la  Bosa  in  1873  ;  and  the
Spaniard  Don  Marcos  Jimenez  de  la  Espada  at
Madrid  in  1880.  Both,  independently,  detected  the
mistake  of  Prescott  as  soon  as  they  began  to  ex-
amine the  text  critically.  The  text  was  reprinted
by  Dr.  de  la  Bosa  with  scrupulous  care ;  the  spelling,
imperfect  punctuation,  and  capricious  use  of  capitals
in  the  manuscript  being  very  carefully  preserved.
But  instead  of  retaining  the  manuscript  numbering
of  chapters,  Dr.  de  la  Bosa  omits  the  fragment  of
chapter  iii,  and  calls  the  fourth  chapter,  chapter  i.
An  edition  was  printed  off  by  Mr.  Trubner,  but
soon  afterwards  Dr.  de  la  Bosa  left  London  for  Peru,
without  completing  the  editorial  work.  So  that
this  edition  of  the  second  part  of  Cieza  de  Leon
has  never  been  editorially  completed  or  published,
and  remains  on  Mr.  Triibner's  hands.

Don  Marcos  Jimenez  de  la  Espada,  to  whom  the
student  of  Peruvian  history  is  so  much  indebted  for
other  precious  editorial  work,  delayed  his  publication
of  the  text  of  the  Second  Part  of  Cieza  de  Leon,
because  he  had  heard  from  Don  Pascual  de  Gayan-
gos  that  the  learned  Peruvian,  Dr.  de  la  Bosa,  was
engaged   upon   the    same   work.     It  was  not  until


INTRODUCTION.  X I X

1880  that  the  edition  of  Espada  was  published  at
Madrid.1  The  Spanish  editor  has  corrected  the
spelling  and  punctuation,  and  has  supplied  many
useful  notes.  Five  copies  appear  to  have  been  made
of  the  Escurial  manuscript.  One,  very  carelessly
executed,  is  in  the  Academy  of  History  at  Madrid.
The  second  was  in  the  collection  of  Lord  Kings-
borough,  from  which  was  copied,  through  Mr.  Rich's
agency,  the  one  supplied  to  Mr.  Prescott,  which  is
the  third.  The  fourth  and  fifth  are  those  from
which  the  versions  of  Rosa  and  Espada  were
printed.

In  the  Prologue  to  his  First  Part,  Cieza  de  Leon
announced  the  plan  of  his  great  work  : — .

Part  i.      The  divisions  and  description  of  the  provinces  of  Peru.
Part  ii.     The  government,  great  deeds,  origin,  policy,  buildings,  and

roads  of  the  Yncas.
Part  hi.  Discovery  and  conquest  of  Peru  by  Pizarro,  and  rebellion  of

the  Indians.
Part  iv.  Book  I.       "War  between  Pizarro  and  Alraagro.
Book  II.     War  of  the  young  Almagro.
Book  III.  The  civil  war  of  Quito.
Book  IV.    War  of  Huarina.
Book  V.     AVar  of  Xaquixaguana.
Commentary  I.     Events   from   the   founding    of   the  Audience  to   the

departure  of  the  President.
Commentary  II.  Events  to  the  arrival  of  the  Viceroy  Mendoza.

Part  I  of  this  very  complete  Chronicle  of  Peru
was  published  at  Seville  in  folio,  by  Martin  Clement

1  Biblioteca  Hispano-Uliramarina.  Segunda  Parte  de  laCronica
del  Peru,  que  trata  del  Sefiorio  de  los  Incas  Yupanquis  y  de  sus
grandes  hechos  y  gobernacion,  escrita  por  Pedro  de  Cieza  de  Leon.
La  publica  Marcos  Jimenez  de  la  Espada.  Madrid,  Imprenta  de
Manuel  Gines  Hernandez,  Libertad,  16  duplicado,  bajo,  1880.
Pp.  279,  and  xi  of  Introduction.

b2


XX  INTRODUCTION.

in  1553.  A  second  edition,  in  duodecimo,  was
printed  at  Antwerp  by  Jean  Steeltz  in  1554  ;x  and
another  independent  edition,  also  at  Antwerp  and
in  the  same  year,  by  Martin  Nucio.  In  1555  an
Italian  translation,  by  Agostino  di  Gravalis,  appeared
at  Home,  and  was  reprinted  at  Venice  by  Giordano
Ziletti,  in  1560.  A  third  Italian  version  was  pub-
lished at  Venice  in  1566.  An  English  translation
by  John  Stevens  came  out  in  London  in  1576.  The
latest  Spanish  edition  forms  part  of  the  second
volume  of  the  Historiadores  Primitivos  de  Indias,
in  the  Biblioteca  de  Autores  Espanoles  (vol.  26),
and  is  edited  by  Don  Enrique  de  Vedia.  It  was
published  at  Madrid  in  1853.  Lastly,  the  Hakluyt
Society  issued  a  translation  in  English  in  1864.2

Part  II  remained  in  manuscript  until  1873,  when
the  Peruvian  editor,  and  in  1880  the  Spanish  editor,
printed  their  versions.  An  English  translation  is
now,  for  the  first  time,  issued  by  the  Hakluyt
Society.

Part  III,  and  Books  I  and  II  of  Part  IV,  are
still  in  manuscript  and  inaccessible,  but  Don  M.  J.
de  la  Espada  knows  that  they  exist  and  where,
although  he  has  not  seen  them.

Book  III  of  Part  IV  long  remained  inedited.
The  manuscript  is  in  the  Royal  Library  at  Madrid,

1  This  was  the  edition  used  by  Prescott ;  and  by  me  in  trans-
lating the  First  Part  for  the  Hakluyt  Society.

2  Don  M.  J.  de  la  Espada  says  of  the  Hakluyt  Society's
volume: — "Edition  muy  bella.  Bien  anotada  en  la  parte  geo-
grafica  y  de  historia  natural,  en  la  bistorica  y  biografica  con  los
comentarios  de  Garcilasso  y  las  decadas  de  Herrera."


INTRODUCTION.  XXI

and  is  in  handwriting  of  the  middle  of  the  16th
century.  It  includes  the  war  of  Quito,  and  is
divided  into  239  chapters.  A  copy  of  this  manu-
script was  included  in  the  collection  of  Don  Antonio
de  Uguina,  on  whose  death  it  passed  into  the  pos-
session of  M.  Ternaux-Compans  of  Paris.  After-
wards Mr.  Rich  obtained  it,  and  sold  it  in  1849  to
Mr.  Lenox  of  New  York  for  £600.  At  length
this  Booh  III  of  Part  IV  was  printed  and  edited  in
1877,  with  an  interesting  and  very  learned  introduc-
tion by  Don  Marcos  Jimenez  de  la  Espada.1

Books  IV  and  V  of  Part  iv,  and  the  two  Com-
mentaries, are  not  known  to  be  in  existence ;  but  they
were  written,  for  Cieza  de  Leon  refers  to  them  in
his  Prologue  as  completed.

Mr.  Prescott  was  mistaken  in  supposing  that  Cieza
de  Leon  only  completed  the  First  Part.8  He  worked
so  diligently,  and  with  such  ability,  and  sound  judg-
ment, that  he  was  able  to  finish  the  whole  of  the
grand  work  he  had  projected.  He  is  thus  the
greatest  and  most  illustrious  among  the  historians  of
Peru.  So  that  his  fate  has  been  peculiarly  hard.
For  more  than  three  centuries  his  First  Part  only

1  Biblioteca  Hispano-Ultramarina.  Tercero  libro  de  las  Guerras
Civiles  del  Peru,  el  dial  se  llama  la  Guerra  de  Quito,  hecho  por
Pedro  de  Cieza  de  Leou,  Coronista  de  las  cosas  de  las  Iudias.
Madrid,  1877.  Prologo  por  M.  J.  de  la  Espada,  pp.  cxix.  La  Guerra
de  Quito,  pp.  176.     Apendices,  pp.  120.

2  "  The  First  Part,  as  already  noticed,  was  alone  completed.
The  author  died  without  having  covered  any  portion  of  the  mag-
nificent ground  plan  which  he  had  confidently  laid  out." — Conquest
of  Peru,  ii.  p.  298.


XX11  INTRODUCTION.

has  been  credited  to  him.  His  most  valuable  Second
Part,  though  used  and  highly  appreciated  by  Mr.
Prescott,  was  attributed  to  an  obscure  lawyer  who
never  was  out  of  Spain  in  his  life.  One  book  of  his
Fourth  Part  has  also  at  length  been  edited,  but  all
the  rest  of  his  work  still  remains  in  manuscript.  The
accomplished  Spanish  editor,  Don  Marcos  Jimenez
de  la  Espada,  was  influenced  in  his  labours  and
researches  by  a  generous  zeal  to  repair,  in  some
degree,  the  great  injustice  which  has  been  done  to
the  memory  of  Cieza  de  Leon.

In  my  Introduction  to  the  First  Part,  I  gave  some
account  of  the  author,  all  indeed  that  could  be
gathered  from  the  part  of  his  work  then  accessible;
and  I  said  that  he  was  supposed  to  have  been  born
in  Seville.1  This  is  an  error.  The  Spanish  editor
has  pointed  out  the  authority  for  believing  that  the
place  of  his  birth  was  the  town  of  Llerena  in  Estre-
madura.2     In  my  former  Introduction  I  suggested

1  So  says  Fray  Buenaventura  de  Salinas  y  Cordova,  in  his
Memorial  de  las  Historias  dal  Niievo  Mundo  Piru  (Lima  1630),
but  without  giving  any  authority.

2  Herrera  gives  Llerena  as  the  birthplace  of  Cieza  de  Leon
(Dec.  vi,  lib.  vi,  cap.  4;  and  Dec.  vii,  lib.  ix,  cap.  19).  In  the
latter  of  these  two  passages,  in  the  first  edition,  the  word  is
printed  Ei-ena,  an  error  which  is  repeated  in  the  editions  of
Antwerp  and  of  Gonzalez  Barcia.  Piedrahita  (lib.  iv,  cap.  2)  re-
peals that  Cieza  de  Leon  was  a  native  of  Llerena.  The  town  of
Llerena  is  nineteen  leagues  east  of  Badajos,  at  the  foot  of  the
Sierra  de  San  Miguel.  It  was  taken  from  the  Saracens  in  1241  ;
and  in  1340  Alfonso  XI  assembled  the  Cortes  at  Llerena.
Besides  Cieza,  it  produced  the  Holguins,  and  Juan  de  Pozo,  the
watchmaker  who  placed  the  giralda  on  the  tower  of  Seville.


INTRODUCTION.  XX111

from  the  dates,  and  from  the  company  in  which  we
find  him  immediately  on  landing  in  America,  that
young  Cieza  de  Leon,  then  a  boy  between  13  and  15,
sailed  from  his  native  land  in  one  of  the  ships  which
formed  the   expeditionary  fleet  of   Don    Pedro   de
Heredia,  who  had  obtained  a  grant  of  the  govern-
ment of  the  region  between  the  river  Magdalena
and  the  gulf  of  Darien.     This  fleet  left  Cadiz    in
1532,  and  arrived  at  Cartagena  in  1533.     But  the
Spanish  editor  has  shown  that  there  are  difficulties
in  the  way  of  this  conclusion,  and  Cieza  himself  is
slightly  contradictory  in  the  matter  of  dates.     He,
however,    mentions    having   seen   the   treasures   of
Atahualpa  at  Seville,  when  they  arrived  from  Caxa-
marca,1  which  was  in  1534.     Senor  de  le  Espada,
therefore,  concludes  that  our  author   did   not  sail
for  America  until  1534,  and  that  he  embarked  with
the    ships    of  Rodrigo    Duran,  which   anchored   at
Cartagena  in  November  1534.     At   all   events    he
was  in  San  Sebastian  de  Buena  Vista  in  1537,2  and
was  with  the  first   Spaniards  who  opened  a  road
from  the  north  to  the  south  sea.     Thence  he  ac-
companied Pedro  Vadillo  in  his  expedition  up  the
valley  of  the  Cauca  to  Cali,  and  then  joined  Jorge
de  Pobledo,  who  established  towns  in  this  Cauca
valley,  and  conquered  some  of  the  cannibal  tribes.
It  was  at  this  time,  in  1541,  when  at  Cartago  in  the
Cauca  valley,  that  our  author  conceived  a  strong
desire  to  write  an  account  of  the  strange  things  that

1  See  my  Translation,  p.  335.  3  My  Translation,  p.  40.


XXIV  INTRODUCTION.

were  to  be  seen  in  the  new  world.1  "  Oftentimes
when  the  other  soldiers  were  reposing,  I  was  tiring
myself  by  writing.  Neither  fatigue,  nor  the  rugged-
ness  of  the  country,  nor  the  mountains  and  rivers,
nor  intolerable  hunger  and  suffering,  have  ever  been
sufficient  to  obstruct  my  two  duties,  namely,  writing,
and  following  my  flag  and  my  captain  without  fault."
In  1547  he  joined  the  President  Gasca  in  his  march
to  Cuzco,  and  was  present  at  the  final  rout  of
Gonzalo  Pizarro.  After  a  residence  at  Cuzco  he
undertook  a  journey  southwards  to  Charcas,  under
the  special  auspices  of  Gasca,  and  with  the  sole
object  of  learning  all  that  was  worthy  of  notice.
Returning  to  Lima  he  finished  his  First  Part  on
September  8th,  1550.  He  says  he  was  then  thirty-
two  years  of  age,  and  had  passed  seventeen  of  them
in  the  Indies.

The  Second  Part  was  also  nearly  completed  before
Cieza  de  Leon  left  Peru,  because  he  mentions  having
shown  most  of  it  to  two  learned  judges  at  Lima,
Dr.  Bravo  de  Saravia  and  the  Licentiate  Hernando
de  Santillan.  The  latter  was  himself  the  author  of
a  valuable  work  on  the  government  of  the  Yncas,

1  Mr.  Robert  Blake  White,  who  has  travelled  in  the  valley  of
the  Cauca,  read  an  interesting  paper  on  the  "Central  Provinces  of
Colombia",  at  the  meeting  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society  on
February  26th,  1883.  He  afterwards  read  the  First  Part  of  the
Chronicle  of  Cieza  de  Leon,  and  was  struck  by  the  accuracy
with  which  the  soldier-historian  described  that  same  region  which
Mr.  Blake  White  travelled  over  more  than  three  hundred  years
afterwards.  The  English  explorer  was  much  interested  in  the
perusal  of  the  work  of  his  Spanish  predecessor.


INTRODUCTION.  XXV

which  also  long  remained  in  manuscript.  It  was
first  printed  in  Madrid  in  1879,  having  been  edited
by  Don  Marcos  Jimenez  de  la  Espada.  From  inci-
dental notices  in  the  Second  Part,  we  learn  how
diligently  young  Cieza  de  Leon  collected  information
respecting  the  history  and  government  of  the  Yncas,
after  he  had  written  his  accurate  yet  picturesque  de-
scription of  the  country  in  his  First  Part.  He  often
asked  the  Indians  what  they  knew  of  their  condi-
tion before  the  Yncas  became  their  lords.1  He
carefully  examined  the  temple  of  Cacha,  and  in-
quired into  the  traditions  concerning  it,  from  the
intelligent  native  governor  of  an  adjacent  village.2
In  1550  he  went  to  Cuzco  with  the  object  of  col-
lecting information,  and  it  was  arranged  by  Juan  de
Saavedra,  the  Corregidor  of  that  city,  that  one  of
the  surviving  descendants  of  the  great  Ynca  Huayna
Ccapac,  an  intelligent  and  learned  native  named
Cayu  Tupac,  should  confer  with  him.  At  the  very
time  when  Cieza  de  Leon  was  diligently  studying
the  history  of  the  Yncas  under  the  guidance  of  this
Peruvian  "  Pundit",  the  young  Ynca  Garcilasso  de
la  Vega,  then  eleven  years  of  age,  was  at  school  in
the  same  old  city  of  Cuzco,  learning  Latin  under  the
good  Canon  Cuellar.  The  two  historians  must  often
have  seen  each  other,  the  little  half-caste  boy  play-
ing in  the  streets  with  his  schoolfellows,  and  the
stately  young  Spanish  soldier  studying  carefully  with
his  noble  Ynca  friend.     Cieza  de  Leon  explains  the

1  Page  2.  2  Page  7.


XXVI  INTRODUCTION.

plan  of  his  Second  Part,  which  was,  first  to  review
the  system  of  government  of  the  Yncas,  and  then
to  narrate  the  events  of  the  reign  of  each  sovereign.
He  weighs  conflicting  evidence,  and  gives  the  version
which  appears  to  him  to  be  nearest  the  truth,  some-
times also  adding  the  grounds  of  his  decision.  He
spared  no  pains  to  obtain  the  best  and  most  au-
thentic information ;  and  his  sympathy  with  the
conquered  people,  and  generous  appreciation  of  their
many  good  and  noble  qualities,  give  a  special  charm
to  his  narrative.

Cieza  de  Leon  is  certainly  one  of  the  most  im-
portant authorities  on  Ynca  history  and  civilization,
whether  we  consider  his  peculiar  advantages  in  col-
lecting information,  or  his  character  as  a  conscien-
tious historian.  His  remarks  respecting  the  Ynca
roads  and  system  of  posts,  on  the  use  of  the  quipus,
on  the  system  of  colonists,  and  on  the  ceremonial
songs  and  recitations  to  preserve  the  memory  of
historical  events,  are  of  the  first  importance.  He
bears  striking  evidence  of  the  historical  faculty
possessed  by  the  learned  men  at  the  court  of  the
Yncas.  After  saying  that,  on  the  death  of  a  sove-
reign, the  chroniclers  related  the  events  of  his  reign
to  his  successor,  he  adds  : — "  They  could  well  do  this,
for  there  were  among  them  some  men  with  good
memories,  sound  judgments,  and  subtle  genius,  and
full  of  reasoning  power,  as  we  can  bear  witness  who
have  heard  them  even  in  these  our  days."1

Students  owe  much  to  the  labours  of  Don  Marcos
1  Page  32.


INTRODUCTION.  XXVll

Jimenez  de  la  Espada.  He  has  not  only  edited  the
text  of  the  Second  Part  of  Cieza  de  Leon,  and  his
War  of  Quito,  but  also  the  hitherto  inedited  narra-
tives of  Betanzos,  Molina,  Salcamayhua,  Santillan,
and  an  anonymous  work,  all  of  great  importance
with  reference  to  the  history  and  civilization  of  the
Yncas.  These  additions  to  our  knowledge  are  suffi-
cient to  show  us  how  much  there  is  to  learn  before
anything  approaching  to  a  correct  appreciation  of
this  interesting  subject  can  be  attained.  The  future
historian  who  will  at  last  achieve  this  task,  must  be
intimately  acquainted  with  every  part  of  the  Ynca-
rial  empire,  must  be  a  thorough  Quichua  scholar,
must  have  closely  studied  all  early  Spanish  writers,
and  must  possess  the  critical  faculty  to  enable  him
to  assign  its  proper  weight  to  the  varied  evidence
given  by  many  different  authorities.  The  present
useful  labour  of  editing  and  indexing  will  prepare
the  way  for  the  future  work.  It  is  the  accumulation,
sorting,  and  preparation  of  the  materials  with  which
the  noble  edifice  will  some  day  be  built.

The  Index  of  the  present  volume  is  classified  on
the  same  principle  as  those  in  the  volumes  of  Gar-
cilasso  de  la  Vega,  Acosta,  Molina,  Salcamayhua,
Avila,  and  Polo  de  Ondegardo.  The  student  is  thus
able  to  see,  without  trouble,  the  Quichua  words  and
the  names  of  places  and  persons  which  are  men-
tioned by  each  author.  His  studies  will  in  this  way
be  much  facilitated,  especially  if  he  undertakes  the
task  of  weighing  the  respective  value  of  facts  and
opinions  given  by  different  writers.     Such  an  inves-


XXV111  INTRODUCTION.

tigation  is  one  essential  step  towards  the  compre-
hension of  the  history  and  civilization  of  the  Yncas.
A  more  important  inquiry  refers  to  the  assignment
of  traditions,  customs,  beliefs,  and  words  to  the
different  races  which  were  comprehended  in  the
Yncarial  empire.  But  this  can  only  be  attempted
by  students  of  the  native  languages.  It  is  from
Peru  itself — from  learned  and  painstaking  Peruvian
scholars — that  we  must  look  for  future  real  progress
in  this  most  interesting  field  of  research.  Republican
Peru  has  already  produced  many  eminent  writers
who  have  devoted  their  talents  to  historical  studies,
and  to  the  elucidation  of  the  archaeology  and  philo-
logy of  their  native  land.  The  names  of  Bivero,  Paz
Soldan,  Palma,  Zegarra,  Barranca,  Mujica,  and  others,
at  once  occur  to  the  mind.  Peru,  in  her  undeserved
misfortunes,  has  shown  that  her  sons  can  fight
bravely  for  their  beloved  fatherland.  In  literature,
many  of  her  sons  have  shed  lustre  on  their  country's
history.  In  no  christian  land  is  there  warmer  family
affection ;  in  none  is  there  truer  and  more  cordial
hospitality.  Those  who  know  Peru  best,  most  deeply
regret  her  misfortunes,  and  most  heartily  desire
her  future  welfare.


NOTE


THE    ANCIENT   YNCA   DRAMA.


The  reference  of  Cieza  de  Leon  to  the  songs  and
recitations  at  the  court  of  the  Yncas  suggests  the
question  of  the  existence  among  the  ancient  Peru-
vians of  a  drama,  or  system  of  representing  his-
torical and  other  events  by  means  of  dialogues.
This,  therefore,  seems  a  suitable  opportunity  for
examining  what  light  is  thrown  on  the  question  in
the  works  which,  in  a  translated  form,  have  been
issued  by  the  Hakluyt  Society;  and  for  considering
the  most  reasonable  conclusion  to  be  derived  from
the  materials  now  within  our  reach.

At  page  32  of  the  present  volume,  Cieza  de  Leon
says  that  the  most  learned  among  the  peoj)le  were
selected  to  make  known  historical  events  by  songs
and  recitations,  which  were  handed  down  from
memory.  This  is  the  germ  of  dramatic  representa-
tion, which  might  be  expected  to  attain  fuller  de-
velopment ;  and  that  it  did  so  is  clear  from  the
evidence  of  other  historians.  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega
says: — "The  Amautas,  or  philosophers,  were  not
wanting  in  ability  to  compose  comedies  and  tragedies,
which  were  represented  before  their  kings  on  solemn


XXX        THE  ANCIENT  YNCA  DRAMA.

festivals.  The  subject  matter  of  the  tragedy  always
related  to  military  deeds,  triumphs,  and  victories,  or
to  the  grandeur  of  former  kings  and  of  other  heroic
men.  The  arguments  of  the  comedies  were  on  agri-
culture and  familiar  household  subjects.  All  the
plays  were  on  decorous  and  important  topics,  the
sentences  being  such  as  befitted  the  occasion.  They
understood  the  composition  of  long  and  short  verses,
with  the  right  number  of  syllables  in  each.  They
did  not  use  rhymes  in  the  verses,  but  all  were
blank."1  The  native  author,  Salcamayhua,  also  bears
witness  to  the  existence  of  an  ancient  drama,  and
even  gives  the  Quichua  names  of  four  different
kinds  of  plays.  "In  the  festival  they  represented
plays  called  anay  sauca,2  hayachuca,3  llama-llama,4'
and  hanamsi."5  That  the  memory  of  the  old  dra-
matic lore  was  preserved,  and  handed  down  after
the  Spanish  conquest,  is  proved  by  the  sentence
pronounced  on  the  rebels  at  Cuzco  in  1781,  by  the
Judge  Areche.  It  prohibited  "  the  representation
of  dramas,  as  well  as  all  other  festivals  which  the
Indians  celebrated  in  memory  of  their  Yncas."6  Dr.
Justiniani,  a  descendant  of  the  Yncas,  who  was
eighty-five  when  I  knew  him,  in  1853,  told  me  that
he  could  remember  having  seen,  when  a  very  little


1  Vol.  i,  p.  194.

2  Afiay,  interjection  of  praise ;  sauca,  joy,  pleasure.

3  A  word  referring  to  some  kind  of  head-dress.

4  Very  brutish.     Probably  a  farce.  5  Tragic.

6  Coleccion  de  obras  y  documentos  por  Don   Pedro  de  Angelis,
vol.  v  (Buenos  Ayres,  1836-37).


THE   ANCIENT   YNCA    DRAMA.  XXXI

boy,  a  Quichua  tragedy  acted  by  Indians  in  the
town  of  Tinta.1

The  Spanish  priests  took  advantage  of  this  apti-
tude of  the  Indians  for  dramatic  representation,  and
composed  religious  plays  in  the  Quichua  language,
in  imitation  of  the  Autos  Sacramentales  then  in
vogue.  Garcilasso  says, — "  The  Jesuits  composed
comedies  for  the  Indians  to  act,  because  they  knew
that  this  was  the  custom  in  the  time  of  the  Yncas."
He  mentions  three  such  plays,2  and  adds,  "  the
Indian  lads  repeated  the  dialogues  with  so  much
grace,  feeling,  and  correct  action  that  they  gave
universal  satisfaction  and  pleasure ;  and  with  so
much  plaintive  softness  in  the  songs,  that  many
Spaniards  shed  tears  of  joy  at  seeing  their  ability
and  skill.  From  that  time  the  Spaniards  disabused
themselves  of  the  opinion  that  the  Indians  were
dull,  barbarous,  and  stupid."

Several  of  these  religious  plays  were  written  by
the  Spanish  priests  in  the  Quichua  language,  for
the  people  to  perform  at  great  festivals,  and  they  of
course  bear  unmistakeable  evidence  of  their  Spanish
origin.  I  possess  two  of  these  plays.  One  is  by
Dr.  Lunarejo,  a  native  of  Cuzco,  and  a  celebrated
Quichua  scholar,  who  flourished  in  the  eighteenth
century.  It  is  entitled  Comeclia  famosa  del  pobre
mas  rico,    and  is   on    the  plan  of  the   "Autos"  of

1  Padre  Francisco  Ituri  also  speaks  of  the  "  Quichua  dramas
transmitted  to  our  day  by  an  unbroken  tradition." — Carta  critica
sobre  "  La  Historia  de  America  de  Juan  B.  Munoz"  (Rome,  1797).

-  Vol.  i,  pp.  203-204.


XXX11  THE    ANCIENT   YNCA    DRAMA.

Lope  de  Vega  and  Calderon.  The  other  is  anony-
mous and  appears  to  be  of  earlier  date.  The  title
is  Usca  Paucar,  Auto  Sacramental  el  Patrocinio  de
Maria.

We  thus  have  evidence  that  the  Yncas  cultivated
the  drama  in  ancient  times;  that  some  of  the  plays
were  handed  down  and  were  acted  as  late  as  1781;
and  that  the  Spanish  priests,  finding  that  the  Peru-
vians possessed  traditional  aptitude  for  dramatic
performances,  turned  this  talent  to  account  in  the
inculcation  of  religious  dogma.  It  might,  therefore,
naturally  be  expected  that  one  or  more  of  the  ancient
Ynca  plays,  as  distinguished  from  the  religious
"Autos"  of  Spanish  times,  would  have  been  preserved.
It  has  long  been  known  that  at  least  one  such  drama
does  exist,  under  the  title  of  Ollantay,  and  Quichua
scholars  concur  in  the  belief  that  it  is  really  of
ancient  origin,  and  that  it  dates  from  pre- Spanish
times.

The  drama  of  Ollantay,  as  it  now  exists,  was
arranged  for  representation,  divided  into  scenes,
and  supplied  with  stage  directions  in  Spanish  times ;
but  competent  Quichua  students  believe  that  most
of  the  dialogues,  speeches,  and  songs  date  from  a
period  before  the  conquest ;  and  that  consequently
it  is  an  Ynca  drama.  The  manuscript  copies  are  pro-
bably numerous,  some  carelessly  made  by  ignorant
scribes,  and  containing  modern  words  in  substitution
of  what  may  have  been  illegible  in  the  originals.
But  others  are  older  and  more  correct  versions,  and
these  alone  should  be  referred  to  in  discussing  the


THE    ANCIENT    YNCA    DRAMA.  XXX1J1

question  of  the  date  of  this  composition.  A  really
critical  text  has  not,  however,  been  hitherto  estab-
lished, from  which  all  modern  interpolations  have
been  excluded,  and  the  readings  in  the  most  au-
thentic and  oldest  versions  alone  retained.

The  drama  was  first  brought  to  notice  by  Don
Manuel  Palacios,  in  the  Museo  Erudito,  a  periodical
published  at  Cuzco  in  1837.  The  learned  Peruvian
mineralogist  and  antiquary,  Don  Mariano  Eduardo
de  Rivero,1  in  his  work  entitled  Antiguedades
Peruanas,  gave  two  specimens  from  it,  in  Quichua
and  Spanish.  Senor  BAvero  says  that  copies  of
Ollantay,  written  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth
centuries,  are  preserved  in  private  libraries  at
Cuzco.2  The  whole  text  was  first  printed  by  Dr.
von  Tschudi  at  the  end  of  his  Quichua  Grammar,
but  without  a  translation,  in  1853.3  The  manu-
script used  by  the  learned  German  was  copied  from
one  preserved  in  the  Dominican  monastery  at  Cuzco
by  one  of  the  monks,  between  1840  and  1845,  for
the  artist  Ruggendas  of  Munich,  who  gave  it  to
Dr.  von  Tschudi,  the  original  being  much  damaged
and  in  parts  illegible.

In  April  1853  I  had  the  opportunity  of  examining
and  transcribing  a  version  of  Ollantay,  which,  I  was
informed,  contained  the  purest  text.     It  belonged  to

1  Antiguedades  Peruanas  por  Mariano    Eduardo    de  Rivero  y
Juan  Diego  de  Tschudi  (Viena,  1851),  p.  116.

2  Ibid.,  pp.  116,  117.

3  Die  Kechua  Sprache,  von   J.   J.   von  Tschudi  (Wien,    1853),
pp.  71-110.

C


XXXIV  THE    ANCIENT   YNCA    DRAMA.

Dr.  Don  Pablo  Justin  iani,  the  aged  priest  of  the
village  of  Laris,  in  the  heart  of  the  eastern  Andes.1
His  father,  Dr.  Justo  Pastor  Justiniani,  had  copied  it
from  the  original  manuscript  belonging  to  Dr.  Don
Antonio  Valdez,  the  priest  of  Sicuani  in  1780,  and
the  friend  of  the  unfortunate  Ynca  Tupac  Amaru.
Dr.  Yaldez  died  in  the  year  1816.  He  is  said  to
have  been  the  first  to  reduce  the  drama  to  writing,
and  to  arrange  it  for  the  stage,2  but  this  is  clearly
an  error,  as  there  is  a  manuscript  of  1730,  and  others
dating  from  the  previous  century,  according  to
Pivero.  The  manuscript  of  Valdez  is,  however,  one
of  great  value,  as  it  preserves  all  the  original  forms,
and  the  fame  of  the  owner  as  a  Quichua  scholar  is

1  He  was  a  son  of  Dr.  Justo  Pastor  Justiniani,  a  surgeon,  by
Dona  Manuela  Simancas  Catano,  a  lineal  descendant  of  Hualpa
Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui,  one  of  whose  daughters  was  the  mother
of  Gai'cilasso  Ynca  de  la  Vega  the  historian.  Dr.  Justo  Pastor's
father  was  Don  Nicolo  Ambrosio  Justiniani,  his  grandfather  Don
Luis  Justiniani,  his  great-grandfather  also  Don  Luis  of  Seville,
whose  parents  belonged  to  the  Genoese  family  of  Justiniani,
descended  from  the  Emperor  Justinian.  This  first  Don  Luis
Justiniani  came  to  Peru  and  married  Dona  Catalina  Ortiz  de
Orue,  whose  father,  Don  Pedro  Ortiz  de  Orue,  a  Biscayan,  was  one
of  the  first  conquerors,  and  whose  mother  was  the  Princess  Tupac
Usca,  daughter  of  the  Ynca  Manco  Ccapac  IT.

2  The  Quichua  drama  of  Ollantay  was  reviewed  in  a  periodical
published  at  Cuzco  in  1837,  called  the  Museo  Erudito,  Nos.  5
to  9.  The  editor,  Don  Manuel  Palacios,  says  that  the  story  was
handed  down  by  immemorial  tradition,  but  that  the  drama  was
written  by  Dr.  Valdez.  The  editor  had  inquired  of  Don  Juan
Hualpa,  a  noble  Curaca  of  Belem  in  Cuzco,  and  of  the  Curacas  of
San  Sebastian  and  San  Bias,  near  Cuzco,  who  agreed  in  their
account  of  the  tradition,  wThich  was  that  the  rebellion  of  Ollantay
arose  from  the  abduction  of  an  aclla  or  virgin  of  the  Sun.


THE  ANCIENT  YNCA  DRAMA.       XXXV

some  guarantee  for  its  accuracy.  In  1853  it  was  in
the  possession  of  Don  Narciso  Cuentas  of  Tinta,  the
nephew  and  heir  of  Dr.  Valdez.  Another  copy
taken  from  the  Valdez  manuscript,  was  in  possession
of  Dr.  Rosas,  the  priest  of  Chinchero  near  Cuzco.
I  carefully  collated  the  Justiniani  and  Rosas  copies.
In  the  year  1871  I  published  the  text  of  my  copy
of  the  Justiniani  version,  with  an  attempt  at  a
literal  English  translation.1  But  in  three  or  four
passages  I  adopted  the  reading  of  Yon  Tschudi's
version,  and  in  all  I  was  wrong.  I  should,  as  I
have  since  convinced  myself,  have  adhered  closely  to
the  Justiniani  text.  In  this  text,  however,  there
are  several  additions  inserted  by  a  later  hand  when
the  drama  was  arranged  for  the  stage.  These.  I
placed  in  brackets.

In  1873  the  Peruvian  scholar,  Dr.  Don  Manuel
Gonzalez  de  la  Rosa,  informed  me  that  he  had  in
his  possession  the  manuscripts  of  Dr.  Justo  Sahu-
araura  Ynca,  Archdeacon  of  Cuzco,  and  a  descendant
of  Paullu,  the  younger  son  of  the  great  Ynca  Huayna
Ccapac.  Among  them  is  a  version  of  the  drama  of
Ollantay,  which  Dr.  de  la  Rosa  considers  to  be
authentic  and  very  accurate.  This  text  has  not
hitherto  been  published.

Don  Jose  S.  Barranca,  in  1868,  published  an  ex-

1  Ollanta,  an  ancient  Ynca  Drama,  translated  from  the  original
Quichua.  By  Clements  R.  Markham,  C.B.  (Triibner,  1871.)  Pp.
128,  with  introduction  and  notes.  My  translation,  owing  to  my
imperfect  knowledge  of  the  language,  contained  numerous  mis-
takes, which  have  been  duly  pointed  out  by  Zegarra,  a  native  of
the  country,  in  his  work  published  subsequently.

c  2


XXXVI  THE   ANCIENT   YNCA    DKAMA.

cellent  Spanish  translation,  chiefly  from  the  text  of
Von  Tschudi,  now  called  the  Dominican  text.  It
is  preceded  by  an  interesting  introduction,  and  the
author  announced  that  he  was  preparing  for  the
press  a  carefully  edited  Quichuan  text,  but  I  am  not
aware  that  this  has  yet  seen  the  light.1  In  1876
the  Peruvian  poet,  Don  Constantino  Carrasco,  pub-
lished, in  Lima,  a  version  of  the  drama  of  Ollantay
in  verse,  paraphrased  from  the  translation  of  Bar-
ranca. It  is  preceded  by  a  critical  introduction
from  the  pen  of  the  accomplished  Peruvian  writer,
Don  Hicardo  Palma,  who  expressed  an  opinion  that
the  drama  was  composed  after  the  Spanish  con-
quest.

In  1874  the  enthusiastic  Peruvian  student  of  the
language  of  the  Yncas,  Dr.  Jose  Fernandez  Nodal,
printed  the  Quichua  text  with  a  Spanish  translation
in  parallel  columns.  This  version  has  several  different
readings.2

In  1875  Dr.  von  Tschudi  published  a  second  text
of  Ollantay,  at  Vienna,  with  a  translation.  His  new
version,  like  the  first,  is  mainly  from  the  Dominican

1  "  Ollanta  o'  sea  la  severidad  de  un  Padre  y  la  clemencia  de
un  Hey,  drama  dividido  en  tres  actos,  traducido  del  Quichua  al
Castellano,  cos  notas  diversas,  por  Jos6  S.  Barranca."  (Lima,
1868.)     Pp.  16  and  71.

2  "Los  vinculos  de  Ollanta  y  Cwsi  Kcuyllor,  Drama  en
Quichua.  Obra  compilada  y  espurgada  con  la  version  Castellana
al  frente  de  su  testo  por  el  Dr.  Jose  Fernandez  Nodal,  Abogado
de  los  tribunales  de  justicia  de  la  Republica  del  Peru  :  bajo  los
auspicios  de  La  Redentora  Sociedad  de  Filantropos  para  mejorar
la  suerte  de  los  Aborijenes  Peruanos."  (Ayacucho,  en  el  deposito
del  Autor.)  Dr.  Nodal  commenced,  but  never  completed,  an
English  translation.


THE    ANCIENT   YNCA    DRAMA.  XXXV11

text,  but  partly  from  another  manuscript  which
bears  the  date  "La  Paz,  June  18th,  1735". l  This
important  date  proves  that  Dr.  Valdez  was  not  the
author,  as  supposed  by  the  editor  of  the  Museo
Evudito,  but  merely  the  possessor  of  one  of  the
best  manuscripts.2

Don  Gavino  Pacheco  Zegarra  published  the  text
of  Ollantay  at  Paris,  in  1878  ;  his  version  being
taken  from  a  manuscript  found  among  the  books  of
his  great-uncle,  Don  Pedro  Zegarra.  He  added  a
free  translation,  and  numerous  valuable  notes.  The
work  of  Zegarra  is  by  far  the  most  important  that
has  appeared  on  this  subject ;  for  the  accomplished
Peruvian  has  the  great  advantage  of  knowing
Quichua  from  his  earliest  childhood.  To  this  ad-
vantage, not  possessed  by  any  previous  writer,  he
unites  extensive  learning,  literary  ability,  and  very
considerable  critical  sagacity.  He  is  fully  convinced
of  the  antiquity  of  the  drama.3

In  his  Races  Aryennes,  Don  Vicente  Fidel  Lopez

1  "Ollanta.  Em  Altperuanisches  Drama  aus  der  Kechuasprache.
Ubersetzt  imd  commentirt  von  J.  J.  von  Tschudi."  (Wien,  1875.)
4to.,  pp.  220.

2  Lopez  also  tells  us  that  his  father  was  a  personal  friend  of
Dr.  Valdez,  and  never  heard  that  the  learned  Quichua  scholar
was  the  author  of  Ollantay.  On  the  contrary,  he  believed  that  the
di-ama  was  very  ancient.  Mariano  Moreno,  another  intimate
friend  of  Dr.  Valdez,  bears  the  same  testimony.  Races  Aryennes,
p.  325.

3  Collection  Linguistique  Americaine.  Tome  iv.  "  Ollantai,
drama  en  vers  Quechuas  du  temps  des  Incas  :  traduit  et  com-
mented' Par  Gavino  Pacheco  Zegarra.  Paris:  Maisonneuve  et
Cie.,  25,  Quai  Voltaire,  1878,  pp.  clxxiv  and  265.  At  the  end
there  is  a  vocabulary  o   all  the  words  in  the  text  of  Ollantay.


XXXV111  THE   ANCIENT    YNCA    DRAMA.

refers  to  the  drama  of  Ollantay,  and  discusses  the
meaning  of  the  word.  The  editors  and  critics  to
whom  I  have  referred,  all  being  students  of  the
Quichua  language,  have  come  to  the  conclusion
that  Ollantay  is  an  ancient  Ynca  drama.  Some  of
them,  including  myself,  arrived  at  this  conclusion
after  long  study  and  much  hesitation.1  The  fol-
lowing is  the  argument  of  the  drama.  Ollantay,
General  of  Anti-Suyu,  was  deeply  enamoured  of  the
princess  Cusi-Ccoyllur,  the  chief  beauty  of  the
court  of  the  Ynca  Pachacutec.  In  vain  the  High
Priest,  Uillac-Umu,  endeavoured  to  dissuade  him,
and  even  performed  a  miracle  to  divert  him  from  his
illegal  love.  Pachacutec,  the  Ynca,  rejected  the
suitor  for  his  daughter's  hand,  and  Ollantay  rose
in  rebellion,  occupying  the  great  fortress,  consisting
of  colossal  ruins,  which  has  ever  since  been  called
Ollantay-tampu.  Meanwhile,  Cusi  Ccoyllur  gave
birth  to  a  child  which  was  named  Yma  Sumac  ("how
beautiful").  For  this  transgression  the  princess  was
immured  in  a  dungeon  in  the  Aclla  Huasi,  or  convent
of  Sacred  Virgins,  for  ten  years.  Pachacutec  died,
and  the  sceptre  passed  to  his  son  Ynca  Yupanqui.

1  In  my  book,  Cuzco  and  Lima,  1853,  written  when  I  was  twenty-
two,  immediately  after  transcribing  the  Jnstiniani  version,  I  as-
sumed the  antiquity  of  the  drama.  But  in  my  later  work,  Travels
in  Peru  and  India  (1862),  I  expressed  a  doubt,  and  inclined  to
the  opinion  that  Dr.  Valdez  was  the  author  (Note,  p.  138).  A
subsequent  detailed  and  critical  study  of  the  text  obliged  me  to
revert  to  my  former  belief  that  Ollantay  was,  in  the  main,  a
composition  of  Ynca  origin,  dating  from  before  the  conquest.  All
I  have  since  read  has  confirmed  me  in  this  opinion.


THE   ANCIENT    YNCA    DRAMA.  XXXIX

Ollantay  was  at  length  conquered  by  a  stratagem.
Concealing  his  army  in  a  neighbouring  ravine,  the
general  Rurni-iiaui  came  to  the  stronghold  of  the
rebels,  and  appeared  before  Ollantay  covered  with
blood.  He  declared  that  he  had  been  cruelly  treated
by  the  Ynca,  and  that  he  desired  to  join  the  insur-
rection. Encouraging  the  insurgents  to  celebrate  a
festival  with  drunken  orgies,  he  admitted  his  own
troops  and  captured  the  whole  party,  including
Ollantay.  Next  there  is  a  touching  dialogue  between
Yma  Sumac  and  one  of  the  virgins,  who  allows  her
to  visit  her  mother  hi  the  dungeon.  Finally  the
great  rebel  is  pardoned  by  the  magnanimous  Ynca,
and  the  unfortunate  princess  is  restored  to  the  arms
of  her  lover.  One  of  the  characters,  a  facetious
servant  lad,  named  Piqui  Chaqui,  supplies  the  comic
vein  which  runs  through  the  piece.

There  are  ample  proofs  of  the  antiquity  of  the
tradition,  and  that  the  name  of  Ollantay  was  known
in  the  days  of  the  Yncas,  and  was  applied  to  the
famous  ruins  near  Cuzco.  Father  Cristobal  de
Molina,  a  very  high  authority,  writing  in  1580,
mentions  Ollantay-tampu  in  connection  with  a  curious
sacrificial  ceremony.1  Salcamayhua,  a  writer  of  the
seventeenth  century,  also  mentions  Ollantay.2  The
name,  therefore,  was  well  known  before  the  Spanish
conquest.3     The  name  of  Rumi-naui,  which  means

1  Seep.  51.  2  P.  llg.

3  Don  Vicente  Lopez  suggests  the  following  derivation  for  the
name  of  Ollantay.  The  second  part,  Antay,  signifies  "of  the
Ancles",  anything  belonging  to  the  Andes.     Oil  would  be  a  cor-


xl  THE   ANCIENT   YNCA    DRAMA.

"stone-eye",  as  that  of  the  general  who,  by  the  strata-
gem of  mutilating  his  face,  deceived  Ollantay,  is  not
uncommon  in  Ynca  history.  A  general  of  Atahualpa
had  the  same  name.  It  is  a  curious  fact,  as  corrobo-
rative of  this  part  of  the  story,  that  in  1837  an
Indian  presented  to  Don  Antonio  Maria  Alvarez,
then  Prefect  of  Cuzco,  an  ancient  earthen  drinking
vessel,  moulded  into  the  shape  of  a  man's  head  and
bust.  He  said  that  it  had  been  handed  down  in  his
family  for  generations,  as  the  likeness  of  Rumi-
naui.  The  person  represented  must  have  been  a
general,  from  the  masccapaycka  or  ornament  on  the
forehead,  and  wounds  are  cut  on  the  face  in  ac-
cordance with  the  argument  of  the  drama.

But  the  chief  reasons  for  assigning  a  date  before
the  Spanish  conquest  to  the  speeches  and  dialogues
of  Ollantay,  have  reference  to  the  internal  evidence.
Throughout   the   piece    there    is    not  the  remotest

ruption  of  TJll  or  Vill.  The  correct  form  would  be  TJill — Antay
or  Uilla  Antay.  Uilla  means  a  legend,  tradition,  or  history,  The
Legend  of  the  Andes.  Several  of  the  manuscripts  have  Apu-
Ollantay,  Aptc,  meaning  chief,  The  Legend  of  the  Chief  of  the
Andes."

Barranca  proposes  TJila  as  a  derivative  of  Uilu,  "  the  power  of
love."     Ccahuari-Ullanta,  as  an  expression  of  admiration.

Nodal  thinks  that  Olla  is  really  Colla,  the  c  having  suffered
elision,  that  the  n  is  the  pronoun  for  the  third  person,  and  ta  the
accusative.  He  translates  Ollanta  as  "  her  lover",  with  reference
to  Cusi-coyllur.

Dr.  de  la  Rosa  says  that  Lopez  is  mistaken  in  his  etymology,
that  the  suggestion  of  Barranca  is  more  plausible  ;  but  that  he
thinks  he  has  himself  hit  upon  a  more  rational  derivation.  He
has  not,  however,  yet  given  it  to  the  world.

Zegarra  rejects  all  these  derivations.


THE    ANCIENT    YNCA   DRAMA.  xli

allusion  to  Christianity,  an  impossible  phenomenon
if  the  drama  had  been  written  in  Spanish  times,  like
the  comedy  of  Dr.  Lunarejo  and  the  Usca-paucar.
It  contains  songs  of  indubitable  antiquity,  and  in
use  among  the  purest  Quichua  people.  The  language
is  archaic ;  there  are  many  words  which  have  long
disappeared  from  the  spoken  Quichua,  and  are  now
only  found  in  the  earliest  vocabularies.  The  gram-
matical forms,  such  as  cca  instead  of  pa  for  the
genitive,  are  ancient.  The  state  of  society  repre-
sented in  the  drama  is  entirely  Pagan,  without  a
sign  of  Spanish  contact.  The  metre  is  octo-syllabic,
like  that  of  the  Ynca  song  preserved  by  Bias  Valera,
and  is  the  same  as  the  most  ancient  verses  in  the
collection  of  Dr.  Justiniani.  In  the  early  and  pure
copies  there  is  not  an  allusion  to  anything,  or  any
animal,  introduced  by  Europeans.  All  arguments
must  of  course  be  based  on  the  most  authentic  text,
and  not  on  later  copies  into  which  many  errors  have
crept,  such  as  the  substitution  of  words  like  mi  si
(a  cat),  and  asna  (a  donkey),  corrected  in  another
copy  to  llama,  for  the  original  word,  in  both  cases,
atoc  (a  fox).

In  the  final  decision  of  a  question  of  this  kind,  it
is  always  an  advantage  to  have  an  able  antagonist
who  will  take  the  trouble  to  state  all  that  can  be
said  against  the  generally  received  opinion.  In  the
present  case  the  "Devil's  Advocate"  is  no  less  a
person  than  General  Don  Bartolome  Mitre,  the  ex-
President  of  the  Argentine  Republic.  General  Mitre
maintains  that  the  drama  of  Ollantay  is  entirely  of


xlii  THE   ANCIENT   YNCA   DRAMA.

Spanish  origin,  and  that  it  was  written  in  modern
times.1  His  opinion  is  not  to  be  despised;  for  he  is
evidently  a  man  of  extensive  reading,  and  is  pos-
sessed of  critical  insight  of  a  high  order.  But  his
knowledge  of  the  Quichua  language  and  of  the
Spanish  authors  who  wrote  in  the  first  century  after
the  conquest  of  Peru  is  limited,  as  will  presently
appear.  Nevertheless,  the  accomplished  general  and
statesman  would  no  doubt  have  proved  his  case  if
it  had  been  possible.  The  facts,  however,  are  too
numerous,  and  too  closely  arrayed  against  him.  His
attack  was  well  planned  and  gallantly  delivered,
but  it  has  utterly  failed.2

The  General's  first  assault  is  made  upon  the  evi-
dence of  the  existence  of  dramatic  compositions
among  the  Yncas.  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  is  declared
to  be  the  sole  authority,  and  he  is  unceremoniously
set  aside  as  unworthy  of  credit.     Cieza  de  Leon  and

1  Ollantay.  Estudio  sobre  el  drama  Quechua.  Por  Bartolome
Mitre,  publicada  en  la  Nueva  Revista  de  Buenos  Ayres.  (Buenos
Ayres,  1881.)    Pp.  44.

2  Bartolome  Mitre  was  born  on  June  26th,  1821,  and  in  early
life  was  several  years  in  Peru  and  Chile  as  an  officer  and  jour-
nalist.    Returning  to  Buenos  Ayres,  he  distinguished  himself  as

.  an  orator  in  the  Representative  Assembly,  and  was  Minister  of
War  in  1859.  In  1860  he  was  appointed  Governor  of  Buenos
Ayres,  and  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  General.  On  September
17th,  1860,  he  defeated  General  Urquiza  in  the  battle  of  Pavou,
and  soon  afterwards  signed  a  treaty  with  him.  On  October  5th,
1862,  he  was  elected  President  of  the  Argentine  Republic,  and
held  that  office  with  credit  to  himself  and  benefit  to  his  country
for  six  years.  He  is  an  able  and  enlightened  statesman,  as  well
as  an  accomplished  scholar.  General  Mitre  is  the  author  of  a
Life  of  General  Belgrano  and  other  works.


THE    ANCIENT    YNCA    DRAMA.  xliii

Acosta  are  then  triumphantly  referred  to  as  being
absolutely  silent  on  the  subject.  But  General  Mitre
had  evidently  only  read  the  first  part  of  Cieza  de
Leon,  and  was  still  ignorant  of  the  contents  of  the
present  volume.  He  was  equally  ignorant  of  the
work  of  Salcamayhua,  where  the  names  of  four  dif-
ferent kinds  of  dramatic  compositions  are  given.
There  is,  quite  independently  of  the  positive  state-
ment of  Garcilasso,  ample  evidence  of  the  existence
of  a  drama  of  some  kind  in  the  time  of  the
Yncas.

His  next  point  is  that  Ollantay  is  throughout,
in  general  form  and  minute  details,  a  Christian
and  cavalieresque  play  de  capa  y  espada,  such  as
those  of  Lope  de  Vega  and  Calderon.  Mr.  Ticknor
says  that  comedias  de  capa  y  espada  excluded  those
dramas  in  which  royal  personages  appear ;  their
main  and  moving  principle  is  gallantry  ;  the  story
is  almost  always  involved  and  intriguing ;  and  ac-
companied with  an  underplot  and  parody  on  the
characters  and  adventures  of  the  principal  parties,
formed  out  of  those  of  the  servants  and  other  in-
ferior personages.1  Ollantay  is  a  historical  play
including  royal  personages ;  the  main  and  moving
principle  is  not  gallantry  of  the  capa  y  espada
type,  the  story  is  simple  and  not  intriguing,  and
it  is  not  accompanied  with  an  underplot.  So  that
the  Quichua  drama  is  not  only  unlike  a  Spanish
comedia  de  capa  y  espada,  but  it  would  be  difficult
to  find  two  classes  of  compositions,  both  being  dra-

1   Ticknor,  ii,  p.  167.


xliv  THE   ANCIENT   YNCA   DRAMA.

matic,  which  are  more  completely  distinct  from  each
other.

Next,  General  Mitre  objects  that  the  sentiments
prevailing  in  Ollantay  are  pride  of  caste,  conjugal
fidelity,  military  spirit,  filial  love,  humanity  to  the
vanquished,  horror  of  polygamy,  royal  magnanimity,
which  are  proper  to  European  civilisation,  but  op-
posed to  all  that  is  known  of  Ynca  social  life.  Yet
pride  of  caste  is  described,  by  nearly  all  writers  on
the  subject,  as  a  noteworthy  characteristic  of  the
Ynca  family.  There  are  many  touching  stories  told
of  conjugal  fidelity  and  filial  love  among  the  Peru-
vians by  writers  contemporaneous  with  the  conquest;
and  I  am  tempted  to  relate  one  of  these  stories  at
the  end  of  the  present  critical  notice.  The  military
spirit  was  sedulously  cultivated  by  the  Yncas,  who
were  always  engaged  in  new  conquests.  The  exer-
cise of  magnanimity  and  of  humanity  to  the  con-
quered was  constantly  inculcated,  and  was  a  part  of
the  established  policy  of  the  Yncas,  as  we  are  told
by  nearly  all  the  early  writers.  Polygamy  is  no-
where spoken  of  with  horror  in  Ollantay.  All  the
sentiments  enumerated  by  General  Mitre  as  peculiar
to  European  civilisation,  are  those  which  went  to-
wards the  formation  of  the  best  part  of  the  Ynca
character,  and  which  would  naturally  be  met  with
in  a  Quichua  drama.

The  next  objection  is  that  rebellion  is  approved  in
the  drama  of  Ollantay,  and  that  such  countenance
would  be  impossible  at  a  despotic  court  like  that  of
the  Yncas.     The  remark  applies  equally  to  the  court


THE   ANCIENT   YNCA   DRAMA.  xlv

of  Spain.  It  may  be  admitted  that  the  encourage-
ment of  rebellion  as  a  principle  would  not  be  toler-
ated unless  it  eventually  redounded  to  the  credit  of
the  sovereign.  Successful  rebellion  was  not  un-
known in  Ynca  history,  and  Yupanqui  Pachacutec
himself,  the  sovereign  of  the  play,  deposed  his
brother  Urco,  according  to  Cieza  de  Leon.  That
story  would  not  be  heard  with  displeasure.  Nor
would  that  of  Ollantay,  where  the  rebel  is  subdued,
and  where  the  magnanimity  of  the  sovereign  is
celebrated.

The  whole  of  the  arguments  of  the  General,
based  on  internal  evidence  afforded  by  words  and
passages  in  the  play,  may  be  set  aside,  because
none  of  the  words  upon  which  he  relies  as  evidence
of  Spanish  origin  are  to  be  found  in  the  true  ver-
sion. The  true  version  must  be  considered  as  that
which  excludes  all  words  and  passages  which  are
not  common  to  all  the  older  manuscripts.  On  this
principle  all  the  words  relied  upon  by  the  General
are  corrupt  readings  which  have  crept  in  through
the  carelessness  of  copiers.1

1  The  points  raised  by  Genei'al  Mitre"  may,  however,  be
enumerated  and  disposed  of  in  a  foot-note  : —

I.  He  discusses  the  words  huafiuy  ychunantin,  or  "death  with
his  scythe".  The  word  ychuna  means  an  instrument  for  cutting
ychti  (grass).  General  Mitre  argues  that  the  idea  of  death  with  a
scythe  is  exclusively  European.  But  the  word  does  not  occur  in
the  Rosas  version,  although  I  printed  it  by  mistake  in  my  book.
Nodal  has  ychvsjya,  which  is  quite  a  different  word.

ii.  The  High  Priest  performs  a  miracle  by  squeezing  water  out
of  a  flower.  Ollantay  exclaims  it  would  be  easier  to  squeeze  it
from  a  rock.     General  Mitre  says  that  the  idea  must  have  been


xlvi  THE    ANCIENT    YNCA    DRAMA.

General  Mitre  objects  that  the  High  Priest
alludes  to  the  broken  thread  of  destiny,  which  is
a  strictly  Greek  image.  He  misunderstands  the
passage.  The  High  Priest  compares  the  conse-
quence of  the  act,  which  will  bring  destruction  on
Ollantay,  not  with  the  thread  of  destiny  entangled
and  severed,  but  with  the  wool  and  frame  of  a
native  weaving  machine  overturned  and  broken,  a
natural  and  indigenous  figure  suggested  by  things
often  before  the  speaker's  own  eyes.  The  remainder
of  the  General's  attack  is  occupied  in  efforts  to  find
traces  of  old  world  ideas  in  Ollantay,  most  of  his
analogies  being  very  far-fetched.  There  is  a  yaravi
or  song,  describing  the  beauty  of  the  heroine,  which
the  General   compares  with  the  Song  of  Solomon.


suggested  by  the  miracle  of  Moses  making  a  fountain  flow  from  a
rock.  It  is  really  a  play  upon  words,  involving  an  essentially
Quichuan  idea.  The  word  in  the  Eosas  version  is  not  rock,  but
brick.  Ttica  is  a  flower,  and  tica  a  brick.  The  general  could  not
have  hit  upon  a  passage  which  is  more  certainly  of  native  origin.

in.  General  Mitre  refers  to  the  words  misi  (cat),  asna  (ass),
and  llama  occurring,  and  considers  their  .appearance  as  a  proof  of
Spanish  origin.  But  all  are  the  errors  of  copyists.  In  the
true  version  the  word  atoc  (a  fox),  takes  the  place  of  those  words
in  every  instance.

tv.  The  General  further  maintains  that  the  interjection  ay  !
which  occurs  fifteen  times  in  the  Dominican  text,  is  not  Quichuan,
but  Spanish,  and  is  an  indisputable  proof  of  Spanish  origin.
But  another  manuscript  text  has  nay  !  and  anay,  which  are  good
Quichuan  interjections.

v.  There  is  an  allusion  to  an  owl  on  the  roof  as  a  warning  of
death,  which  General  Mitre  considers  to  be  an  anachronism.
This  is  not  the  case.  It  is  alluded  to  as  a  popular  superstition
by  the  Council  of  Lima  in  1583.


THE   ANCIENT    YNCA    DRAMA.  xlvii

The  only  resemblance  is  that  both  describe  personal
beauty  by  comparisons  with  the  beauties  of  nature,
and  this  is  common  to  nearly  all  poetry.  But
General  Mitre,  by  using  Zegarra's  somewhat  free
translation,  attributes  figures  to  the  song  which  it
does  not  contain,  such  as  a  "  countenance  white
and  transparent  as  alabaster,  bosoms  as  white  as
pieces  of  ice,  cheeks  like  roses  fallen  on  snow,
eyebrows  like  bows  sending  forth  burning  and
slaughter  -  dealing  arrows,  fingers  like  bolls  of
opening  cotton."  There  is  nothing  of  all  this  in
the  authentic  text.  In  the  real  song  all  the
similes  are  strictly  and  essentially  Quichuan.  Her
forehead  is  compared  to  Quilla,  the  moon ;  her
eyes,  not  to  arrows,  but  to  two  suns ;  her  eyebrows
to  rainbows,  the  insignia  of  the  Yncas.  Her  tresses
are  black,  mixed  with  gold,  just  as  the  plaited  hair
of  an  Ynca  princess  is  represented  in  an  ancient
picture  at  Cuzco.  The  bloom  of  her  cheek  is
compared  with  the  achancaray,  a  red  flower
peculiar  to  Peru  ;  her  bosoms,  not  to  snow,  but  to
the  utcu  swelling  out  of  the  bolls,  a  simile  which  is
also  essentially  Peruvian.  These  figures  show  that
the  yaravi  could  not  possibly  have  been  composed
anywhere  but  in  the  land  where  the  achancaray  and
the  utcu  flourish  within  sight  of  the  snows  of  the
Andes.  General  Mitre  objects  to  a  copper-coloured
beauty  being  praised  for  her  fairness,  and  to  her
skin  being  compared  with  snow.  The  Ynca  prin-
cesses, as  we  know  from  some  ancient  pictures  and
descriptions,   were   naturally  much   fairer  than  the


xlviii  THE    ANCIENT    YNCA    DRAMA.

common  people,  and  this  striking  difference  would
as  naturally  lead  to  fairness  of  skin  being  prized,
celebrated,  exaggerated,  and,  by  a  poetical  licence,
compared  with  the  fairest  thing  in  the  Peruvian
landscape.

Still  referring  to  an  erroneous  reading,  General
Mitre  objects  that  the  Ynca  says  : — "Take  this  ring
in  thy  hand,  that  thou  mayest  never  forget  that  it
is  thy  duty  to  show  clemency  to  all.  Rise,  thou  art
a  hero," — which,  he  suggests,  must  be  an  idea  taken
from  arming  knights  in  the  middle  ages.  Possibly  ;
but  the  Ynca  never  makes  such  a  speech  in  the
authentic  text1  of  Ollantay.  He  says : — "Receive  this
head  dress,  that  thou  mayest  command  my  army,
and  this  arrow,  that  T  destine  for  you."  The  pre-
sentation of  a  head-dress  is  a  peculiarly  Yncarial
ceremony,  and  this  passage  is  one  among  many
which  furnish  strong  internal  proofs  of  the  antiquity
of  the  drama.

The  critic  then  proceeds  to  refer  to  three  more
alleged  anachronisms.  The  deceased  Ynca  is  said  to
be  spoken  of  as  buried,  when  Yncas  were  always
embalmed,  and  the  bodies  preserved  in  the  temple  ;
black  is  mentioned  as  the  colour  for  mourning,  when
the  Yncas  used  grey  ;  and  the  city  of  Cuzco  is  said
to  have  elected  a  new  Ynca,  though  the  Peruvian
monarchy  was  hereditary.  The  replies  are  that
the  word  pampasacta  from  pampani,  to  bury,  is
used,  in  the  oldest  songs,  for  interments  of  every
kind  ;  that  the  word  for  mourning,  in  the  authentic

1  The  word  sipi  (a  ring)  is  a  later  interpolation,  not  in  the
Justiniani  text.


THE    ANCIENT    YNCA    DRAMA.  xlix

version,  is  not  yana  (black),  but  ccica  (grey)  ;  and
that  the  great  men  of  Cuzco,  in  the  cases  of  this
very  Ynca  Yupanqui  (according  to  Cieza  de  Leon)
and  others,  did  select  the  sovereign  under  special
circumstances.

The  next  objection  is  that  the  Ynca,  after  pardon-
ing Ollantay,  appointed  him  to  be  his  successor  and
invested  him  with  the  fringe ;  which,  it  is  contended,
is  historically  false,  and  impossible  in  ancient  Peru.
But  the  Ynca  merely  invested  Ollantay  with  the
insignia  of  his  rank  as  a  great  chief  (the  yellow
fringe,  not  the  crimson  fringe  peculiar  to  the  sove-
reign), and  appointed  him  to  rule  at  Cuzco  during
the  sovereign's  absence,  a  very  different  thing.
Such  appointments  were  of  constant  occurrence,  and
are  recorded  over  and  over  again  by  Cieza  de  Leon.

Thus  General  Mitre  fails  to  establish  the  exist-
ence of  a  single  allusion  to  things  of  European
origin  in  the  drama  of  Ollantay.

Treating  of  the  one  comic  character  in  the  piece,
the  servant  of  Ollantay,  and  referring  to  his  fre-
quent use  of  puns  and  expressions  with  double
meanings,  the  General  contends  that  his  wit  is
Andalusian,  and  that  it  is  contrary  to  the  genius  of
the  Quichua  language.  In  reality,  the  speeches  of
this  servant,  Piqui  Chaqui,  are  so  thoroughly  native
and  of  the  soil,  his  allusions  and  double  meanings
are  so  hidden,  that  no  Spaniard — no  one  but  a  native
— could  have  written  or  even  conceived  them.  In  one
of  the  Quichua  plays,  written  by  Spanish  priests,  in
my  possession,  there  is  a  "gracioso"  named  Quespillo,

d


1  THE    ANCIENT    YNCA    DRAMA.

whose  fun  is  broad  and  without  a  sign  of  double
entendre.  If  Quespillo  is  a  Spanish  creation,  Piqui-
chaqui  is  as  certainly  of  native  conception.  This  is
one  strong  proof  that  Ollantay,  differing  so  com-
pletely in  all  respects  from  the  Quichua  religious
dramas  prepared  by  Spanish  priests,  is  of  pure  native
origin.

Next,  General  Mitre  compares  a  simple  speech  of
Urco-huaranca,  the  general  of  Ollantay,  with  an
enumeration  of  forces  in  Homer ;  a  reference  to  his
services,  made  by  Ollantay,  to  some  speech  in  the
Spanish  drama  of  the  Cid  Campeador ;  and  the
election  of  Ollantay  by  his  army,  to  an  election  by
the  Praetorian  guard  described  by  Tacitus.  These
allusions  are  too  far-fetched  and  vague  to  need
special  replies;  but  they  require  wonderful  erudition
on  the  part  of  General  Mitre's  imaginary  Spanish
author.  Rumi-naui,  in  order  to  make  Ollantay  think
that  he  had  been  ill-treated  by  the  Ynca,  mutilated
his  face.  Zopyrus,  in  the  story  told  by  Herodotus,
for  a  similar  purpose,  cut  off  his  nose  and  ears,  which
Rumi-naui  did  not  do.  Nevertheless,  General  Mitre
jumps  at  the  conclusion  that  the  idea  must  have
been  copied  from  Herodotus.  It  will  be  remembered
that  the  story  of  the  mutilation  of  Rumi-naui  is
preserved  on  an  ancient  piece  of  Ynca  pottery.

General  Mitre  then  quotes  a  speech  of  Ollantay,
when  he  receives  the  Ynca's  pardon,  from  my  book,
a  text  which  he  had  all  along  repudiated,  in  order
to  use  the  Dominican  text  as  better  suited  to
his  purpose.      His  criticism  on  this  speech  is  sound,


THE    ANCIENT    YNCA    DRAMA.  ll

but  the  lines  I  inserted  were  evidently  interpo-
lated by  the  person  who  arranged  the  drama  for
acting.  I  had,  consequently,  placed  them  in  brackets
as  doubtful,  and  noted  their  omission  by  Von
Tschudi  and  Barranca,  a  fact  which  the  General
does  not  mention.  The  passage  is  not  authentic,
and  would  be  omitted  in  a  properly  revised  ver-
sion. It  is  in  fact  omitted  by  Zegarra.  But
this  use,  by  General  Mitre,  first  of  one  text  and
then  of  another,  as  it  happens  to  suit  his  purpose,  is
not  conducive  to  the  proper  object  of  criticism,
namely,  the  discovery  of  truth.  It  shows  also  that
his  critical  essay  is  premature,  and  that  it  should
not  have  been  attempted  until  all  the  versions  had
been  critically  examined  and  collated,  and  an  au-
thoritative text  established.

The  octo-syllabic  metre  in  which  the  drama  is
written  was  also  used  by  Spanish  dramatists,  and,
consequently,  according  to  General  Mitre,  the  drama
of  Ollantay  was  written  by  a  Spaniard.  But  it  is
also  a  native  Peruvian  metre.  The  ancient  song
given  by  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  though  printed  in
lines  of  four  syllables,  is  really  octo-syllabic.  These
eight-syllable  lines  are  composed  with  great  facility
in  many  languages,  and  are  natural  to  the  Quichua,
most  of  the  ancient  songs  in  the  collection  of  Dr.
Justiniani  being  octo-syllabic.  Consequently,  though
also  used  in  Spanish  literature,  they  do  not  there-
fore indicate  a  Spanish  origin.

The  greater  part  of  General  Mitre's  argument
amounts  to  little  more  than  this.     There  is  a  river

d  2


Hi  THE    ANCIENT    YNCA    DRAMA.

in  Macedon,  and  there  is  a  river  in  Monmouth,  there-
fore Macedon  and  Monmouth  are  the  same  place.
It  is  a  very  old  argument,  but  it  has  never  been
looked  upon  as  conclusive.  The  General's  theory
requires  an  unknown  Spanish  author  living  in  the
eighteenth  century,  and  writing  in  the  Quichua
language,  of  portentous  erudition,  who  borrowed  his
ideas  from  the  Pentateuch,  the  Song  of  Solomon,
Homer,  Tacitus,  Herodotus,  Shakespeare,  Lope  de
Vega,  Mrs.  Ratcliffe,  and  the  ballads  of  the  Cid  ;
and  who  yet  excluded  the  most  distant  allusion  to
Christianity  or  to  anything  Spanish.  He  could  not
have  been  a  priest,  for  we  possess  Quichua  plays
composed  by  Spanish  priests,  and  they  are  entirely
and  radically  different  from  Ollantay,  containing,  as
was  inevitable,  constant  allusions  to  Christianity,
and  none  to  the  classic  authors  of  antiquity.  Yet
the  imaginary  author  must  have  known  Quichua
perfectly,  in  its  earliest  and  most  archaic  form,  and
have  been  versed  in  all  the  plays  upon  words  and
double  meanings  used  by  initiated  natives.  It  may
safely  be  affirmed  that  no  such  prodigy  ever  existed
in  the  eighteenth  century,  and,  consequently,  the
General's  theory  falls  to  pieces  like  a  house  of  cards.
At  the  same  time,  General  Mitre  has  done  good
service  to  literature  by  the  publication  of  this  elabo-
rate criticism.  Every  argument  that  the  ingenuity
of  an  accomplished  scholar  could  bring  forward
against  the  authenticity  of  Ollantay  has  been  ad-
duced. Quichua  students  now  know  all  that  can
possibly  be  said  against  the  antiquity  of  the  play,


THE    ANCIENT    YNCA    DRAMA.  Hii

and  they  know  that  what  is  not  based  on  incorrect
readings,   is   far-fetched  and   fanciful.     The  former
considerations  which  led  them  to  the  conclusion  that
most  of  the  dialogues  and  songs    dated   from  the
time  of  the  Yncas,  remainrin  full  force,  unshaken  by
anything   General    Mitre    has    written.     The    new
points  he  has  raised,  prove  to  be  either  based  on  cor-
rupt readings,  or  to  be  of  no  validity  in  themselves.
It  is  gratifying  to  find  that  the  rich  and  interest-
ing language  of  the  Yncas  continues  to  be  studied
by  ardent  young  Peruvian  scholars.     Among  them
is  Dr.  Martin  Antonio  Mujica,  a  native  of  Huancave-
lica,   who  is  making  Quichua  a  serious  study,  and
has  suggested  some  changes  in  the  accepted  ortho-
graphy, based  on  sound  principles.1     There  is  much
yet  to  learn  in  this  important  branch  of  investiga-
tion, and  much  useful  work  to  be  done.     A  really
critical  text  of  Ollantay  is  a  desideratum.     There
are   many   ancient    Quichua   songs,    possibly   other
dramas,  in  private  libraries.     These  should  be  dili-
gently sought  out,  edited,  and  printed,  with  trans-
lations.    A  dictionary  should  be  undertaken,  with
references   to    all    the   words   which    occur   in   the
writings  of  ancient  authors.     There  is  a  wide  field
and  a  noble  one,  for  young  students  in  the  land  of
the  Yncas,  which  is  Avell  deserving  of  careful,  diligent,
and    enthusiastic    cultivation.       Such    discouraging
criticisms  as  that  of  General  Mitre  should  have  no

1  I  have  received  from  Dr.  Mujica  a  copy  of  a  Yardhui,  written
with  the  orthography  he  considers  to  be  most  accurate,  and  the
ordinarily  accepted  spelling,  in  parallel  columns.


liv  THE    ANCIENT    YNCA    DRAMA.

depressing  effect.  They  should  rather  arouse  the
student  to  fresh  efforts,  both  to  secure  the
purity  of  his  texts,  and  to  illustrate  their
meaning  by  the  acquisition  of  wider  knowledge,
and  the  cultivation  of  critical  and  accurate  habits
of  thought.

Meanwhile,  the  conclusion  that  the  drama  of
Ollantay  is  of  Ynca  origin,  having  withstood  all  the
assaults  of  General  Mitre's  criticism,  remains  more
firmly  established,  and  on  securer  ground  than
before.  The  unsuccessful  attack  is  an  additional
source  of  strength.


A   PERUVIAN    LOVE   STORY.


The  assertion  of  General  Mitre  that  conjugal  devo-
tion was  not  among  the  virtues  of  the  ancient  Peru-
vians, induces  me  to  relate  a  story  which  is  told  by
Miguel  Cavello  Balboa.1  The  events  it  records  took
place  during  the  war  between  Huascar  and  Atahu-
alpa.  It,  therefore,  illustrates  the  closing  chapters
of  the  present  volume.2

On  the  death  of  the  great  Ynca  Huayna  Ccapac
in  the  province  of  Quito,  he  was  succeeded  by  his
legitimate  son  Huascar  at  Cuzco  ;  while  the  son  who
was  with  him,  named  Atahualpa,  remained  at  the
head  of  an  army  at  Quito.  But  the  body  of  the
deceased  sovereign  was  sent  to  Cuzco,  accompanied
by  the  widowed  queen,  Mama  Rahua  Ocllo,  and  her
daughter  the  Princess  Chuqui  Uzpay,  and  by  four
venerable  councillors  who  were  executors  of  Huayna
Ccapac.  On  approaching  Cuzco  these  venerable
men  were  arrested,  ordered  to  explain  why  Atahu-
alpa had  remained  behind,  and,  their  defence  not
being  satisfactory,  they  were  put  to  death.  The
principal  executor,  who  thus  suffered,  was  named
Auqui  Tupac  Yupanqui.

The  Queen,  Mama  Rahua  Ocllo,  was  much  shocked
at  this  cruelty  on  the  part  of  her  son  Huascar.   After

1   He  finished  his  book  in  1586.  2  Pages  224  to  235.


lvi  A    PERUVIAN    LOVE    STORY.

the  funeral  ceremonies,  the  new  sovereign  desired
to  marry  his  sister  Chuqui  Uzpay,  and,  after  much
hesitation,  the  Queen  Mother  reluctantly  gave  her
consent.

Young  Quilaco  Yupanqui,  a  son  of  the  murdered
executor,  Auqui  Tupac  Yupanqui,  was  sent  by  Ata-
hualpa  as  an  envoy  to  his  brother  Huascar.  On
reaching  the  valley  of  Xaquixaguana,  Quilaco  re-
ceived a  secret  message  from  the  Queen  Mother,
who  loved  him  dearly,  for  he  was  a  foster-brother
of  her  child,  the  young  queen  Chuqui  Uzpay.  The
Queen  Mother  ordered  a  procession  of  damsels  to
come  out  and  meet  the  envoy  ;  among  whom  there
was  one  more  beautiful  than  all  the  rest,  named
Curi-coyllur.

At  the  coronation  of  Huascar,  the  chief  of  the
valley  of  Yea  arrived  from  the  coast  with  a  lovely
daughter  named  Chumbillaya.  She  inspired  the
Ynca  with  a  violent  passion,  and  he  gave  her  the
name  of  Curi-coyllur,  the  "golden  star."  She  bore
him  a  daughter  and  died  soon  afterwards.  His  sister
Corvaticlla,  a  beloved  friend  of  Curi-coyllur,  brought
up  the  child  with  great  care  in  a  house  near  Cuzco,
and  her  beauty  was  so  marvellous  that  she  inherited
her  mother's  name  of  Curi-coyllur.

Curi-coyllur  was  fifteen  when  the  girls  assembled
to  meet  the  young  envoy  from  Quito  at  Siquilla-
bamba.  Quilaco  fell  in  love  with  her.  He  went  on  to
Cuzco,  and,  finding  that  the  Ynca  Huascar  had  gone
to  Calca  in  the  vale  of  Vilcamayu,  he  hurried  thither,
and  laid  the  presents  from  the  Ynca's  brother  Ata-


A    PERUVIAN    LOVE    STORY.  lvii

hualpa  at  his  feet.  Huascar  spurned  both  envoy
and  presents,  and  dismissed  Quilaco  with  disdain.
Quilaco  returned  to  Cuzco,  and  told  the  queens
what  had  befallen  him  at  Galea.  The  guardian  of
Curi-coyllur,  on  hearing  of  his  love,  allowed  him
to  visit  the  young  girl.  A  few  days  afterwards
Huascar  sent  him  back  with  a  message  to  Atahu-
alpa,  to  the  effect  that  he  would  be  closely  followed
by  an  army  to  enforce  obedience.

One  day,  at  early  dawn,  Curi-coyllur  was  praying
for  the  return  of  her  lover.  When  a  labourer  ap-
peared with  his  taclla  (plough)  on  his  shoulder,  she
mistook  it  for  the  chuqui  (lance)  of  Quilaco.  At
last  a  troop  of  strangers  appeared  on  the  hill,
taking  the  way  to  Xaquixaguana.  She  was  shed-
ding tears,  when  her  lover  came  out  of  a  field  of
maize  close  by,  and  threw  himself  at  her  feet.
Quilaco  told  her  and  her  aunt  all  that  had  hap-
pened at  Cuzco,  and  asked  Corvaticlla  for  the  hand
of  her  niece.  It  was  promised  when  the  times  had
become  more  quiet,  and  Quilaco  continued  his
journey  to  Quito.

The  great  war  then  broke  out  between  the  two
brothers,  Huascar  and  Atahualpa.  Quilaco  had  pro-
mised to  return  to  Curi-coyllur  in  three  years,  and
four  had  elapsed.  Huascar  was  on  the  point  of
marrying  her  to  one  of  his  captains.  She  cut  her
hair,  put  on  the  dress  of  one  of  her  servants,  painted
her  face  according  to  the  usage  of  those  who  go  to
war,  and  mixed  herself  amongst  the  camp  followers
<>t't lie  army  of  Huascar.     The  Ynca's  general,  named


lviil  A    PERUVIAN    LOVE    STORY.

Huanca  Auqui,  had  retreated  to  the  valley  of  Xauxa,
where  he  met  the  reinforcements  from  Cuzco,  and
was  superseded  by  Mayta  Yupanqui.  The  army  of
Atahualpa,  under  the  command  of  Quizquiz,  ad-
vanced to  Tarma,  and  the  hostile  forces  met  between
Tarma  and  Xauxa.  The  battle  lasted  all  day,  but
eventually  the  army  of  Huascar  was  defeated  with
great  slaughter.  Quilaco  was  wounded  by  an  arrow,
and  fell  on  a  heap  of  dead,  while  his  men  were  too
much  occupied  in  chasing  the  fugitives  to  notice
his  fall.

Quilaco  would  have  perished  miserably  from  loss
of  blood ;  but  he  saw  a  lad  searching  among  the
bodies,  and  cried  for  help.  The  boy  ran  to  him,
drew  out  the  arrow,  and  staunched  the  wound.  He
carried  the  wounded  man  to  the  banks  of  a  stream,
and  washed  the  dirt  off  his  face  and  body.  Quilaco
asked  the  motive  of  such  kindness  in  a  follower  of
Huascar.1  "  Brother,"  said  the  lad,  "  I  am  a  native
of  this  place  ;  my  name  is  Titu  ;  I  seek  no  advant-
age." He  collected  sticks,  lighted  a  fire  to  warm
the  wounded  chief;  and  so  they  passed  the  night.
Next  day  the  boy  conveyed  Quilaco  to  a  neighbour-
ing hut  until  he  should  be  cured.  A  search  was
made  for  him  by  order  of  Quizquiz,  and  his  disap-
pearance caused  profound  sadness  in  the  host  of
Atahualpa.

For  many  months  Quilaco  was  unable  to  rise  from
his  bed,  and  in  the  interval  great  events  happened.
Huascar   was  dethroned,  his  family  was  massacred
1  Every  ayllu,  or  lineage,  was  known  by  its  head  dress.


A    PERUVIAN    LOVE    STORY.  lix

at  Cuzco,  the  usurper  advanced  to  Caxamarca,
Pizarro  arrived  on  the  coast  with  his  Spaniards,
and  Atahualpa  was  made  prisoner  by  them.  Titu
used  to  leave  the  hut,  and  collect  news  from  passers-
by  on  the  great  road.  One  day  he  told  Quilaco
that  the  power  of  Atahualpa  and  his  generals  had
departed,  and  that  strange  men  from  the  sea  were
now  the  rulers  of  the  country.  Titu  spoke  of  the
noble  bearing  and  of  the  justice  of  the  Viracochas,
as  he  called  the  Spaniards,  looking  upon  them  as
messengers  from  God.  He  entreated  and  at  last
persuaded  the  chief,  who  was  now  able  to  walk,  to
appear  before  the  Spanish  leader,  who  had  arrived
in  the  valley.  It  was  the  famous  Hernando  de
Soto.  They  went  together,  and  Titu,  with  the  aid
of  an  interpreter,  related  his  history  to  the  proud
but  noble-minded  conqueror.  Quilaco  now  for  the
first  time  discovered  that  Titu  was  his  long-lost
love,  his  Curi-coyllur,  whom  he  had  never  hoped  to
see  again.

They  were  baptized  under  the  names  of  Hernando
Yupanqui  and  Leonora  Curi-coyllur,  and  married  in
conformity  with  the  laws  of  the  Church.  But  the
young  chief  only  survived  for  two  years.  The
widow  afterwards  lived  with  Hernando  de  Soto,  and
bore  him  several  children^Leonora  de  Soto,  who
married  Fernando  Carrillo,  notary  to  his  Majesty,  and
lived  at  Cuzco  ;  Juana  de  Soto ;  Pedro  de  Soto ;
and  others.

I  know  not  whether  the  story  of  Quilaco  and
Curi-coyllur  was  ever  dramatised  like  that  of  Ollan-


lx  A    PERUVIAN   LOVE    STORY.

tay.  But  we  need  not  doubt  that  the  "  brilliant
erudition"1  of  General  Mitre  would,  if  the  play  were
brought  to  light,  soon  announce  to  us  that  it  was  a
"  comedia  de  capa  y  espada",  with  all  the  ideas  and
incidents  borrowed  from  Homer,  Herodotus,  Tacitus,
the  Pentateuch,  the  Song  of  Solomon,  Shakespeare,
Lope  de  Vega,  Mrs.  Ratcliffe,  and  the  Cid  Campea-
dor.  Too  much  erudition  is  surely  a  dangerous
thing.

The  other  story  told  by  Balboa,  of  the  love  of
Elfquen  Pisan,  Chief  of  Lambayeque,  for  the  beau-
tiful Chestan  Xecfuin,  is  equally  romantic,  equally
of  native  origin,  and  has  as  little  to  do  with  the  old
world  classics  as  Ollantay.  Among  these  people
there  was  pride  of  caste,  magnanimity  towards  the
vanquished,  a  martial  spirit,  filial  love,  and  conjugal
devotion ;  and  these  sentiments  found  natural  ex-
pression in  their  literature.  Cieza  de  Leon,  in  the
following  pages,  bears  ample  testimony  to  Ynca  civi-
lisation.

1  Mercurio  de  Valparaiso,  14th  March  1853.


SECOND    PART


CHRONICLE    OF    PERU,

WHICH    TREATS    OF    THE    LORDSHIP    OF     THE     INCAS     YUPANQUIS,    AND
OF    THEIR    GREAT    DEEDS    AND    GOVERNMENT.

WRITTEN    BY

PEDEO  DE  CIEZA  DE  LEON.


SECOND    PART

OP  THB

CHRONICLE     OF     PERU


CHAPTEE  III.


of  them  more  than  what  I  recount,  go  to  a  delightful  place
full  of  enjoyment  and  pleasure,  where  they  all  eat  and  drink
and  rejoice ;  and  if,  on  the  contrary,  they  have  done  evil,
disobedient  to  parents,  hostile  to  religion,  they  go  to  another
place  which  is  dark  and  dismal.  In  the  first  book  I  treated
more  fully  of  these  things,  so  that  I  will  now  pass  on,  and
relate  in  what  manner  the  people  of  this  kingdom  lived
before  the  Incas  flourished  and  made  themselves  sovereign
lords,  in  which  time  all  affirm  that  they  were  in  a  state  of
anarchy,  without  any  of  the  order,  and  reasonable  govern-
ment and  justice  which  was  afterwards  established.  I  will
also  recount  what  there  is  to  be  said  of  Ticiviracocha,  which
is  the  name  by  which  the  Maker  of  all  things  was  known.


EARLIEST   STATE   OF   THE   PEOPLE


CHAPTER  IV.

Wliich  treats  ofivhat  the  Indians  of  this  kingdom  say  touch-
ing the  state  of  things  before  the  Yncas  were  knoion,  and
how  they  had  fortresses  in  the  hills,  whence  they  came
forth  to  make  war  one  with  another.

I  OFTEN  asked  the  inhabitants  of  these  provinces  what  they
knew  of  their  condition  before  the  Incas  became  the  lords.
On  this  subject  they  say  that  all  men  lived  without  order,
and  that  many  went  naked  like  savages ;  that  they  had  no
houses,  nor  any  habitations  except  the  caves,  many  of  which
may  be  seen  in  the  great  cliffs  and  rocks,  whence  they  came
forth  to  eat  what  they  could  find  in  the  fields.  Others  made
fortresses  in  the  mountains,  called  pucara,  out  of  which  they
came  forth,  using  strange  languages,  to  fight,  one  with  the
other,  over  the  cultivable  lands,  or  for  other  reasons :  and
many  were  slain,  the  spoils  and  women  of  the  vanquished
being  carried  off.  With  all  these  things  they  went  in
triumph  to  the  heights,  where  they  had  their  castles,  and
there  offered  up  sacrifices  to  their  gods,  shedding  much  blood
of  men  and  lambs  before  the  stones  and  idols.  All  these
people  were  in  a  state  of  anarchy,  for  they  say  for  certain
that  they  had  no  lords,  but  only  captains  to  lead  them  in
their  wars.  If  some  went  about  dressed,  it  was  in  slight
clothing,  and  not  such  as  they  now  use.

They  say  that  the  llautu  or  cords  wliich  they  put  on  their
heads  that  one  tribe  may  be  distinguished  from  another,
were  used  then  as  they  are  now.

This  people  living  in  the  condition  that  I  have  described,

there  rose  up  in  the  province  of  the  Collao,  a  very  brave  lord

named  Zapana,1  who  so  prevailed  that  he  brought  many

people  of  that  province  under  his  rule.     They  relate  another

1  See  Part  i,  p.  363.


A   KACE   OF   AMAZONS.  3

thing;  but  whether  it  be  true  or  not,  the  most  High  God
who  understands  all  things  only  knows.  As  for  me,  I  have
no  other  testimony  or  authority  of  books  for  what  I  relate
than  the  statements  of  the  Indians.  What  I  want  to  relate
is  that  they  affirm  of  a  certainty  that,  after  that  powerful
captain  arose  in  Hatuncollao,1  there  appeared  in  the  province
of  the  Canas,2  which  lies  between  the  Candies3  and  Collao,
near  the  village  called  Chugara,  some  women  who  were  like
valiant  men.  Taking  up  arms  they  subdued  those  who  were
in  the  district  where  they  lived,  and,  almost  like  what  is
told  of  the  Amazons,  they  made  homes  for  themselves,  with-
out husbands.  These  people,  after  this  had  gone  on  for
some  years,  and  they  had  performed  some  famous  deeds,
came  to  fight  with  Zapana,  he  who  had  become  Lord  of
Hatuncollao ;  and  to  defend  themselves  against  his  power,
which  was  great,  they  made  fortresses  and  walls,  which  still
exist.  But  after  they  had  done  all  to  the  utmost  of  their
power,  they  were  taken  and  killed,  and  their  name  dis-
appeared.

There  is  a  citizen  in  Cuzco  named  Tomas  Vasquez,4  who
told  me  that  he  and  Francisco  de  Villacastin,5  being  in  the


1  Hatun  Colla  (Great  Colla),  a  village  N.W.  of  Lake  Titicaca.

2  The  Canas  were  a  hardy  mountain  race  on  the  water-parting  be-
tween the  Titicaca  basin  and  the  Vilcamayu.  A  proud,  cautious,
melancholy  race  of  shepherds ;  constantly  in  revolt  against  the
Yncas.

3  The  Canches  inhabited  the  hills  opposite  the  Canas,  on  the  right
bank  of  the  Vilcamayu.

4  Tomas  Vasquez  was  one  of  the  first  conquerors,  and  had  houses  in
Cuzco. — G.  de  la  Vega,  ii,  p.  255.

6  Francisco  de  Villacastin  was  also  a  householder  in  Cuzco.  He  mar-
ried an  Ynca  princess,  widow  of  Juan  Balsa,  who  was  killed  at  the  battle
of  Chupas,  fighting  for  young  Almagro.  Through  her,  Villacastin  in-
herited Balsa's  house  at  Cuzco.  He  died  in  prison  at  Cuzco,  having
taken  the  side  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro.  He  owned  the  district  of  Ayaviri,
and  was  one  of  the  first  conquerors,  but  a  good  man. — See  G.  de  la  Vega,
ii,  p.  524.

b2


4  BEARDED   MEN   AT   TITICACA.

town  of  Ayavire,1  seeing  these  enclosures,  and  asking  the
natives  what  they  were,  the  above  story  was  told  them.
They  also  relate  what  I  have  written  in  the  first  part,
namely,  that  there  were  people  with  beards,  in  the  Island  of
Titicaca,  in  past  ages,  white  like  ourselves ;  that,  coining
from  the  valley  of  Coquimbo,  their  captain,  who  was  named
Cari,2  arrived  at  the  place  where  Chucuito  now  stands,
whence,  after  having  founded  some  new  settlements,  he
passed  over  with  his  people  to  the  island.  He  made  such
war  upon  the  inhabitants  that  he  killed  them  all.  tChiri-
huana,  the  governor  of  those  settlements,  which  now  belong
to  the  Emperor,3  told  me  what  I  have  now  written ;  and  as
this  land  was  so  extensive,  and  in  parts  so  healthy  and
well  suited  for  man's  habitation,  although  they  continued  in
the  practice  of  petty  warfare  and  indulgence  of  their  pas-
sions, yet  they  established  many  settlements.  Those  captains
who  showed  themselves  to  be  valorous,  continued  as  lords  of
several  towns ;  and  all,  as  is  generally  reported,  had  Indians
of  intelligence  in  their  houses  and  fortresses,  who  spoke  with
the  Devil.  And  the  Devil,  by  permission  of  Almighty  God,
and  for  reasons  known  to  Him,  had  very  great  power  amongst
these  people

1  A  village  on  the  ridge  between  the  basin  of  Titicaca  and  the  Vilca-
mayn.     The  Ayaviris  bordered  on  the  Canas.

2  See  Part  i,  p.  363.

3  Chucuito  was  a  fief  of  the  crown.


A  STRANGE  MAN  OF  GREAT  STATURE.


CHAPTER  V.

Touching  what  these  natives  say  concerning  Ticiviracocha,  of
the  opinion  held  by  some  that  an  Apostle  passed  through
this  land,  and  of  the  temple  there  is  in  Cdchan,  cdso  v:hat
happened  there.

Before  the  lncas  reigned  in  these  kingdoms,  or  had  ever
been  heard  of,  the  Indians  relate  another  thing  much  more
notable  than  all  things  else  that  they  say.  For  they  declare
that  they  were  a  long  time  without  seeing  the  sun,  and  that,
suffering  much  evil  from  its  absence,  great  prayers  and  vows
were  offered  up  to  their  gods,  imploring  for  the  light  they
needed.  Things  being  in  this  state,  the  sun,  shining  very
brightly,  came  forth  from  the  island  of  Titicaca,  in  the  great
lake  of  the  Collao,  at  which  every  one  rejoiced.  Presently
afterwards,  they  say,  that  there  came  from  a  southern  direc-
tion a  white  man  of  great  stature,  who,  by  his  aspect  and
presence,  called  forth  great  veneration  and  obedience.  This
man  who  thus  appeared  had  great  power,  insomuch  that  he
could  change  plains  into  mountains,  and  great  hills  into
valleys,  and  make  water  flow  out  of  stones.  As  soon  as
such  power  was  beheld,  the  people  called  him  the  Maker  of
created  things,  the  Prince  of  all  things,  Father  of  the  Sun.
For  they  say  that  he  performed  other  wonders,  giving  life  to
men  and  animals,  so  that  by  his  hand  marvellous  great
benefits  were  conferred  on  the  people.  And  such  was  the
story  that  the  Indians  who  told  it  to  me  say  that  they  heard
from  their  ancestors,  who  in  like  manner  heard  it  in  the  old
songs  which  they  received  from  very  ancient  times.  They
say  that  this  man -went  on  towards  the  north,  working  these
marvels  along  the  way  of  the  mountains ;  and  that  he  never-
more returned  so  as  to  be  seen.  In  many  places  he  gave
orders  to  men  how  they  should  live,  and  he  spoke  lovingly


6  THE   DEEDS    OF   TICIVIRACOCHA.

to  them  and  with  much  gentleness,  admonishing  them  that
they  should  do  good,  and  no  evil  or  injury  one  to  another,
and  that  they  should  be  loving  and  charitable  to  all.  In
most  parts  he  is  generally  called  Ticiviracocha,1  but  in  the
province  of  the  Collao  they  call  him  Tuapaca,  and  in  other
places  Arnauan.  In  many  parts  they  built  temples  in  which
they  put  blocks  of  stone  in  likeness  of  him,  and  offered  up
sacrifices  before  them.  It  is  held  that  the  great  blocks  at
Tiahuanacu  were  from  that  time.  Although,  from  the  fame
of  what  formerly  had  passed,  they  relate  the  things  I  have
stated  touching  Ticiviracocha,  they  know  nothing  more  of
him,  nor  whether  he  would  ever  return  to  any  part  of  this
kingdom.

Besides  this,  they  say  that,  a  long  time  having  passed,  they
again  saw  another  man  resembling  the  first,  whose  name
they  do  not  mention ;  but  they  received  it  from  their  fore-
fathers as  very  certain  that  wherever  this  personage  came
and  there  were  sick,  he  healed  them,  and  where  there  were
blind  he  gave  them  sight  by  only  uttering  words.  Through
acts  so  good  and  useful  he  was  much  beloved  by  all.  In
this  fashion,  working  great  things  by  his  words,  he  arrived  at
the  province  of  the  Canas,  in  which,  near  to  a  village  which
has  the  name  of  Cacha,  and  in  which  the  Captain  Bartolome
de  Terrazas2  holds  an  encomienda,  the  people  rose  against

1  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  says :  "  The  Spaniards  gave  another  name  for
God  in  their  histories,  which  is  Ticiviracocha,  but  neither  I  nor  they
know  what  it  means."  But  he  quotes  Bias  Valera  in  another  place,
who  says  that  the  god  Tied  Huira-ccoccha  was  otherwise  called  Pacha-
camac.  Montesinos  suggests  that  Tici  meant  "bottom  or  foundation".  I
suspect  it  comes  from  Atini,  "to  conquer".  Atic,  "conquering".  It
may  be  from  Tied,  "beginning".

2  Terrazas  was  one  of  the  first  conquerors,  and  he  accompanied  Al-
magro  in  the  expedition  to  Chile.  Afterwards  he  became  an  active
agriculturist.  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  says  that  he  was  very  noble,
liberal,  magnificent,  and  possessed  of  all  the  knightly  virtues.  He
planted  vineyards,  and  in  1555  sent  a  large  present  of  grapes  to  Garci-
lasso's  father,  when  he  was  Corregidor  of  Cuzco,  with  a  request  that  he


TEMPLE   OF   CACHA.  7

him,  threatening  to  stone  him.  They  saw  him  upon  his
knees,  with  his  hands  raised  to  heaven,  as  if  invoking  the
divine  favour  to  liberate  him  from  the  danger  that  threatened
him.  The  Indians  further  state  that  presently  there  ap-
peared a  great  fire  in  the  heaven,  which  they  thought  to  be
surrounding  them.  Full  of  fear  and  trembling,  they  came  to
him  whom  they  had  wanted  to  kill,  and  with  loud  clamour
besought  him  to  be  pleased  to  forgive  them.  For  they  knew
that  this  punishment  threatened  them  because  of  the  sin
they  had  committed  in  wishing  to  stone  the  stranger.  Pre-
sently they  saw  that  when  he  ordered  the  fire  to  cease,  it
was  extinguished,  so  that  they  were  themselves  witnesses  of
what  had  come  to  pass  ;  and  the  stones  were  consumed  and
burnt  up  in  such  wise  as  that  large  blocks  could  be  lifted  in
the  hand,  as  if  they  were  of  cork.  On  this  subject  they  go
on  to  say  that,  leaving  the  place  where  these  things  hap-
pened, the  man  arrived  on  the  sea  coast,  where,  holding  his
mantle,  he  went  in  amongst  the  waves  and  was  never  more
seen.  And  as  he  went,  so  they  gave  him  the  name  of
Viracocha,  which  means  "  the  foam  of  the  sea."

Soon  afterwards  they  made  a  temple  in  this  village  of
Cacha,1  on  the  other  side  of  a  river  which  passes  near,  where
they  set  up  an  idol  of  stone,  very  large,  but  in  a  somewhat
narrow  recess.  This  recess  is  not  so  large  as  those  in
Tiahuanaco,  erected  in  memory  of  Ticiviracocha,  nor  does  the
figure  appear  to  have  the  same  kind  of  vestments.  Some
gold  was  found  in  holes  near  it.

When  I  passed  through  this  province,  I  went  to  see  the
idol,  for  the  Spaniards  affirm  that  it  may  have  been  some
apostle.     I  heard  many  declare  that  it  had  legends  written

would  send  bunches  to  all  the  cavaliers  in  the  town.  These  were  the
first  grapes  ever  seen  there.  Terrazas  was  also  the  first  to  raise  carrots
in  Peru.

1  The  best  description  of  the  very  interesting  temple  of  Cacha  will  be
found  in  Mr.  Squier's  Peru  (Macmillan,  1877),  pp.  402  to  409.


8  NAME    OF    VIKACOCHA.

on  its  hands.  But  this  is  nonsense,  unless  my  eyes  were
blinded,  for  although  I  looked  closely  I  could  not  see  any-
thing of  the  kind.  The  hands  were  placed  over  the  haunches,
the  arms  twisted,  and  on  the  girdle  were  indications  that  the
vestments  were  fastened  with  buttons.  Whether  this  or  any
other  was  intended  for  one  of  the  glorious  apostles  who,  in
the  days  of  his  preaching,  had  passed  this  way,  God  Almighty
knows.  I  know  not,  and  can  only  believe  that  if  he  was  an
apostle,  he  would  work  with  the  power  of  God  in  his
preaching  to  these  people,  who  are  simple  and  with  little
guile ;  and  there  would  be  some  vestige  of  his  visit.  Yet
what  we  see  and  understand  is  that  the  Devil  had  very
great  power  over  these  people,  God  permitting  it,  and  that  in
these  places  very  heathenish  and  vain  sacrifices  were  offered
up.  Hence  I  believe  that,  until  our  times,  the  word  of  the
Holy  Gospel  was  not  heard.  Now  we  see  all  the  temples
profaned,  and  the  glorious  Cross  planted  in  all  directions.

I  asked  the  people  of  Cacha  in  remembrance  of  what  god
the  temple  had  been  built.  The  cacique,  or  lord,  was  an
Indian  of  intelligence  and  good  presence,  named  Don  Juan,  a
Christian,  who  came  with  me  himself  to  show  me  this  piece
of  antiquity.  He  told  me  that  it  was  built  in  honor  of  Ti-
civiracocha.  Treating  of  this  name  Viracocha,  I  wish  to  dis-
abuse the  reader  of  the  popular  belief  that  the  natives  called
the  Spaniards  by  the  name  of  Viracocha,  which  means  foam  of
the  sea.  So  far  as  the  word  is  concerned  it  is  true,  for  vira
is  the  word  for  grease,  and  cocha  is  the  sea.  And  seeing  that
the  Spaniards  came  by  sea,  that  name  has  been  attributed  to
them.  But  this  is  a  wrong  interpretation,  according  to  the
explanation  which  I  received  at  Cuzco,  and  which  the
Orejones  give.  They  say  that  before  Atahuallpa  was  taken
prisoner  by  the  Spaniards  in  the  province  of  Caxamarca,
there  had  been  great  wars  between  him  and  his  brother  Huas-
car  Inca,  the  sole  heir  to  the  empire.  At  length,  at  the  pass
of  Cotabamba  over  the  river  Apurimac,  the  king  Huascar  was


FIRST   SPANIARDS   AT   CUZCO.  9

taken  prisoner,  and  cruelly  treated  byChalicuchiina.1  Besides
this,  Quizquiz2  did  great  mischief  in  Cuzco  and,  as  is  well
known,  killed  thirty  brothers  of  Huascar,  committing  other
cruelties  on  those  who  were  favourable  to  the  legitimate  heir
and  had  not  shown  a  desire  to  receive  Atahuallpa.  While  these
passions  were  at  their  height,  Atahuallpa  had  been  made  pri-
soner and  had  agreed  with  Pizarro  to  give  him  a  house  of  gold
as  his  ransom.  Martin  Bueno,  Zarate,  and  Moguer3  went  to
Cuzco  to  receive  it,  the  greater  part  being  in  the  Sun  temple
called  Curicancha.  As  these  Christians  arrived  at  Cuzco  at
the  time  when  the  party  of  Huascar  was  suffering  under  the
above  calamity,  the  oppressed  Yncas  rejoiced  when  they  heard
of  the  imprisonment  of  Atahuallpa,  and  with  great  supplica-
tions implored  the  aid  of  the  Christians  against  their  enemy,
declaring  that  they  must  be  sent  by  the  intervention  of  their
great  God  Ticiviracocha,  and  that  they  were  his  sons ;  and
presently  they  called  them  so,  giving  them  the  name  of
Viracocha.

They  ordered  the  High  Priest  and  the  other  ministers  of
the  temple  to  keep  the  sacred  women  there,  and  Quizquiz  de-
livered all  the  gold  and  silver  to  the  Spaniards.     As  these

1  One  of  the  generals  of  At'ahualpa.

2  Another  of  Atahualpa's  generals.

3  Zarate  and  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  give  the  names  of  Hernando  de
Soto,  and  Pedro  del  Barco  of  Lobon,  as  those  of  the  first  Spaniards  who
were  sent  by  Pizarro  to  Cuzco.  Pedro  Pizarro,  who  was  at  Caxamarca
at  the  time,  says  that  only  two  were  sent,  Martin  Bueno  and  Pedro
Martin  de  Moguer.

They  left  Caxamarca  on  February  15th,  1533,  and  remained  one  week
at  Cuzco.  Xeres  says  that  three  men  were  sent.  The  truth  seems  to
have  been  that  three  soldiers  named  Pedro  Moguer,  Francisco  de  Zarate,
and  Martin  Bueno  were  first  sent ;  but  that  they  behaved  with  so
much  imprudence  and  insolence  at  Cuzco  as  to  endanger  their  own  lives
and  the  success  of  their  mission.  Pizarro,  therefore,  ordered  two  officers
of  distinction,  Hernando  de  Soto  and  Pedro  del  Barco,  to  follow  the
three  soldiers  to  Cuzco. — See  G.  de  la  Vega,  Part  n,  lib.  i,  cap.  31 ;
Herrera,  Dec.  v.  lib.  i,  cap.  1  ;  Zarate,  n,  cap.  vi ;  Gomara,  cap.  cxiv  ;
Xei-es,  p.  72.


10  NAME    OF    VIKACOCHA.

Spaniards  were  scTfree  from  all  restraint,  and  held  the  honor
of  the  people  "so  lightly,  in  return  for  the  hospitality  and
friendliness  with  which  they  were  received,  they  corrupted
some  of  the  virgins ;  which  was  the  reason  that  the  Indians,
who  also  saw  how  little  reverence  the  Spaniards  felt  for  the
Sun,  and  how  shamelessly  and  without  the  fear  of  God  they
violated  the  mamaconas,1  which  the  Indians  held  to  be  a
great  sacrilege,  began  to  say  that  such  people  were  not  sons  of
God,  but  that  they  were  worse  than  Supais,  which  is  their
name  of  Devil.  Nevertheless,  to  comply  with  the  order  of  the
Lord  Atahuallpa,  the  captains  of  the  city  took  leave  of  the
Spaniards  without  showing  any  anger  whatever,  soon  after-
wards sending  the  treasure.  But  the  name  of  Viracocha  con-
tinued from  that  day,  and  it  was  given,  as  I  was  informed,  for
the  reason  I  have  already  written  down,  and  not  owing  to  its
signification  of  foam  of  the  sea.2  And  now  I  will  relate  what
I  have  been  given  to  understand  respecting  the  origin  of  the
Incas.

1  Matrons  in  charge  of  virgins  of  the  Sun.  The  word  seems  to  be
used  here,  and  elsewhere,  for  all  females  connected  with  the  temples.

2  TJ'ira  means  "grease",  and  Ccocha,  "a  lake".  The  word  for  the
sea  is  Mama-ccocha .  Montesinos  says  that  Uira,  in  the  word  Uiracocha,
was  a  corruption  of  Pirua,  meaning  all  things  united  together.  Pirua
literally  means  a  "granary".  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  pointed  out  that  Uira-
ccocha  would  mean  a  "Sea  of  grease",  not  "Foam  of  the  Sea":  the
genitive  always  being  placed  first.  Ccochap-uira  would  be  "Foam  of
the  sea".

But  the  Ynca  Garcilasso,  though  he  points  out  the  errors  of  other
writers,  does  not  explain  the  meaning  of  the  word  himself.  He^simply
infers  that  it  is  a  proper  name,  the  original  meaning  of  which  is  lost ;
and  adds  that  Bias  Valera  says  that  it  signified  "  the  will  and  power  of
God",  not  because  that  is  the  etymology  of  the  component  words,  but
because  of  the  God-like  qualities  ascribed  to  Uira-ccocha.


SOURCES    OF   INFORMATION.  11


CHAPTER  VI.


How  certain  men  and  women  appeared  in  Pacarec- Tampu,  and
ivhat  they  relate  touching  their  proceedings  after  they  came
forth  from  there.

I  have  already  stated  more  than  once,  how,  as  an  exercise
and  to  escape  from  the  vices  caused  by  idleness,  I  took  the
trouble  to  describe  all  that  I  obtained  touching  the  Incas
and  their  system  and  good  order  of  government.  As  I  have
no  other  account  nor  writing  beyond  what  they  gave  me,  if
another  should  undertake  to  write  more  certainly  than  I  have,
on  this  subject,  he  may  well  do  so.  At  the  same  time,  I  have
not  spared  pains  to  make  what  I  write  clear ;  and  to  ensure
greater  accuracy  I  went  to  Cuzco  when  the  Captain  Juan  de
Saavedra  was  Corregidor.1  Here  he  arranged  that  Cayu  Tupac
should  meet  me,  who  is  one  of  the  surviving  descendants  of
Huaina  Capac.  For  Sairi  Tupac,  son  of  Manco  Inca,  has
retired  to  Viticos,  where  his  father  took  refuge  after  his  great
war  with  the  Spaniards  at  Cuzco.  I  also  met  others  of  the
Orejones,  who  are  those  that  are  held  to  be  most  noble
amongst  themselves.  With  the  best  interpreters  that  could
be  found,  I  asked  these  Lords  Incas  of  what  race  they  were,
and  of  what  nation.  It  would  seem  that  the  former  Incas,
to  magnify  their  origin  with  great  deeds,  exaggerated  the
story  they  had  received,  in  their  songs.  It  is  this.  When
all  the  races  who  lived  in  these  regions  were  in  a  state  of  dis-
order, slaughtering  each  other  and  sunk  in  vice,  there  ap-
peared three  men  and  three  women  in  a  place  not  far  from
the  city  of  Cuzco,  which  is  called  Pacarec  Tampu.  And
according  to  the  interpretation,  Pacarec  Tampu  is  as  much  as
to  say  the  House  of  Production.

The  men  who  came  forth  from  there  were,  as  they  relate,

1  In  the  beginning  of  1550.


12  THE  BRETHREN  OF  PACCARI  TAMPU.

the  one,  Ayar  Ucho,  and  the  other,  Ayar  Cachi  Asauca,  and
the  other,  they  say,  was  named  Ayar  Manco.  Of  the  women,
one  had  the  name  of  Mama  Huaco,  the  other  Mama  Cora,  the
other  Mama  Bahua.1

Some  Indians  give  these  names  after  another  fashion  and

1  Balboa  says  that  four  brothers  and  four  sisters  came  out  of  Pacarec
Tampu  or  Tampu  Toco,  named  Manco  Capac,  Ayar  Cacha,  Ayar  Auca,
and  Ayar  Uchi ;  the  women  being  Mama  Guaca,  Mama  Cora,  Mama
Ocllo,  Mama  Arahua.  Montesinos  gives  the  names  as — Ayar  Manco
Tupac,  Ayar  Uchu  Tupac,  Aya  Sauca  Tupac,  and  Ayar  Cachi  Tupac,
and  the  women  Mama  Cora,  Hipa  Huacum,  Mama  Huacum,  Pilco
Huacum.  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  also  says  that  there  were  four  brothers
and  four  sisters,  namely,  Manco  Capac,  Ayar  Cachi,  Ayar  Uchu,  Ayar
Sauca,  but  he  only  gives  the  name  of  one  of  the  women,  Mama  Ocllo,
wife  of  Manco  Capac.  Juan  de  Betanzos  gives  the  names  in  pairs,  in
the  order  in  which  they  came  out  of  the  mysterious  cave,  namely,  Ayar-
cache  and  Mamaguaco,  Ayaroche  and  Cora,  Ayarauca  and  Raguaocllo,
Ayarmango  and  Mama  Ocllo.

Fray  Martin  de  Morua,  in  his  Historia  del  Origen  y  Genealogia  de  los
Incas,  a  work  written  in  1590,  but  still  inedited,  gives  the  following
names  of  those  who  came  out  of  Tambo  Toco  or  Pacaric  Tombo.  The
eldest,  Guanacauri ;  the  second,  Cuzco  Huanca;  the  third,  Mango  Capac;
and  the  fourth,  Tupa  Ayar  Cache.  Of  the  women,  the  first  was  Tupa
Uaco ;  the  second,  Mama  Coya  :  the  third,  Curi  Ocllo ;  and  the  fourth,
Ipa  Huaco.  Before  reaching  Cuzco  they  stopped  at  a  place  then  called
Apitay,  and  now  Guanacauri.  The  third  sister,  Curi  Ocllo,  who  was
considered  most  intelligent  by  the  rest,  was  then  sent  forward  to  seek
for  the  best  situation  for  a  settlement.  Coming  to  the  site  of  Cuzco,  then
inhabited  by  Lares,  Poques,  and  Huallas,  a  low  and  poor  race,  before
she  arrived  there  she  met  one  of  the  Poques.  She  killed  him  with  a
weapon  called  raucana;  cut  out  his  lungs ;  and,  with  them  in  her  mouth,
all  bloody,  she  entered  the  settlements.  The  people  were  frightened  at
the  sight  of  her,  thinking  that  she  fed  on  men,  and  they  left  their  houses
and  fled.  Seeing  that  the  place  seemed  good  for  a  settlement,  and  that
the  people  were  tame,  she  returned  to  her  brothers  and  sisters,  and
brought  them  all  there  except  the  eldest.  He  preferred  to  stay  at  Api-
tay, where  he  died,  and  in  memory  of  him  they  call  that  place  and  hill
Guanacauri.  The  rest  were  received  without  opposition,  and  they
named  the  second  brother  to  be  the  chief  of  the  town,  for  which  reason
the  place  was  called  Cuzco,  for  before  its  name  was  Acamama.  He  died
in  the  Curicancha,  and  was  succeeded  by  the  third  brother,  named  the
great  Manco  Capac.


FATE   OF   AYAR   CACHI.  13

in  greater  number,  but  I  have  put  them  down  from  the  in-
formations of  the  Orejones,  who  know  better  than  any  one
else.  They  say  that  these  people  came  forth,  dressed  in  long
mantles,  and  some  vestments  like  a  shirt  without  collar  or
sleeves,  made  of  very  fine  wool,  with  patterns  of  different
kinds,  which  they  called  tacapu,  and  in  our  language  the
meaning  is  "vestures  of  kings."  And  each  of  these  lords  held
in  the  hand  a  sling  of  gold  with  a  stone  in  it.  The  women
came  out  dressed  very  richly  like  the  men,  and  they  had
much  gold.  Going  forward  with  this,  they  further  say,  that
they  obtained  great  store  of  gold,  and  that  one  of  the  brothers
named  Avar  Uchu  spoke  to  his  brethren  that  they  should
make  a  beginning  of  the  great  things  that  they  had  to  do  ;  for
their  presumption  was  such  that  they  thought  they  were  to
make  themselves  sole  lords  of  the  land.  They  were  deter-
mined to  form  in  that  place  a  new  settlement,  to  which  they
gave  the  name  of  Pacarec  Tanipu ;  and  this  was  soon  done,
for  they  had  the  help  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  surrounding
country.  As  time  went  on,  they  put  great  quantities  of  pure
gold  and  jewels,  with  other  precious  things,  into  that  place,
of  which  the  fame  goes  that  Hernando  Pizarro  and  Don  Diego
de  Almagro  the  lad,  obtained  a  large  share.

Eeturning  to  the  history,  they  say  that  one  of  the  three,
named  Avar  Cachi,  was  so  valiant  and  had  such  great  power,
that,  wTith  stones  hurled  from  his  sling,  he  split  the  hills  and
threw  them  up  to  the  clouds.  When  the  other  brothers  saw
tins  they  were  sorry,  thinking  that  it  was  an  affront  to  them
who  could  not  do  such  things,  and  they  were  enraged  by
reason  of  their  envy.  Then  they  asked  him  sweetly  and
with  gentle  words,  though  full  of  deceit,  to  return  and  enter
the  mouth  of  a  cave  where  they  had  their  treasure,  to  bring
out  a  certain  vase  of  gold  that  they  had  forgotten,  and  to  pray
to  their  father  the  Sun  that  he  would  prosper  their  efforts  so
that  they  might  be  lords  of  that  land.     Ayar  Cachi,  believing


14  THE  PACCAKI  TAMPU  STORY.

that  there  was  no  deceit  in  what  his  brother  said,  joyfully
went  to  do  what  they  required  of  him,  but  he  had  scarcely
got  into  the  cave  when  the  other  two  so  filled  the  mouth  up
with  stones  that  it  could  not  be  seen.  This  done,  they  relate
for  a  certainty  that  the  earth  trembled  in  such  a  manner  that
many  hills  fell  into  the  valleys.

Thus  far  the  Orejones  relate  the  story  of  the  origin  of  the
Incas,  because  they  wished  it  to  be  understood  that  as  their
deeds  were  so  marvellous,  they  must  have  been  children  of
the  Sun.  Afterwards,  when  the  Indians  exalted  them  with
grand  titles,  they  were  called  Ancha  hatun  apu  intipchuri!1
which  means,  "Oh  very  great  lord,  child  of  the  sun."  That
which,  for  my  part,  I  hold  to  be  the  truth  in  this  matter  is  that
as  Zapana  rose  up  in  Hatuncollao,  and  other  valiant  captains
did  the  same  thing  in  other  parts,  these  Incas  must  have  been
some  three  valiant  and  powerful  brothers  with  grand  thoughts
who  were  natives  of  some  place  in  those  regions,  or  who  had
come  from  some  other  part  of  the  mountains  of  the  Andes  >
and  that  they,  finding  the  opportunity,  conquered  and  ac-
quired the  lordship  which  they  possessed.  Even  without
this  supposition  it  might  be  that  what  they  tell  of  Ayar
Cachi  and  the  others  was  the  work  of  magicians,  who  did
what  is  told  of  them  through  the  Devil.  In  fine,  we  cannot
get  from  the  story  any  other  solution  than  this.

As  soon  as  Ayar  Cachi  was  secured  in  the  cave,  the  other
two  brothers,  with  some  people  who  had  joined  them,  agreed
to  form  another  settlement,  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of
Tampu  Quiru,  which  is  as  much  as  to  say,  "Teeth  of  a  resi-
dence or  of  a  palace",  and  it  may  be  supposed  that  these  settle-
ments were  not  large  nor  more  than  sufficient  for  a  small
force.     They  remained  at  this  place  for  some  days,  being  now


1  Ancha,  the  superlative;  Hatun,  "great";  Apu,  "a  chief";  Intip,
genitive  of  Ynti,  "the  sun";  Churi,  "a  son".


THE    HERO-GOD    HUANACAURI.  15

sorry  at  having  so  made  away  with  their  brother  Avar  Cachi,
who  was  also  called  Huanacaure.1

1  Molina  often  mentions  the  worship  of  this  hero,  Huanacauri.  Gar-
cilasso  de  la  Vega  refers  to  Huanacauri  four  times  (i,  65,  66  ;  ii,  169,  230).
He  says  that  the  first  settlement  made  in  the  valley  of  Cuzco  was  on  the
hill  called  Huanacauri,  and  that  a  very  sacred  temple  was  built  there.
Molina  refers  to  the  sacrifices  offered  up  there.  The  idol  of  Huanacauri
was  a  great  figure  of  a  man,  "  their  principal  huaca,  the  brother  of
Manco  Ccapac,  whence  they  descend".  The  ceremonies  of  arming
youths  were  a  good  deal  connected  with  this  Huanacauri  idol.


16  APPEARANCE  OF  AYAR  CACHI.


CHAPTEE  VII.


How  the  brothers,  being  in  Tampu  Quiru,  beheld  him  whom
they  had  shut  up  in  the  cave  by  deceit,  come  forth  with
wings ;  and  hoiv  he  told  them  that  he  went  to  found  the
great  city  of  Cuzco  ;  and  how  they  departed  from  Tampu
Quiru.

Proceeding  with  the  narrative  that  I  took  down  in  Cuzco,
the  Orejones  say  that,  after  the  two  Incas  had  settled  in
Tampu  Quiru,  careless  now  about  seeing  Ayar  Cachi  again,
they  beheld  him  coming  in  the  air  with  great  wings  of
coloured  feathers,  and  they,  by  reason  of  the  great  fear  that
this  visit  caused  them,  wanted  to  flee  away  ;  but  he  quickly
removed  their  terror  by  saying  to  them,  "Do  not  fear,
neither  be  afflicted ;  for  I  only  come  that  the  empire  of  the
Incas  may  begin  to  be  known.  Wherefore  leave  this  settle-
ment that  you  have  made,  and  advance  further  down  until
you  see  a  valley,  and  there  found  the  Cuzco,  which  will  be  of
great  note.  For  here  are  only  hamlets,  and  of  little  im-
portance ;  but  that  will  be  a  great  city,  where  the  sumptuous
temple  must  be  built  that  will  be  so  honoured  and  fre-
quented, and  where  the  sun  will  be  so  worshipped.  I  shall
always  have  to  pray  to  God  for  you,  and  to  intercede  that
you  may  soon  become  great  lords.  I  shall  remain  in  the
form  and  fashion  that  you  will  see  on  a  hill  not  distant  from
here ;  and  will  be  for  you  and  your  descendants  a  place  of
sanctity  and  worship,  and  its  name  shall  be  Guanacaure.
And  in  return  for  the  good  things  that  you  will  have  re-
ceived from  me,  I  pray  that  you  will  always  adore  me  as
God,  and  set  up  altars  in  that  place,  at  which  to  offer  sacri-
fices. If  you  do  this,  you  shall  receive  help  from  me  in  war ;
and  as  a  sign  that  from  henceforward  you  are  to  be  esteemed,
honoured,  and  feared,  your  ears  shall  be  bored  in  the  manner


A  YAK   CACHI   ON   THE  HUANACAUKI   HILL.  17

that  you  now  behold  in  mine."  And  when  he  had  so  spoken
they  say  that  he  appeared  with  ear  ornaments  of  gold  set
round  as  with  a  gem.

The  brothers,  astonished  at  what  they  saw,  were  as  men
struck  dumb  and  without  speech.  When  their  perturbation
had  ceased,  they  replied  that  they  were  content  to  do  as  he
commanded,  and  presently  they  went  in  haste  to  the  hill
called  the  Hill  of  Guanacaure,  which,  from  that  time  forward,
was  accounted  sacred.  In  the  highest  part  of  it,  they  again
saw  Ayar  Cachi,  who,  without  doubt,  must  have  been  some
devil,  if  there  is  any  truth  in  what  they  relate ;  and,  God
permitting,  he  made  them  understand  his  desire  that  they
should  worship  and  sacrifice  to  him  under  these  false  ap-
pearances. They  say  that  he  again  spoke  to  them,  telling
them  to  assume  the  fringe  or  crown  of  empire,  such  of  them
as  were  to  be  sovereign  lords,  and  how  they  should  order  the
arming  of  youths  to  make  them  knights  and  nobles.  The
brothers  answered  that  they  would  comply  with  all  his  com-
mands, as  they  had  already  promised,  and  in  sign  of
obedience,  with  hands  joined  and  heads  bowed  down,  they
made  the  mocha1  or  reverence,  that  he  might  the  better
understand  them.  The  Orejones  further  say  that  the  practice
of  assuming  the  fringe  and  of  arming  the  knights  began  here,
so  I  put  it  in  this  place,  that  there  may  be  no  necessity  for  re-
peating it  further  on.

This  may  be  received  as  pleasant  and  very  certain  history,
for  Manco  Inca  assumed  the  fringe  or  sovereign  crown  in
Cuzco,  and  many  Spaniards  are  still  living  who  were  present
at  the  ceremony,  and  I  have  heard  it  from  them.  It  is  true
that  the  Indians  say  that  the  ceremony  was  more  solemn
and  magnificent  in  former  times,  and  was  performed  with
such  sumptuous  riches  as  could  not  be  enumerated.

It  would  seem  that  these  lords  arranged  the  ceremony  for
assuming  the  fringe  or  crown,  and  they  say  that  Ayar  Cachi
1  MucTia,  "adoration",  from  Muchan'i,  "I  worship".

C


18  YNCA   CEREMONIES    AT    HUANACAURI.

dressed  in  the  same  manner,  on  this  same  hill  of  Guanacaure.
He  who  was  to  become  Inca  was  dressed,  on  one  day,  in  a
black  shirt  painted  with  red  patterns  and  no  collar,  and  on
his  head  a  fawn-coloured  plait  twisted  round.  And  he  wore
a  long  grey  mantle,  in  which  dress  he  came  forth  from  his
lodging  and  went  into  the  fields  to  gather  a  wisp  of  straw,
and  he  had  to  stay  out  all  day  doing  this,  without  eating  or
drinking,  for  it  was  his  duty  to  fast.  And  the  mother  and
sisters  of  the  former  Inca  had  to  remain  spinning  with  such
diligence  that,  during  that  one  day,  they  had  to  spin  and
weave  four  dresses,  fasting  all  the  time.  One  of  these
dresses  consisted  of  a  grey  shirt  and  white  mantle,  and
another  had  to  be  all  white,  and  the  other  had  to  be  blue,
with  cords  and  trimmings.  He  who  was  to  become  Inca  had
to  wear  these  dresses,  and  to  fast  for  the  appointed  time,
which  is  one  month,  and  they  call  this  fast  zaziy}  It  is
kept  in  a  lodging  of  the  royal  palace,  without  seeing  light  or
having  connection  with  a  woman.  During  this  time  of
fasting  the  ladies  of  his  lineage  have  to  work  very  hard  to
make  a  great  quantity  of  chicha  with  their  own  hands,
making  it  from  maize,  and  they  must  be  richly  dressed.
After  the  time  of  fasting  is  passed,  he  who  was  to  be  lord
came  forth,  carrying  a  halberd  of  gold  and  silver  in  his
hands,  and  he  proceeded  to  the  house  of  some  venerable
relative,  where  his  hair  had  to  be  shorn.  Then,  clothed  in
one  of  these  dresses,  he  left  Cuzco,  where  this  festival  was
held,  and  went  to  the  hill  of  Guanacaure,  and  performed
certain  ceremonies  and  sacrifices.  He  then  proceeded  to
where  the  wine  was  kept,  and  drank.  The  Inca  then  went
to  a  hill  called  Anaquar,  and  from  the  foot  of  it  he  ran,  that
the  people  might  see  whether  he  was  agile,  and  would  be
valiant  in  war.  Presently  he  came  down,  carrying  a  little
wool  on  the  halberd,  in  token  that  when  he  fought  with  his
enemies,  he  would  bring  away  their  hair  and  the  heads  with
1  Sasi,  "a  fast".     See  G.  de  la  Vega,  Parti,  lib.  vii,  cap.  6.


YNCA   CEREMONIES.  19

it.  This  clone,  the  Inca  returned  to  the  hill  of  Guanacaure.
Here  he  and  his  courtiers  gathered  straw,  and  he  who  was  to
be  Inca  had  a  very  large  bundle  of  it,  made  of  very  fine  gold
of  equal  lengths.  With  this  he  went  to  another  hill  called
Yahuira,  and  there  he  put  on  another  of  the  dresses,  and  on
his  head  a  plait  or  llautu  called  pillaca}  which  is  like  a
crown,  underneath  which  were  ear-ornaments  of  gold,  and  on
the  top  a  tuft  of  feathers  sewn  like  a  diadem,  which  they
call  puruchuco.2  On  the  halberd  they  fastened  a  girdle  of
gold  which  reached  to  the  ground,  and  on  his  breast  was
placed  a  moon  of  gold.  In  this  dress,  and  before  all  who
were  present,  he  killed  a  sheep,  the  body  and  blood  being
divided  among  all  the  principal  people,  to  be  eaten  raw.
The  signification  of  the  ceremony  was  that  if  they  were  not
valiant  their  enemies  would  eat  them,  as  they  were  eating
the  sheep  that  had  been  killed.

At  tins  place  they  took  a  solemn  vow,  according  to  their
usage,  in  the  name  of  the  Sun,  that  they  would  maintain  the
order  of  knighthood,  and  would  die  in  defence  of  Cuzco,  if  it
should  be  necessary.  Next  their  ears  were  opened,  and  the
apertures  were  so  large  that  they  could  hold  a  geme  each
one  in  circumference.  This  done,  they  put  on  the  heads  of
fierce  lions,  and  returned  to  the  square  of  Cuzco  with  great
noise.  In  the  square  there  was  a  great  chain  of  gold  going
all  round,  and  supported  on  prongs  of  gold  and  silver.  Here
they  danced,  and  there  were  marvellous  great  festivities,
according  to  their  fashion.  Those  who  had  been  made
knights  had  on  the  heads  of  lions,  as  a  sign  that  they  would
be  valiant  and  fierce.  At  the  end  of  the  dancing  the  knights
remained  armed,  and  were  called  Orejones.  They  had  privi-
leges and  enjoyed  great  dignities,  and  are  worthy,  if  selected,
to  assume  the  crown,  which  is  the  fringe.

1  This  word,  in  Quichua,  is  used  also  for  a  kind  of  cloak.

2  Puhura  is  "a  feather",  and  chaccu,  "a  cap".  The  distinctive
head-dress  of  each  tribe  was  called  chuccu  or  umachuccu.

c2


20  YNCA   CEREMONIES.

When  this  was  given  to  the  lord  who  was  to  be  sovereign,
greater  festivities  were  held,  a  vast  concourse  of  people  as-
sembled, and  he  who  is  about  to  be  Emperor  must  first  take
his  own  sister  for  his  wife,  that  no  base  lineage  may  succeed.
He  also  performed  the  great  zaziy,  which  is  the  fast.  And
during  the  intervals  that  these  ceremonies  occupied,  the  lord
being  engaged  in  the  business  of  sacrifices  and  fasting,  he
could  not  attend  to  private  or  public  concerns.  It  was,
therefore,  a  law  among  the  Incas  that,  when  the  sovereign
died,  or  handed  over  the  crown  or  fringe  to  another,  one  of
the  principal  nobles  was  selected,  who,  with  mature  counsel
and  great  authority,  might  govern  the  whole  empire  of  the
Incas,  as  if  he  were  the  lord  himself,  during  these  days,  and
he  was  allowed  to  have  a  guard  and  to  be  addressed  with
reverence.

These  ceremonies  being  completed,  and  the  blessings  having
been  given  in  the  temple  of  Curicancha,  the  Inca  received  the
fringe,  which  was  large  and  descended  from  the  llautu  that
he  had  on  his  head,  so  as  to  fall  over  his  eyes,  and  he  was
then  held  and  reverenced  as  the  sovereign.

At  the  festivals  were  present  the  principal  lords  for  more
than  five  leagues  round,  and  there  appeared  in  Cuzco  very
great  store  of  gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones,  and  rich
plumes,  all  round  the  long  chain  of  gold,  and  the  marvellous
figure  of  the  Sun.  This  chain  was  of  such  size  that  it  weighed,
according  to  what  the  Indians  assert  for  a  certainty,  more
than  four  thousand  hundred  weights  of  gold.  If  the  Sovereign
did  not  receive  the  fringe  in  Cuzco,  they  looked  upon  it  as  an
absurdity  that  he  should  be  called  Inca,  for  his  possession
was  not  assured.  Thus  Atalmallpa  is  not  counted  among
the  kings,  although,  owing  to  his  great  valour  and  to  his
having  killed  so  many  people,  he  was  obeyed  by  many  nations
from  fear.

Eeturning  to  those  who  were  on  the  hill  of  Guanacaure,
after  Ayar  Cacha  had  spoken  of  the  order  that  was  to  be  taken


FOUNDING   OF   CUZCO.  21

for  the  arming  of  knights,  the  Indians  relate  that  turning  to
his  brother  Ayar  Manco,  he  told  him  to  go  on  with  the  two
women  to  the  valley  he  had  pointed  out,  and  to  found  there
the  Cuzco,  without  forgetting  to  come  and  perform  sacrifices  in
that  place,  as  he  had  commanded.  And  as  soon  as  he  had  done
speaking,  both  he  and  the  other  brother  were  turned  into  two
figures  of  stone  in  the  shape  of  men.  This  was  seen  by  Ayar
Manco,  who,  taking  the  women  with  him,  went  to  the  place
where  Cuzco  now  stands  and  founded  a  city,  naming  himself
from  that  time  forward  Manco  Capac,1  which  means  the  rich
King  and  Lord.

1  The  word  Manco  has  no  meaning  in  Quichua.  Cco/ac  means  "rich",
and,  as  applied  to  the  sovereign,  it  is  explained  as  signifying  rich  in
power  and  in  virtues.


22  FOUNDING   OF   THE   CCURI-CANCHA.


CHAPTER  VIII.

How  Manco  Capac,  when  he  savj  that  his  brothers  had  been
turned  into  stones,  went  to  a  valley  where  he  met  some
people,  and  how  he  founded  and  built  the  ancient  and  very
rich  city  of  Cuzco,  which  was  the  capital  of  the  whole
empire  of  the  Incas.

When  Manco  Capac  had  seen  what  had  happened  to  his
brothers,  and  had  come  to  the  valley  where  now  is  the  city
of  Cuzco,  the  Orejones  say  that  he  raised  his  eyes  to  heaven
and,  with  great  humility,  besought  the  Sun  that  he  would
favour  and  aid  him  in  forming  the  new  settlement.  Then
turning  his  eyes  towards  the  hill  of  Guanacaure  he  addressed
the  same  petition  to  his  brother,  whom  he  now  held  and  re-
verenced as  a  god.  Next  he  watched  the  flight  of  birds,  the
signs  in  the  stars,  and  other  omens,  which  filled  him  with  con-
fidence, so  that  he  felt  certain  that  the  new  settlement  would
flourish,  and  that  he  would  be  its  founder  and  the  father  of  all
the  Incas  who  would  reign  there.

In  the  name  of  Ticiviracocha,  and  of  the  Sun,  and  of  the
other  Gods,  he  laid  the  foundation  of  the  new  city.  The
original  and  beginning  of  it  was  a  small  stone  house  with  a
roof  of  straw  that  Manco  Capac  and  his  women  built,  to
which  they  gave  the  name  of  Curicancha,1  meaning  the  place
of  gold.  This  is  the  place  where  afterwards  stood  that  cele-
brated and  most  rich  temple  of  the  Sun,  and  now  a  monastery
of  monks  of  the  order  of  St.  Domingo.  It  is  held  for  certain
that,  at  the  time  when  Manco  Inca  Capac  built  this  house,
there  were  Indians  in  large  numbers  in  the  district ;  but  as  he
did  them  no  harm  and  did  not  in  any  wise  molest  them,  they
did  not  object  to  his  remaining  in  their  land,  but  rather
rejoiced  at  his  coming.  So  Manca  Capac  built  the  said  house,
1  Ccuri,  "  gold";  "cancha",  "a  place".


MANGO   CCAPAC.  23

and  it  was  devoted  to  the  worship  of  his  Gods,  and  he  became
a  great  man  and  one  who  represented  high  authority.

One  of  his  wives  was  barren  and  never  had  children.  By
the  other  he  had  three  sons  and  one  daughter.  The  eldest
was  named  Inca1  Eoca  Inca  and  the  daughter  Ocllo.  The
names  of  the  others  are  not  recorded,  nor  is  more  said  than
that  the  eldest  was  married  to  his  sister,  and  that  he  taught
them  how  to  make  themselves  beloved  by  the  people  and  not
hated,  with  other  important  matters.  In  those  days  the  de-
scendants of  Zapana  had  made  themselves  powerful  in  Hatun-
collao,  and  sought  to  occupy  all  that  region  by  tyranny.  But
Manco  Capac,  as  the  founder  of  Cuzco,  had  married  his  sons,
and  brought  into  his  service,  by  love  and  good  words,  some
people  who  enlarged  the  house  of  Curicancha.  After  he  had
lived  for  many  years,  he  died  at  a  great  age,  and  his  obsequies,
were  sumptuously  performed.  Besides  that,  a  figure  of  him
was  made,  to  be  reverenced  as  a  child  of  the  Sun.

1  Sinchi.


24  .    PLAN    OF   THE   WORK


CHAPTER   IX.

In  which  notice  is  given  to  the  reader  of  the  reason  that  the
Author,  leaving  the  account  of  the  succession  of  the  kings,
prefers  to  explain  the  government  of  the  people,  their  laws,
and  customs.

Although  I  might  write  the  events  of  the  reign  of  Sinchi
Roca  Inca,  son  of  Manco  Capac  the  founder  of  Cuzco,  in  this
place,  it  has  seemed  to  me  that  there  will  be  confusion  further
on  if  the  system  of  the  government  of  these  lords  is  not  ex-
plained as  one  whole.  For  one  ordered  one  set  of  laws,  and
others  others.  For  example,  one  introduced  the  system  of
mitimae,1  others  the  plan  of  having  garrisons  of  soldiers  in
fixed  positions  for  the  defence  of  the  kingdom.  All  these
regulations  are  important  and  worthy  to  be  remembered,  that
the  learned  statesmen  who  regulate  the  affairs  of  civilized
governments  may  be  informed  of  them,  and  may  feel  as-
tonished at  the  knowledge  that  a  barbarous  people  without
letters  should  have  been  found  to  have  had  institutions  such
as  we  know  that  they  possessed,  both  with  reference  to  in-
ternal polity  and  to  their  plans  of  extending  their  dominion
over  other  nations.  Under  a  monarchy  they  obeyed  one  Lord,
who  alone  was  deemed  worthy  to  reign  in  an  empire  which
the  Incas  possessed,  extending  over  more  than  one  thousand
two  hundred  leagues  of  coast.  In  order  to  avoid  the  necessity
for  saying  that  some  assert  that  particular  institutions  were
introduced  by  one  lord,  and  others  by  another,  on  which
points  many  of  the  native  accounts  differ,  I  will  relate,  in
this  place,  what  I  understand  and  hold  for  certain,  in  con-
formity with  the  statements  that  I  took  down  from  their
mouths  in  the  city  of  Cuzco,  which  are  corroborated  by  the

1  Colonists.


AUTHORITIES   FOR   THE-  HISTORY.  25

remains  that  they  have  left,  and  which  are  visible  to  those
who  have  travelled  through  Peru.

It  should  not  appear  to  learned  persons  that,  in  adopting
this  course,  I  deviate  from  the  plan  of  my  work ;  for  my  aim
is  to  make  the  matter  more  clear  and  intelligible,  as  I  have
declared.  I  propose  to  write  with  brevity,  and  not  to  dwell
on  minute  details,  and  in  the  same  way  I  shall  afterwards
proceed  to  narrate  the  events  of  the  reigns  of  the  Incas,  and
their  succession,  down  to  the  death  of  Huascar,  and  the  entry
of  the  Spaniards  which  brought  them  to  an  end.  I  desire
that  those  who  may  read  my  work,  should  understand  that
among  all  the  Incas,  the  number  of  which  was  eleven,  three
were  most  capable  of  governing  their  lordships,  insomuch  that
the  Orejones  who  relate  their  history  do  not  cease  to  praise
them.  These  were  Huayna  Capac,  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui
his  father,  and  Inca  Yupanqui,  father  of  one  and  grandfather
of  the  other.  It  may  also  be  assumed  that,  as  these  monarchs
flourished  in  recent  times,  the  kingdom  must  still  be  full  of
people  who  knew  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui,  and  accompanied
him  in  his  wars,  and  that  they  heard  from  their  fathers  what
Inca  Yupanqui  did  during  his  reign ;  so  that  it  may  be  said
that  the  events  took  place  almost  before  their  eyes.  They,
therefore,  have  more  light  to  throw  upon  this  period,  and  are
well  able  to  relate  the  events ;  although  much  has  been
forgotten  touching  the  history  of  the  earlier  reigns.  Yet  it  is
certain  that  they  do  not  lose  the  memory  of  events  for  many
years,  although  they  know  not  the  use  of  letters,  as  I  have
already  observed  in  the  first  part  of  this  Chronicle.1  The  use
of  letters  has  not  been  found  either  in  any  part  of  this  king-
dom or  throughout  the  whole  of  the  Indies.  With  these
remarks  we  will  now  proceed  with  the  narrative.

1  Cap.  xxxviii,  in  which  he  refers  his  reader  to  this  second  part.  He
observes  that  the  Yncas  were  very  intelligent  and  learned,  without
having  letters,  which  had  not  been  invented  in  the  Indies. — See  p.  136
of  my  Translation.


26  THE    QUEEN.


CHAPTEK  X.


How  the  lord,  after  he  had  assumed  the  fringe  of  sovereignty,
was  married  to  his  sister  the  Coya,  which  is  the  name  of
the  queen,  and  how  it  was  permitted  that  he  should  have
many  women,  although  among  them  all  the  Coya  alone
was  the  legitimate  and  principal  wife.

In  former  chapters  I  have  briefly  explained  how  those  who
were  to  become  nobles  were  armed  as  knights,  as  well  as  the
nature  of  the  ceremonies  that  took  place  when  the  Incas
were  crowned  as  kings,  by  taking  the  crown,  which  is  the
fringe  falling  as  far  down  as  their  eyes.  And  it  was  or-
dained by  them  that  he  who  became  king  should  take
his  sister,  being  the  legitimate  daughter  of  his  father  and
mother,  as  his  wife;  in  order  that  the  succession  of  the
kingdom  might  by  that  means  be  confirmed  in  the  royal
house.  It  appeared  to  them  that  by  this  means,  even  if  such
a  woman,  being  sister  of  the  king,  should  not  be  chaste,  and
should  have  intercourse  with  another  man,  the  son  thus  born
would  still  be  hers,  and  not  the  son  of  a  strange  woman.
They  also  considered  that  if  the  Inca  married  a  strange
woman,  she  might  do  the  same  and  conceive  in  adultery,  in
such  a  way  that,  it  not  being  known,  the  child  would  be  re-
ceived as  a  natural  born  son  of  the  lord.  For  these  reasons,
and  because  it  seemed  desirable  to  those  who  ordained  the
laws,  it  was  a  rule  among  the  Incas  that  he  amongst  them  all
who  became  emperor  should  take  his  sister  to  wife.  She  had
the  name  of  Coya,  which  means  the  Queen,  as  when  the
King  of  Spain  marries  any  princess,  who  before  had  her  own
name,  she  is  called  Queen  so  soon  as  she  enters  the  kingdom,
so  they  called  those  of  Cuzco  Coya.  If  by  chance  he  who
became  lord  had  no  sister,  it  was  permitted  that  he  should
marry  the  most  illustrious  lady  there  was,  and  she  was  held


WOMEN   AND   CHILDREN   OF   THE   YNCA.  27

to  be  the  principal  among  all  his  women.  For  none  of  these
lords  had  less  than  700  women  for  the  service  of  their  house
and  for  their  pleasure.  So  that  they  all  had  many  children
by  these  women,  who  were  well  treated,  and  respected  by  the
people.  When  the  king  was  lodging  in  his  palace  or  wherever
he  might  be,  the  women  were  watched  and  guarded  by
porters  and  camayos,1  which  is  the  name  of  the  guards.  If
any  had  intercourse  with  a  man  she  was  punished  with
death,  and  the  man  suffered  the  same  penalty.

The  sons  whom  the  lords  had  by  these  women,  as  soon  as
they  were  grown  up,  received  lands  and  fields,  which  they
call  ch&caras?  and  they  were  given  clothes  and  other  neces-
saries from  the  government  stores  for  their  use.  But  it  was
not  thought  fit  that  they  should  have  lordships,  because,  in
the  event  of  any  troubles  in  the  kingdom,  it  was  not  desired
that  they  should  be  in  a  position  to  be  looked  upon  as  legiti-
mate sons  of  the  king.  Thus  none  of  them  was  entrusted
with  the  rule  over  a  province,  although  in  time  of  war  many
were  captains  and  were  preferred  to  those  who  were  of  purer
lineage.  The  legitimate  lord  who  inherited  the  kingdom
favoured  them;  but  if  they  joined  in  any  revolt  they  were
cruelly  punished.  None  of  them  was  allowed  to  speak  to
the  king,  even  if  he  was  a  brother,  without  first  putting  a
light  burden  on  his  shoulders  and  taking  off  his  shoes,  as  was
the  custom  with  all  other  subjects.

1  Caman  is  a  particle  which,  when  added  to  a  noun,  denotes  a  task  or
occupation.  Nocap-camay  means  "my  task";  Campa-camayqui,  "your
task".  It  also  means  fitness,  as  Apupac-caman,  "fit  to  be  a  chief".
Camay oc  is  a  word  attached  to  offices  and  occupations.  Slray-camayoc,
"a  tailor";  Llacta-camayoc,  " a  village  officer".  Pucara-camayoc,  "a
castellan".  2  A  farm.


28  MEMORIALS    OF   THE   YKCAS.


CHAPTER   XL

How  it  was  the  custom  among  the  Incas  that  they  celebrated
in  their  songs,  and  by  making  statues  of  those  ivho  were
valorous  and  extended  the  bounds  of  the  empire,  and  per-
formed any  other  deed  worthy  of  memory ;  while  those  who
were  negligent  or  cowardly  received  little  notice.

I  understood,  wlien  I  was  in  Cuzco,1  that  it  was  the  custom
among  the  kings  Incas,  that  the  king,  as  soon  as  he  died
should  be  mourned  for  with  much  lamentation,  and  that
great  sacrifices  should  be  offered  up  in  accordance  with  their
religion.  When  these  ceremonies  were  over,  the  oldest
people  of  the  country  discussed  the  life  and  acts  of  the
recently  deceased  king,  considering  whether  he  had  done
good  to  the  country,  and  what  battles  he  had  gained  over  the
country's  enemies.  Having  settled  these  questions,  and
others  which  we  do  not  entirely  understand,  they  decided
whether  the  deceased  king  had  been  so  fortunate  as  to  merit
praise  and  fame,  and  to  deserve  that  his  memory  should  for
ever  be  preserved.  They  then  called  for  the  great  quipos-
camayos2  who  preserve  the  records,  and  understand  how  to
give  an  account  of  the  events  that  occur  in  the  kingdom.
Next  they  communicated  with  those  who  were  most  expert,
and  who  were  selected  for  their  skill  in  rhetoric  and  the  use
of  words.  These  knew  how  to  narrate  the  events  in  regular
order,  like  ballad  singers  and  romance  writers.  These  com-
pose the  songs,  so  that  they  shall  be  heard  by  all  at  marriage
ceremonies  and  other  festivities.  Thus  they  were  instructed
what  to  say  concerning  the  deceased  lord,  and,  if  they
treated  of  wars,  they  sang,  in  proper  order,  of  the  many
battles  he  had  fought  in  different  parts  of  the  empire.     And

i  In  August  1550.

2  Quipu-camayoc,  the  officer  in  charge  of  the  records.


SYSTEM   OF   RECORDING   EVENTS.  29

for  other  events,  there  were  songs  and  romances  to  celebrate
them  on  suitable  occasions,  so  that  the  people  might  be  ani-
mated by  the  recital  of  what  had  passed  in  other  times.

Those  Indians  who,  by  order  of  the  kings,  had  learnt  the
romances,  were  honoured  and  favoured,  and  great  care  was
taken  to  teach  their  sons  and  other  men  in  their  provinces
who  were  most  able  and  intelligent.  By  this  plan,  from  the
mouths  of  one  generation  the  succeeding  one  was  taught,
and  they  can  relate  what  took  place  500  years  ago,  as  if  only
ten  years  had  passed.

This  was  the  order  that  was  taken  to  prevent  the  great
events  of  the  empire  from  passing  into  oblivion.  When  a
king  died,  if  he  had  been  valiant  and  a  gdod  ruler,  without
having  lost  any  province  inherited  from  his  father,  nor  been
guilty  of  mean  or  paltry  actions,  it  was  permitted  and  or-
dained that  songs  in  his  honour  should  be  composed,  in
which  he  should  be  praised  in  such  wise  as  that  all  the
people  should  be  astonished  to  hear  of  deeds  so  mighty.
These  songs  were  not  to  be  recited  always  and  in  all  places  ;
but  only  on  occasions  when  there  was  a  great  and  solemn
assembly  of  people  from  all  parts  of  the  empire,  or  when  the
principal  lords  met  together  before  the  king  on  special  occa-
sions, or  when  they  held  their  taquis,1  or  drinking  bouts.
Then,  those  who  knew  the  romances,  standing  before  the
Inca,  sang,  with  loud  voices,  of  the  mighty  deeds  of  his
ancestors.  If  any  of  his  predecessors  had  been  negligent,
cowardly,  or  vicious,  or  preferred  pleasure  to  the  labour  of
extending  the  bounds  of  the  empire,  it  was  ordered  that  such
a  king  should  receive  little  or  no  mention.  If  the  name  was
preserved,  it  was  merely  to  complete  the  line  of  succession.
On  other  points  there  was  silence  concerning  him,  and  the
good  and  valiant  alone  were  kept  in  memory.

1  Taqui  is  "  music";  Taquiz,  "  a  song".    The  taquis  was  an  assembly
to  hear  the  legendary  songs.


30  MUMMIES    OF   DECEASED    YXCAS.

The  memory  of  those  who  were  great  and  good  was  so
venerated  that  the  successor  of  such  an  one  sought  no  in-
heritance from  him,  but  he  succeeded  to  the  empire  alone.
It  was  the  law  that  the  riches  and  the  royal  insignia  of  one
who  had  been  King  of  Cuzco  should  never  pass  to  another,
and  should  never  be  forgotten.  "With  this  end,  a  figure  was
made  in  the  resemblance  of  the  deceased  king,  which  was
called  by  his  name.1  These  figures  used  to  be  placed  in  the
square  of  Cuzco  on  festivals,  and  round  each  figure  stood  the
women  and  servants  of  the  dead  king,  with  his  food  and
drink.  For  the  Devil  was  accustomed  to  speak  out  of  these
figures.  And  each  figure  had  its  orators,  who  pleased  the
multitude  with  pleasant  speeches.  All  the  treasure  which
the  deceased  lord  possessed  was  left  in  the  care  of  his  ser-
vants and  confidential  attendants,  who  brought  it  out  at  the
festivals,  with  great  ceremony.  Besides  this,  the  servants
and  attendants  had  their  ckacaras,  which  is  their  name  for
fields  where  they  cultivate  maize  and  other  crops,  and  with
these  the  women  and  family  of  the  deceased  lord  were  main-
tained, although  he  was  dead  and  gone.  No  doubt  this
custom  explains  the  fact  that,  in  this  empire,  there  was  such
vast  treasure  as  we  here  beheld  with  our  eyes.  The  Spanish
conquerors  heard  that  when,  in  discovering  the  provinces  of
the  kingdom,  they  entered  Cuzco,  the  figures  of  the  deceased
kings  were  there.  This  appears  to  have  been  true,  for  when
Manco  Inca  Yupanqui,  son  of  Huayna  Capac,  desired  to
assume  the  fringe,  these  figures  were  publicly  brought  out
into  the  square  of  Cuzco,  in  the  sight  of  all  the  Spaniards
and  Indians  who  were  present  on  that  occasion.

It  is  true  that  the  Spaniards  got  possession  of  a  great  part
of  the  treasure  ;  but  the  remainder  is  concealed  in  such  wise
as  that  few  or  perhaps  none  know  where  it  is.    Of  the  figures

1  It  was  the  mummified  body,  as  will  be  seen  presently.


MUMMIES   OF   DECEASED    YXCAS.  31

and  of  their  other  wonderful  things,  there  is  now  no  memory
except  what  is  preserved  in  their  songs.1

1  Twenty  years  after  this  was  written,  the  Licentiate  Polo  de  Onde-
gardo  discovered  where  five  of  these  figures  were  concealed,  which
proved  to  be  the  actual  mummies  of  the  Yncas  and  their  wives,  dressed
in  their  clothes.  Ondegardo,  who  was  corregidor  of  Cuzco,  showed  them
to  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  in  1570.  One  mummy  was  that  of  the  Tnca
Uira-ccocha ;  the  second  of  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui ;  the  third  of  Huayna
Ccapac :  the  fourth  of  Mama  Riintu.  queen  of  Uira-ccocha ;  the  fifth
of  Ccoya  Mama  Ocllo,  mother  of  Huayna  Ccapac.  They  were  perfect,
wantiug  neither  hair,  nor  eye-lashes,  and  were  dressed  in  the  clothes
they  wore  when  alive,  with  the  Uautu  or  fringe.  They  were  seated  with
the  arms  crossed  on  the  breast,  and  eyes  cast  down.

Acosta,  who  also  saw  them,  says  that  the  eyes  were  made  of  small
pellets  of  gold,  '•'  so  well  imitated  that  no  one  would  have  missed  the
real  ones".  The  mummies  were  taken  to  Lima  by  order  of  the  Viceroy
Marquis  of  Caiiete,  and  eventually  interred  there,  at  the  hospital  of  San
Andres.


32  KECITATIONS   OF  WISE   MEN.


CHAPTER    XII.

How  they  had  chroniclers  to  record  their  deeds,  and  of  the
quipos,  what  they  were,  and  ivhat  we  see  of  them.

What  I  have  written  respecting  the  placing  of  the  images  in
the  square  was  done  by  order  of  the  Incas,  and  some  of  the
most  learned  of  the  people  were  chosen  to  make  known  the
lives  of  those  lords  in  songs,  and  the  events  of  their  reigns,
with  the  object  I  have  already  described.  And  it  is  also  to  be
noted  that  besides  this,  it  was  the  custom  among  them,  and  a
law  much  kept  and  observed,  for  each  king,  during  his  reign
to  select  three  or  four  old  men,  known  for  their  intelligence
and  ability,  who  were  instructed  to  retain  in  their  memory
all  the  events  that  happened  in  the  provinces,  whether  they
were  prosperous,  or  whether  they  were  the  reverse,  and  to
compose  songs  to  be  handed  down,  so  that  the  history  of  the
reign  might  be  had  in  remembrance  in  after  times.  But  these
songs  could  not  be  recited  or  made  public,  except  in  the
presence  of  the  lord,  and  those  who  were  charged  with  this
duty,  during  the  reign  of  the  king,  were  not  allowed  to  say
anything  which  referred  to  him.  But  after  his  death  they
spoke  to  his  successor  in  the  empire,  almost  in  these  very
words:  "Oh!  great  and  powerful  Inca,  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  the
earth,  the  hills  and  the  trees,  the  stones,  and  thine  ancestors,
may  they  all  preserve  thee  from  misfortune  and  make  thee
prosperous,  happy,  and  successful  over  all  that  are  born  !
Know  that  the  events  which  occurred  in  the  days  of  thy
fathers  are  these/'  Then,  in  the  narration,  they  stood  in
great  humility,  with  eyes  cast  on  the  ground  and  hands
lowered.  They  could  well  do  this,  for  there  were  among
them  some  men  with  very  good  memories,  sound  judgments,
and  subtle  genius,  and  full  of  reasoning  power,  as  we  can  bear
witness,  who  have  heard  them  even  in  these  our  days.

As  soon  as  the  kins?  understood  what  wTas  related  to  him,


SYSTEM   OF   THE    QUIPUS.  33

he  caused  other  aged  men  to  be  called,  and  charged  them
with  the  duty  of  learning  the  songs  which  were  handed  down
from  memory,  and  to  prepare  others  touching  the  events
which  might  occur  in  his  own  reign.  The  expenditure  and
the  account  of  contributions  from  the  provinces  were  recorded
in  the  guipus,  that  it  might  be  known  how  much  was  paid
in  the  former  reign,  and  also  during  that  of  the  new  lord.  No
one  was  allowed  to  treat  of  historical  events,  except  only  on
days  of  great  rejoicing,  or  on  days  of  mourning  and  sadness
for  the  death  of  some  brother  or  child  of  the  king.  If  the
histories  were  recited  on  other  occasions,  those  who  did  so
were  severely  punished.

They  had  another  method  of  knowing  and  understanding
what  had  been  received  from  the  contributions  in  the  pro-
vinces, what  provisions  were  stored  on  the  routes  that  the
king  would  take  with  his  army  or  when  he  was  visiting  the
provinces,  how  much  was  in  each  place  of  deposit,  how
much  was  delivered  out.  And  this  method  exceeded  in  arti-
fice the  carastes  used  by  the  Mexicans  for  their  calculations.1
The  system  of  the  Peruvians  was  by  guipus.  These  were  long
ropes  made  of  knotted  cords,  and  those  who  were  accountants
and  understood  the  arrangement  of  these  knots,  coidd,  by
their  means,  give  an  account  of  the  expenditure,  and  of  other
things  during  a  long  course  of  years.  On  these  knots  they
counted  from  one  to  ten,  and  from  ten  to  a  hundred,  and  from
a  hundred  to  a  thousand.  On  one  of  the  ropes  are  the  units,
on  another  the  tens,  and  so  on.  Each  ruler  of  a  province
was  provided  with  accountants  who  were  called  quipucamayos,
and  by  these  knots  they  kept  account  of  what  tribute  was  to
be  paid  in  the  district,  with  respect  to  silver,  gold,  cloth,
flocks,  down  to  fire-wood  and  other  minute  details.  By  the
same  guipus  they  could  report  to  those  who  were  commis-
sioned to  take  the  account  at  the  end  of  a  year,  or  of  ten  or

1  See  Prescott's  Conquest  of  Mexico  (i,  p.  83),  where  the  Aztec  system
of  notation  and  arithmetic  is  explained.

I)


34  PEACTICAL  USE   OF  THE   QUIPUS.

twenty  years,  with  such  accuracy  that  so  much  as  a  pair  of
alpargatas1  would  not  be  missing.

I  was  incredulous  respecting  this  system  of  counting,  and
although  I  heard  it  described,  I  held  the  greater  part  of  the
story  to  be  fabulous.  But  when  T  was  at  Marcavillca,  in  the
province  of  Xauxa,  I  asked  the  lord  Guacarapora  to  explain
it  in  such  a  way  as  that  my  mind  might  be  satisfied,  and  that
I  might  be  assured  that  it  was  true  and  accurate.  He  ordered
his  servants  to  bring  the  quipus,  and  as  this  lord  was  a  native,
and  a  man  of  good  understanding,  he  proceeded  to  make  the
thing  clear  to  me.  He  told  me  to  observe  that  all  that  he,
for  his  part,  had  delivered  to  the  Spaniards  from  the  time
that  the  Governor  Don  Francisco  Pizarro  arrived  in  the
valley,  was  duly  noted  down  without  any  fault  or  omission.
Thus  I  saw  the  accounts  for  the  gold,  the  silver,  the  clothes,
the  corn,  sheep,  and  other  things ;  so  that  in  truth  I  was
quite  astonished.

There  is  another  thing  that  should  be  known,  for  I  take  it
to  be  very  certain.  The  long  wars,  cruelties,  robberies,  and
tyrannical  treatment  which  these  people  have  suffered  from
the  Spaniards  would  have  led  to  their  complete  destruction,  if
it  had  not  been  for  the  excellent  order  and  concert  of  their
regulations.  But  they,  having  been  trained  in  the  intelligent
system  of  accounts  which  was  established  by  their  wise  princes,
made  an  agreement  among  themselves  that  if  an  army  of
Spaniards  passed  through  any  of  the  provinces,  and  did  such
damage  as  would  be  caused  by  the  destruction  of  growing
crops,  sacking  of  houses,  and  other  mischief  of  still  worse
kinds,  all  the  accountants  should  make  the  best  provision
possible  in  the  districts  through  which  our  people  passed,  in
order  that  all  might  not  be  devastated.  So  it  was  arranged,
and  as  soon  as  the  Spaniards  were  gone,  the  chiefs  assembled,
the  quipus  were  examined  and  checked,  and  if  one  province
had  lost  more  than  another,  that  which  had  suffered  less
1  The  canvas  shoes  with  rope  soles,  used  in  the  Basque  Provinces.


PRACTICAL   USE   OF   THE   QUIPUS.  35

made  up  the  difference :  so  that  the  burden  was  shared
equally  by  all.

To  this  day  these  accounts  are  kept  in  each  valley,  and
there  are  always  as  many  accountants  as  there  are  lords,  and
every  four  months  the  accounts  are  made  up  and  balanced.
Through  their  former  orderly  government  they  have  been  able
to  endure  such  great  oppression,  and  if  God  should  be  served
by  all  ending  with  the  good  treatment  that  the  people  now
receive,  and  with  the  decent  order  and  justice  that  has  been
introduced,  this  kingdom  might  again  be,  to  some  extent,
what  it  once  was.  But  I  believe  that  such  a  result  will  come
tardily  or  never.

It  is  true  that  I  have  seen  towns,  and  towns  of  considerable
size,  and  after  Christian  Spaniards  have  passed  through  but
one  single  time,  they  are  left  in  such  a  state  as  to  appear  as
if  a  fire  had  consumed  them.  And  where  the  people  were
not  so  well  trained,  they  did  not  help  each  other,  and  after-
wards perished  from  pestilence  and  famine.  For  among  some
of  them  there  is  little  charity,  and  each  one  is  lord  of  his
house  and  does  not  wish  to  take  account  of  others.  But  this
systematic  order  in  Peru  was  due  to  the  lords  who  com-
manded, and  knew  how  to  arrange  all  things  as  we  see  in
those  matters  which  have  been  described.  And  with  this  I
will  pass  onwards.


36  PRUDENCE  NEEDED  IN  GOVERNING.


CHAPTEE  XIII.

How  the  Lords  of  Peru  were  beloved  on  the  one  hand,  and  feared
on  the  other,  by  all  their  subjects ;  and  how  no  one,  even  a
great  lord  of  very  ancient  lineage,  could  come  into  the
presence,  except  with  a  burden,  in  token  of  great  obe-
dience.

It  should  be  well  understood  that  great  prudence  was  needed
to  enable  these  kings  to  govern  such  large  provinces,  extend-
ing over  so  vast  a  region,  parts  of  it  rugged  and  covered  with
forests,  parts  mountainous,  with  snowy  peaks  and  ridges,
parts  consisting  of  deserts  of  sand,  dry  and  without  trees  or
water.  These  regions  were  inhabited  by  many  different
nations,  with  varying  languages,  laws,  and  religions,  and  the
kings  had  to  maintain  tranquillity  and  to  rule  so  that  all
should  live  in  peace  and  in  friendship  towards  their  lord.
Although  the  city  of  Cuzco  was  the  head  of  the  empire,  as
we  have  remarked  in  many  places,  yet  at  certain  points,  as
we  shall  also  explain,  the  king  stationed  his  delegates  and
governors,  who  were  the  most  learned,  the  ablest,  and  the
bravest  men  that  could  be  found,  and  none  was  so  youthful
that  he  was  not  already  in  the  last  third  part  of  his  age.  As
they  were  faithful  and  none  betrayed  their  trusts,  and  as
they  had  the  mitimaes1  on  their  side,  none  of  the  natives,
though  they  might  be  more  powerful,  attempted  to  rise  in
rebellion;  or  if  such  a  thing  ever  did  take  place,  the  town
where  the  revolt  broke  out  was  punished,  and  the  ringleaders
were  sent  prisoners  to  Cuzco.

Thus  the  kings  were  so  feared  that,  when  they  travelled
over  the  provinces,  and  permitted  a  piece  of  the  cloth  to  be
raised  which  hung  round  their  litter,  so  as  to  allow  their
vassals  to  behold  them,  there  was  such  an  outcry  that  the

1  Colonists.     See  chapter  xxii.


FORETHOUGHT   OF   THE    YNCAS.  37

birds  fell  from  the  upper  air  where  they  were  flying,  inso-
much that  they  could  he  caught  in  men's  hands.  All  men  so
feared  the  king,  that  they  did  not  dare  to  speak  evil  even  of
his  shadow.  And  this  was  not  all.  If  any  of  the  king's
captains  or  servants  went  forth  to  visit  a  distant  part  of  the
empire  on  some  business,  the  people  came  out  on  the  road
with  presents  to  receive  them,  not  daring,  even  if  one  came
alone,  to  omit  to  comply  with  all  his  commands.

So  great  was  the  veneration  that  the  people  felt  for  their
princes,  throughout  this  vast  region,  that  every  district  was
as  well  regulated  and  governed  as  if  the  lord  was  actually
present  to  chastise  those  who  acted  contrary  to  his  rules.
This  fear  arose  from  the  known  valour  of  the  lords  and  their
strict  justice.  It  was  felt  to  be  certain  that  those  who  did
evil  would  receive  punishment  without  fail,  and  that  neither
prayers  nor  bribes  would  avert  it.  At  the  same  time,  the
Incas  always  did  good  to  those  who  were  under  their  sway,
and  would  not  allow  them  to  be  ill-treated,  nor  that  too  much
tribute  should  be  exacted  from  them.  Many  who  dwelt  in
a  sterile  country  where  they  and  their  ancestors  had  lived
with  difficulty,  found  that  through  the  orders  of  the  Ynca
their  lands  were  made  fertile  and  abundant,  the  things  being
supplied  which  before  were  wanting.  In  other  districts,
where  there  was  scarcity  of  clothing,  owing  to  the  people
having  no  flocks,  orders  were  given  that  cloth  should  be
abundantly  provided.  In  short,  it  will  be  understood  that  as
these  lords  knew  how  to  enforce  service  and  the  payment  of
tribute,  so  they  provided  for  the  maintenance  of  the  people,
and  took  care  that  they  should  want  for  nothing.  Through
these  good  works,  and  because  the  lord  always  gave  women
and  rich  gifts  to  his  principal  vassals,  he  gained  so  much  on
their  affections  that  he  was  most  fondly  loved.  I  remember
having  seen  old  Indians  with  my  own  eyes,  when  I  was  in
sight  of  Cuzco,  who  gazed  at  the  city  and  raised  a  great
shout,  followed  by  tears  of  sorrow  at  the  contemplation  of


38  MARK   OF   OBEISANCE.

the  present  state  of  things,  and  the  thought  of  what  was
passed,  when  for  so  many  years  they  had  lords  in  that  city,  of
their  own  people,  who  knew  how  to  receive  their  service  and
friendship  after  another  fashion  than  that  of  the  Spaniards.

It  was  a  custom  and  inviolable  law  among  these  lords  of
Cuzco,  for  their  grandeur  and  in  recognition  of  the  royal
dignity,  that  when  the  king  was  in  his  palace,  or  travelling,
either  with  his  army  or  without  it,  no  one,  even  if  he  should
be  the  greatest  and  most  powerful  among  the  lords  of  the
empire,  could  speak  to  him  or  enter  into  his  presence  with-
out first  removing  his  shoes,  which  they  call  oxotas,1  and
placing  on  his  shoulders  a  burden,  with  which  to  appear
in  the  presence  of  the  lord.  In  the  presence,  no  account  was
taken  whether  a  man  was  great  or  humble ;  but  only  that  he
should  understand  the  recognition  he  was  bound  to  show  to
his  lord.  Having  entered,  he  turned  his  back  in  the  presence
of  the  lord,  having  first  made  the  reverence,  which  they  call
mocha?  and  then  he  said  what  he  had  to  say,  or  heard  the
command  he  was  to  receive.  This  done,  if  he  remained  some
days  at  court,  or  was  a  person  of  importance,  he  did  not
again  enter  the  presence  with  a  load.  For  it  was  always
those  who  arrived  first  from  the  provinces,  by  invitation  or
on  other  duty,  who  performed  this  ceremony  on  entering  the
presence  of  the  lord.

1  Usutas.

2  Muchani  means  "  I  kiss",  "  adore",  "  worship".     Hence  Macha,  the
act  of  adoration  or  worship.


RICHES    OF   THE    YNCAS.  39


CHAPTER  XIV.


How  the  riches  possessed  by  the  Kings  were  very  great,  and  how
the  sons  of  the  lord  were  ordered  always  to  be  in  attendance
at  court.

The  great  wealth  that  we  have  seen  in  these  parts  enables  us
to  believe  what  is  said  of  the  riches  possessed  by  the  Incas.
For  I  believe  what  I  have  already  affirmed  several  times,
that  there  is  no  other  country  in  the  world  so  rich  in  metals.
Every  day  they  are  discovering  great  veins  both  of  gold  and
silver.  They  also  collected  gold  in  the  rivers  in  many  parts
of  the  provinces,  and  obtained  silver  from  the  mountains,  and
all  was  for  one  king.  So  that  he  must  have  possessed  very
great  riches.  I  am  not,  therefore,  astonished  at  these  things,
nor  even  if  the  whole  city  of  Cuzco  and  its  temples  had  been
built  of  pure  gold.  That  which  brings  necessity  upon  princes,
and  prevents  them  from  accumulating  riches,  is  war.  We
have  a  clear  example  of  this  in  the  expenditure  of  the  Em-
peror from  the  year  in  which  he  was  crowned  to  the  present
time.  For,  having  received  more  silver  and  gold  than  the
Kings  of  Spain  ever  had,  from  the  king  Don  Eodrigo  to  him-
self, none  of  them  were  in  such  necessity  as  His  Majesty.
Yet  if  he  had  no  wars,  and  his  residence  was  in  Spain,  in
truth,  what  with  his  dues  and  with  the  treasure  from  the
Indies,  all  Spain  would  be  as  full  of  riches  as  Peru  was  in
the  time  of  its  kings.

I  make  the  comparison  because  all  the  treasure  of  the
Incas  was  expended  in  no  other  thing  than  in  personal  array
and  ornaments  for  the  temples,  and  for  the  service  of  the
houses  and  lodgings.  In  war  time  the  provinces  supplied  all
the  men,  arms,  and  provisions  that  were  necessary ;  and  if
they  gave  some  payment  of  gold  to  some  one  of  the  mitimaes
during  war,  it  was  little  more  than  had  been  extracted  from


40  GEEAT   STORE   OF   GOLD   AND   SILVER.

the  mines  in  one  day.  As  the  gold  and  silver  was  highly
valued  and  much  esteemed  by  them,  they  ordered  it  to  be
procured  in  great  quantity,  from  many  parts  of  the  empire,
in  the  manner  and  with  the  order  that  I  will  explain  pre-
sently.

Such  vast  sums  were  collected  because  the  son  was  obliged
to  leave  all  the  wealth  of  the  father  with  his  ima^e  as  a
memorial,  which  had  been  amassed  during  many  years.  For
all  the  service  of  the  king's  house,  including  the  vases  for  Ms
use  and  the  kitchen  utensils,  were  of  gold  and  silver.  These
treasures  were  not  collected  in  one  place,  but  were  scattered,
especially  at  the  chief  places  in  the  provinces,  where  there
were  many  workers  in  silver  who  made  these  things  for  the
king's  service.  In  the  palaces  and  royal  lodgings  there  were
plates  and  sheets  of  these  metals,  and  the  royal  clothes  were
enriched  with  silver  work,  torquoises,  emeralds,  and  other
stones  of  great  value.  For  the  women  they  had  still  greater
riches  to  ornament  their  persons  and  for  their  service ;  and
their  litters  were  encrusted  with  gold  and  silver.  Besides
this,  there  were  vast  quantities  of  gold  in  ingots,  and  of  silver ;
besides  many  taquiras,1  or  beads,  some  very  small,  and  other
ornaments  for  their  taqtiis2  and  drinking-bouts.  For  their
sacrifices  they  also  had  great  store  of  treasure.  As  they  also
had  the  foolish  practice  of  burying  treasure  with  the  dead,
it  is  incredible  the  quantity  that  was  interred  at  the  obsequies
of  a  great  king.  In  short,  the  drums  and  musical  instruments
and  arms  for  royal  use  were  of  the  precious  metals.  Moreover,
to  add  to  the  grandeur  of  their  capital,  a  law  was  made  that
neither  gold  nor  silver  that  once  entered  Cuzco  should  ever
leave  it  again,  on  pain  of  death  to  be  inflicted  on  the  trans-
gressor. Owing  to  this  law,  the  quantity  that  entered  being
great,  while  none  went  out,  there  was  such  store  that  if  when
the  Spaniards  entered  they  had  not  committed  other  tricks,

1  Small  beads.      It  should  be  chaquira.      The  word  occurs  several
times  iu  the  First  Part.  2  Recital  of  songs.


ATTENDANCE  AT   COURT.  41

and  had  not  so  soon  executed  their  cruelty  in  putting  Atahu-
allpa  to  death,  I  know  not  how  many  great  ships  would  have
been  required  to  bring  such  treasure  to  Spain  as  is  now  lost
in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  and  will  remain  so,  because  those
who  buried  it  are  now  dead.

As  these  Incas  required  so  much,  they  ordered  further  that
some  sons  of  the  lords  of  the  provinces  throughout  the  empire
should  reside  at  court  all  the  year  round,  that  they  might
understand  the  ceremonials  and  behold  the  great  majesty  of
the  sovereign,  and  they  were  assured  that,  as  they  obeyed  and
served,  so  they  would  inherit  their  lordships  and  curaca-ahips  ;l
and  when  those  of  one  province  departed,  those  of  another
arrived.  Thus  the  court  was  always  well  attended,  for  besides
these,  it  was  never  without  many  knights  of  the  Orejones  and
aged  councillors,  with  whom  to  consult  touching  what  had  to
be  provided  and  ordained.

1  Curaca,  a  great  lord.


42  YNCA   ROADS.


CHAPTER  XV.

How  they  built  the  edifices  for  the  Lords,  and  the  royal  road
along  which  to  travel  over  the  'kingdom.

One  of  the  things  which  I  admired  most,  in  contemplating
and  noting  down  the  affairs  of  this  kingdom,  was  to  think  how
and  in  what  manner  they  can  have  made  such  grand  and  ad-
mirable roads  as  we  now  see,  and  what  a  number  of  men
would  suffice  for  their  construction,  and  with  what  tools  and
instruments  they  can  have  levelled  the  mountains  and  broken
through  the  rocks  to  make  them  so  broad  and  good  as  they
are.  For  it  seems  to  me  that  if  the  Emperor  should  desire  to
give  orders  for  another  royal  road  to  be  made,  like  that  which
goes  from  Quito  to  Cuzco,  or  the  other  from  Cuzco  to  go  to
Chile,  with  all  his  power  I  believe  that  he  could  not  get  it
done ;  nor  could  any  force  of  men  achieve  such  results  unless
there  was  also  the  perfect  order  by  means  of  which  the
commands  of  the  Incas  were  carried  into  execution.  For  if
the  road  to  be  made  was  fifty  leagues  long,  or  one  hundred
or  two  hundred,  and  though  the  ground  was  of  the  most
rugged  character,  it  would  be  done  with  diligent  care.  But
their  roads  were  much  longer,  some  of  them  extending  for
over  one  thousand  one  hundred  leagues  along  such  dizzy  and
frightful  abysses  that,  looking  down,  the  sight  failed  one.  In
some  places,  to  secure  the  regular  width,  it  was  necessary  to
hew  a  path  out  of  the  living  rock ;  all  which  was  done  with  fire
and  their  picks.  In  other  places  the  ascents  were  so  steep  and
high  that  steps  had  to  be  cut  from  below  to  enable  the  ascent
to  be  made,  with  wider  spaces  at  intervals  for  resting-places.
In  other  parts  there  were  great  heaps  of  snow,  which  were
more  to  be  feared,  and  not  at  one  spot  only,  but  often  recur-
ring. Where  these  snows  obstructed  the  way,  and  where
there  were  forests  of  trees  and  loose  clods  of  earth,  the  road
was  levelled  and  paved  with  stones  when  necessary.


YNCA   ROADS.  43

Those  who  read  this  book,  and  have  been  in  Peru,  will
remember  the  road  which  goes  from  Lima  to  Xauxa  by  the
rugged  mountains  of  Huarochiri  and  the  snowy  heights  of
Pariacaca,  and  will  understand  if  they  have  heard  or  seen
more  than  I  write.  Besides  this,  they  will  remember  the
path  which  descends  to  the  river  Apurimac,  and  how  the  road
passes  along  the  mountains  of  Paltas,  Caxas,  and  Ayancas,
and  other  parts  of  this  kingdom  where  it  is  fifteen  feet  wide,
a  little  more  or  less ;  and  in  time  of  the  kings  it  was  kept
clean,  so  that  there  was  neither  a  loose  stone  nor  a  growing
weed  on  it,  for  it  was  always  kept  in  good  order.  In  the
inhabited  parts,  near  the  towns,  there  were  great  palaces  and
lodgings  for  the  soldiers.  In  the  snowy  wildernesses  and
plains,  shelter-houses  were  built,  where  travellers  could  take
refuge  from  the  cold  and  rain.  In  many  places,  as  in  the
Collao  and  other  parts,  there  were  distance-marks  like  the
heaps  in  Europe  which  indicate  boundaries,  except  that  those
in  Peru  are  larger  and  better  made.  They  called  them  topos*
and  the  distance  between  them  is  a  Castillian  league  and  a
half.

The  manner  of  making  these  roads  and  their  grandeur  being
understood,  I  will  explain  the  ease  with  which  they  were  con-
structed by  the  natives,  without  increasing  the  death-rate,  or
causing  excessive  labour.  When  any  king  determined  to
have  any  of  these  famous  roads  made,  much  preparation  was
not  necessary,  but  it  was  merely  needful  that  the  king  should
give  the  order.  For  then  the  overseers  went  over  the  ground
to  make  a  trace,  and  the  Indians  received  instructions  to  con-
struct the  road  from  among  the  inhabitants  who  were  on
either  side.     One  province  completed  the  section  within  its

1  Tupu  is  the  general  name  for  a  measure.  The  measure  of  land
which  the  Ynca  apportioned  to  each  vassal,  sixty  paces  long  by  fifty
wide,  was  called  tupu  or  topu.  See  also  the  First  Part,  p.  146  of  my
Translation,  and  of  G.  de  la  Vega,  i,  v,  cap.  3.  A  large  pin  for  securing
a  mantle  is  also  called  topu.


44  TSCA   I  lADfl

limits,  and  when  it  reached  the  boundary  it  was  presently
taken  up  by  the  next :  and  if  it  was  urgent,  they  all  worked
at  one  time.  "When  they  reached  the  uninhabited  parts,  the
Indians  of  the  nearest  inhabited  districts  brought  provisions
and  tools,  in  such  wise  that,  with  much  rejoicing  and  little
fatigue,  it  was  finished.  For  there  was  no  apprehension,  and
the  Yncas  or  their  servants  interfered  in  nothing.

They  also  made  great  paved  causeways  of  excellent  con-
struction, such  as  that  which  passes  by  the  valley  of  Xaquixa-
guana,  lead  in  g  from  the  city  of  Cuzco  to  Muhina.  There  were
many  of  these  royal  roads,  both  in  the  mountains  and  along
the  coast.  Among  them  all  there  are  four  which  are  considered
most  important.  They  are  those  starting  from  the  central
square  of  the  city  of  Cuzco,  as  from  a  cross-road,  to  the  pro-
vinces of  the  kingdom,  as  I  have  mentioned  in  the  First  Part
of  this  Chronicle,  where  I  treat  of  the  founding  of  Cuzco.1
The  lords  were  so  respected,  that  when  they  travelled  on
these  roads,  the  attendant  guards  went  by  one,  and  rest  of  the
retinue  by  another.  Their  grandeur  was  so  considered  that,
one  being  dead,  the  son,  on  occasion  of  a  long  journey,  caused
a  road  to  be  made  for  himself,  larger  and  wider  than  that  of
his  predecessor.  This  was  when  such  a  king  set  out  on  some
conquest,  or  to  achieve  something  worthy  of  memory,  that  it
might  be  said  that  the  road  prepared  for  him  was  larger  than
any  made  before.  This  is  clearly  the  case,  for  I  have  seen
three  or  four  roads  near  Tilcas,  and  I  even  lost  my  way  on  one,
believing  that  I  was  on  the  one  which  is  now  in  use.  These
roads  are  called,  one  the  road  of  the  Ynca  Yupanqui,  another
that  of  Tupac  Ynca  ;  and  that  which  is  now  used,  and  always
will  be  hereafter,  is  that  of  Huayna  Ccapac,  reaching  to  the
river  Ancasmayu  in  the  north,  and  to  the  south  far  beyond
what  we  now  call  Chile ;  so  long,  indeed,  that  from  one  end
to  the  other  the  distance  is  over  one  thousand  two  hundred

leagues.

1  Chapter  xcii.


ROYAL   HT: 7


CHAPTER  XVI.

R:  :  and  in  what  manner  they  made  the  royal  hunts  for  the
Lords  of  Peru.

In  the  First  Part1  I  related  how,  in  this  kingdom  of  Peru,
there  was  a  very  great  quantity  of  flocks,  both  wild  and  tame,
of  urcos*  sheep,  paeos,  vicunas,  and  llamas,  and  excellent
pastures  in  all  parts,  so  that  they  could  be  well  maintained.
Although  they  were  so  numerous,  it  was  forbidden  by  the
kings,  on  pain  of  severe  punishment,  to  kill  females,  and  if
the  rule  was  broken,  punishment  followed,  so  that  they  were
never  eaten.  They  multiplied  so  that  the  number  when  the
Spaniards  arrived  in  the  country  is  incredible.  The  principal
reason  for  this  order  was  to  ensure  the  growth  of  sufficient
wool  to  make  clothing ;  for  in  many  parts,  if  the  flocks  were
wanting,  I  certainly  do  not  know  how  the  people  could
preserve  themselves  against  the  cold,  if  they  had  not  any  wool
wherewith  to  make  clothes.  But  by  this  arrangement  there
were  many  store-houses  in  all  parts,  where  they  kept  the
clothing,  as  well  for  the  soldiers  as  for  the  rest  of  the  people,
and  most  of  this  cloth  was  made  of  the  wool  of  guanacos
and  vicunas.

"When  the  lord  desired  to  enjoy  a  royal  hunt,  it  is  note-
worthy how  many  animals  were  taken  and  killed ;  as  many
as  thirty  thousand  head.  Tents  were  pitched  in  a  position
selected  by  the  lord,  on  such  occasions  as  he  was  pleased  to
amuse  himself  with  the  chase.  For,  on  the  high  parts  of  the
mountains,  in  whatever  place  was  chosen,  there  were  sure  to
be  flocks  in  snch  quantities  as  we  have  stated.  Having
-ibled  fifty  thousand  or  sixty  thousand  people,  they  sur-
rounded the  plains  and  broken  ground  in  such  sort  that  they
gradually  approached  each  other,  at  the  same  time  descending
1  Chapter  cxi.  2  Male.


46  ROYAL   HUNTS.

from  the  steeper  heights  to  the  more  level  plains,  and  making
the  country  resound  with  the  noise  of  their  voices.  Gradually
they  approached  each  other,  until  they  formed  a  ring  with
hands  joined,  and  in  the  enclosed  space  bounded  by  their
bodies  the  flocks  were  detained  and  secured.  The  lord  was
so  placed  as  to  witness  the  slaughter.  Then  certain  Indians
entered  the  enclosure  armed  with  ayllos,1  which  are  used  to
secure  the  legs,  and  others  with  sticks  and  clubs,  and  began  to
seize  and  kill.  Among  the  great  quantity  of  captured  animals
there  were  many  guanacos,  which  are  rather  larger  than
small  donkeys,  with  long  necks  like  camels.  They  tried  to
escape  by  spitting  into  the  faces  of  the  men  and  rushing
about  with  great  leaps.  They  say  that  it  was  a  marvellous
thing  to  hear  the  noise  made  by  the  Indians  in  catching  them,
and  to  see  the  efforts  made  by  the  animals  to  escape  in  all
directions.  If  the  king  wished  to  kill  any  of  the  chase  with-
out entering  into  the  tumult,  it  was  arranged  in  any  way  he
pleased.

Many  days  were  passed  in  these  hunts,  and  a  multitude  of
animals  was  killed.  Then  the  overseers  ordered  the  wool  to
be  taken  to  the  store-houses,  and  to  the  temples  of  the  Sun,
where  the  mamaconas  were  expert  in  making  very  fine  cloth
for  the  lords,  the  fineness  being  such  that  it  appeared  to  be  of
silk,  and  of  various  colors.  The  flesh  of  the  slaughtered
animals  was  eaten  by  those  who  were  present  with  the  king,
and  some  of  it  was  dried  in  the  sun,2  to  be  kept  in  the  store-
houses, as  provisions  for  soldiers  on  the  march.  All  these
animals,  it  must  be  understood,  were  in  wild  flocks  and  not
domesticated.  They  also  took  many  deer  and  biscachas,3  as
well  as  foxes,  and  some  bears  and  small  lions.

1  Ayllit,  means  the  ubolas",  or  stones  sewn  round  with  leather  and
attached  to  lines,  which  were  thrown  to  bring  down  animals,  by  twining
round  their  hind  legs.  See  the  Life  of  Don  Alonzo  de  Guzman,  p.  101.
Also  Balboa  and  G.  de  la  Vega.  The  word  Ayllu  also  means  ulineage",
or  "family".  2  Called  charqui,  whence  "  jerked"  beef.

3  A  lartre  rodent,  in  the  loftier  parts  of  the  Andes.  Ldgidium  Peru-
vianum.


METHOD    OF   CONQUEST.  47


CHAPTER    XVII.

Which  treats  of  the  order  maintained  by  the  Incas,  and  how  in
man)/  places  they  made  the  waste  places  fertile,,  by  the
arrangements  they  made  for  that  purpose.

One  of  the  things  for  which  one  feels  envious  of  these  lords  is
their  knowledge  of  the  way  to  conquer  the  wild  lands  and  to
bring  them,  by  good  management,  into  the  condition  in  which
they  were  found  by  the  Spaniards  when  they  discovered  this
new  kingdom.  I  often  remember,  when  in  some  wild  and
barren  province  outside  these  kingdoms,  hearing  the  Spaniards
themselves  say,  "I  am  certain  that  if  the  Incas  had  been  here
the  state  of  things  would  be  different."  So  that  the  advantage
they  were  to  us  was  well  known.  For  under  their  rule  the
people  lived  and  multiplied,  and  barren  lands  were  made
fertile  and  abundant,  in  such  manner  and  by  such  admirable
means  as  I  will  describe.

They  always  arranged  matters,  in  the  commencement  of
their  negotiations,  so  that  things  should  be  pleasantly  and  not
harshly  ordered.  Afterwards,  some  Incas  inflicted  severe
punishments  in  many  parts ;  but  formerly,  it  is  asserted  on
all  sides,  that  they  induced  people  to  submit  by  great  bene-
volence and  friendliness.  They  marched  from  Cuzco  with
their  army  and  warlike  materials,  until  they  were  near  the
region  they  intended  to  conquer.  Then  they  collected  very
complete  information  touching  the  power  of  the  enemy,  and
whence  help  was  likely  to  reach  them,  and  by  what  road.
This  being  known,  the  most  effective  steps  were  taken  to
prevent  the  succour  from  arriving,  either  by  large  bribes  given
to  the  allies,  or  by  forcible  resistance.  At  the  same  time  forts
were  ordered  to  be  constructed  on  heights  or  ridges,  consisting
of  circles  with  high  walls,  one  inside  the  other  and  each  with
a  door.     Thus  if  the  outer  one  was  lost,  the  defenders  could


48  INSTRUCTION   TO   THE   CONQUERED.

retire  into  the  next,  and  the  next,  until  refuge  was  taken  in
the  highest.  They  sent  chosen  men  to  examine  the  land,  to
see  the  roads,  and  learn  by  what  means  they  were  defended,
as  well  as  the  places  whence  the  enemy  received  supplies.
When  the  road  that  should  be  taken  and  the  necessary
measures  were  decided  upon,  the  Inca  sent  special  messengers
to  the  enemy  to  say  that  he  desired  to  have  them  as  allies  and
relations,  so  that,  with  joyful  hearts  and  willing  minds  they
ought  to  come  forth  to  receive  him  in  their  province,  and  give
him  obedience  as  in  the  other  provinces  ;  and  that  they  might
do  this  of  their  own  accord  he  sent  presents  to  the  native
chiefs.

By  this  wise  policy  he  entered  into  the  possession  of  many
lands  without  war.  In  that  case,  he  gave  orders  to  his  soldiers
that  they  should  do  no  harm  or  injury,  nor  commit  any
robbery  or  act  of  violence ;  and  if  there  were  not  sufficient
provisions  in  the  province,  he  ordered  that  it  should  be  sent
from  other  parts.  Tor  he  desired  that  his  sway  should  not
appear  heavy  to  those  who  had  newly  come  under  it,  so  as  to
know  and  hate  him  at  the  same  time.  If  any  newly  conquered
province  had  no  flocks,  he  ordered  that  so  many  thousand
heads  should  be  sent  there,  to  be  well  looked  after,  so  as  to
multiply  and  supply  wool  to  clothe  the  people ;  and
none  were  to  be  killed  for  eating  until  the  lapse  of  a
certain  number  of  years.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  they  had
flocks,  but  needed  some  other  thing,  a  similar  course  was
pursued  to  supply  the  want.  If  the  people  lived  in  caves  or
thickets,  they  were  led,  by  kind  words,  to  build  houses  and
towns  on  the  more  level  parts  of  the  mountains  ;  and  when
they  were  ignorant  as  regards  the  tilling  of  their  land,  they
were  instructed,  and  the  method  of  making  channels  to
irrigate  their  fields  was  taught  to  them.

In  all  things  the  system  was  so  well  regulated  that  when
one  of  the  Incas  entered  into  a  new  province  by  friendly
agreement,  in  a  very  short  time  it  looked  like  another  place,


SYSTEM    OF    CONQUEST'S.  49

the  natives  yielding  obedience  and  consenting  that  the  royal
governors  and  mitimaes1  should  remain  with  them.  In  many
others,  which  were  conquered  by  force  of  arms,  the  order  was
that  little  harm  should  be  done  to  the  property  and  houses  of
the  vanquished  ;  for  the  lord  said,  "  These  will  soon  be  our
people,  as  much  as  the  others."  For  this  reason  the  war  was
made  with  as  little  injury  as  possible,  although  great  battles
were  often  fought,  where  the  inhabitants  desired  to  retain
their  ancient  liberty  and  their  religion  and  customs,  and  not
to  adopt  new  ways.  But  during  such  wars  the  Incas  always
had  the  mastery,  and  when  the  enemies  were  vanquished,  they
were  not  destroyed ;  on  the  contrary,  orders  were  given  to
release  the  captives  and  restore  the  spoils,  and  allow  them  to
retain  their  estates.  For  the  Inca  desired  to  show  them  that
they  should  not  be  so  mad  as  to  revolt  against  his  royal  person
and  reject  his  friendship  ;  rather  they  should  wish  to  be  his
friends,  as  were  those  in  the  other  provinces.  In  saying  this
to  them,  he  gave  them  beautiful  women,  pieces  of  rich  cloth,
and  some  gold.

With  these  gifts  and  kind  words,  he  secured  the  good- will
of  all,  in  such  sort  that  those  who  had  fled  into  the  wilder-
nesses returned,  without  fear,  to  their  houses,  and  all  cast
aside  their  weapons ;  while  those  who  saw  the  Inca  most
frequently,  looked  upon  themselves  as  most  fortunate.

All  were  ordered  to  worship  the  Sun  as  their  god.  Their
own  customs  and  religious  usages  were  not  prohibited,  but
they  were  enjoined  to  conform  to  the  laws  and  customs  that
were  in  force  at  Cuzco,  and  all  were  required  to  use  the
general  language  of  the  empire.

Having  established  a  governor,  with  garrisons  of  soldiers,
the  army  then  advanced,  and  if  the  new  provinces  were  large,
it  was  presently  ordered  that  a  temple  of  the  Sun  should  be
built,  and  women  collected  for  its  service,  and  that  a  palace
should  be  erected  for  the  lord.      Tribute  was  collected,  care

1  Colonists.

E


50  SYSTEM    OF    COLONIES.

being  taken  that  too  much  was  not  exacted,  and  that  no
injustice  was  done  in  anything ;  but  that  the  new  subjects
were  made  acquainted  with  the  imperial  policy,  with  the  art
of  building,  of  clothing  themselves,  and  of  living  together  in
towns.  And  if  they  needed  anything,  care  was  taken  to
supply  it,  and  to  teach  them  how  to  sow  and  to  cultivate  their
lands.  So  thoroughly  was  this  policy  carried  into  effect,  that  we
know  of  many  places  where  there  were  no  flocks  originally,  but
where  there  has  been  abundance  since  they  were  subjugated
by  the  Incas  ;  and  others  where  formerly  there  was  no  maize,
but  where  now  they  have  large  crops.  In  many  provinces
they  went  about  like  savages,  badly  clothed,  and  barefooted,
until  they  came  under  the  sway  of  the  Incas  ;  and  from  that
time  they  have  worn  shirts  and  mantles,  both  men  and  women,
so  that  they  always  hold  the  change  in  their  memories.  In
the  Collao,  and  in  other  parts,  the  lord  gave  orders  that  miti-
maes should  go  to  the  mountains  of  the  Andes1  to  sow  maize
and  coca,  fruits  and  edible  roots,  for  each  town  the  quantity
that  was  required.  These  colonists,  with  their  wives,  alwavs
lived  in  the  places  where  the  crops  were  sown  and  harvested,
and  the  produce  was  brought  from  those  parts,  so  that  the
want  of  it  was  never  felt.  And  no  town,  however  small,  was
without  these  mitimaes  in  the  valleys.  Further  on  we  shall
treat  of  the  lot  of  these  mitimaes,  and  what  they  did,  as  well
as  how  they  fared.

1  That  is  to  say,  that  colonists  were  sent  from  the  cold  and  lofty
plateau  of  the  Collao  to  the  warm  and  deep  valleys  of  the  Andes,  where
maize  and  coca  can  be  cultivated.  There  was  thus  an  exchange  of  pro-
ducts between  the  cold  and  the  more  genial  regions.  For  another  account
of  the  mitimaes  or  colonists,  see  G.  de  la  Vega,  part  i,  lib.  iii,  cap.  19.

The  people  of  the  Collao  were  also  sent  to  settle  in  the  coast  valleys
and  thus  Arequipa,  Tacna,  and  Moquegua  were  colonised.  To  this  day,
it  is  remembered  in  the  villages  of  the  coast  from  what  particular  dis-
tricts in  the  Collao  their  ancestors  came  as  mitimaes.  Those  who  colo-
nised Arequipa  came  from  Cavanilla  near  Lake  Titicaca ;  the  colonists  of
Moquegua  were  from  Acora  and  Have,  villages  on  the  lake ;  of  Tacna,
from  Juli  and  Pisacoma.


ASSESSMENT   OF   TRIBUTE.  51


CHAPTER   XVIII.


Which  treats  of  the  order  they  adopted  in  the  payments  of  tri-
bute by  the  provinces  to  the  Kings,  and  of  the  system  by  which
the  tribute  was  regulated.

As  in  the  last  chapter  I  wrote  of  the  method  adopted  by  the
Incas  in  their  conquests,  it  will  be  well  in  this  one  to  relate
how  they  levied  tribute  from  so  many  nations.  It  is  a  thing
very  well  understood  that  there  was  no  village,  either  in  the
mountains  or  in  the  valleys  of  the  coast,  which  did  not  pay
such  tribute  as  was  imposed  by  those  who  were  in  charge.
It  is  said  that  when,  in  one  province,  the  people  represented  that
they  had  nothing  wherewith  to  pay  the  tribute,  the  king  ordered
that  each  inhabitant  should  be  obliged,  every  four  months,  to
give  a  rather  large  cane  full  of  live  lice,  which  was  a  sign  of
the  care  taken  by  the  Inca  to  make  every  subject  contribute
something.  Thus  we  know  that  they  paid  their  tribute  of
lice  until  such  time  as,  having  been  supplied  with  flocks,  they
had  been  industrious  enough  to  multiply  them,  and  to  make
cloth  wherewith  to  pay  more  suitable  tribute  in  the  time  to
come.

The  system  which  the  Orejones  of  Cuzco  and  the  other
native  lords  of  the  land  say  that  the  Incas  adopted  in  im-
posing tribute  was  as  follows  :  He  who  reigned  in  Cuzco,  sent
some  of  his  principal  officers  to  visit  the  empire,  one  by  each
of  the  four  royal  roads  of  which  I  have  already  written.1  One
was  called  Chincha  Suyo,  which  included  all  the  provinces  as
far  as  Quito,  with  all  the  valleys  of  Chincha  towards  the
north.  The  second  was  Conde  Suyo,  which  includes  the  pro-
vinces on  the  sea  coast,  and  many  in  the  mountains.  The
third  was  called  Colla  Suyo,  including  all  the  provinces  to  the
south  as   far   as  Chile.     The  last   road  led  to  Ande  Suyo,

1  In  chapter  xcii  of  the  First  Part.

E  2


52  ASSESSMENT    OF   TIttBUTE.

which  included  the  lands  covered  with  forests  at  the  foot  of
mountains  of  the  Andes.1

So  it  was  that  when  the  lord  desired  to  know  what  tribute
would  be  due  from  all  the  provinces  between  Cuzco  and
Chile,  along  a  road  of  such  great  length,  as  I  have  often  ex-
plained, he  ordered  faithful  persons  whom  he  could  trust,  to
go  from  village  to  village,  examining  the  condition  of  the
people  and  their  capacity  for  payment.  They  also  took  note
of  the  productiveness  of  the  land,  the  quantity  of  flocks,  the
yield  of  metals,  and  of  other  things  which  they  required  and
valued.  Having  performed  this  service  with  great  diligence
they  returned  to  the  lord  to  submit  their  reports.  He  then
ordered  a  general  assembly  of  the  principal  persons  of  the
kingdom  to  meet.  The  lords  of  the  provinces  which  had  to  pay
the  tribute  being  present,  he  addressed  them  lovingly,  saying
that  as  they  received  him  as  their  sole  lord  and  monarch  of
so  many  and  such  vast  districts,  they  should  take  it  in  good
part,  without  feeling  it  burdensome,  to  give  the  tribute  that
was  due  to  the  royal  person,  who  would  take  care  that  it  was
moderate,  and  so  light  that  they  could  easily  pay  it.  Having
been  answered  in  conformity  with  his  wishes,  the  lords  of
provinces  returned  to  their  homes,  accompanied  by  certain
Orejones  who  fixed  the  tribute.  In  some  parts  it  was  higher
than  is  paid  to  the  Spaniards  at  present.  But,  seeing  that  the
system  of  the  Incas  was  so  perfect,  the  people  did  not  feel  the
burden,  rather  increasing  and  multiplying  in  nimibers  and
well  being.  On  the  other  hand,  the  disorder  introduced  by
the  Spaniards,  and  their  extreme  covetousness,  have  caused  the
prosperity  of  the  country  to  decrease  in  such  sort  that  a  great
part  of  the  population  has  disappeared.  Their  greed  and
avarice  will  destroy  the  remainder,  unless  the  mercy  of  God
should  grant  a  remedy  by  causing  the  wars  to  cease.  Those
wars  have  certainly  been  permitted  as  a  just  scourge.     The

1  The  four  great  divisions  comprised  in  Ttahuantin  Suyu  (the  four
provinces)  were  Chincha  Suyu,  Cvnti  Suyu,  Colla  Suyu.  Anf'i  Suyu.


THE   MINING   INDUSTRY.  53

country  can  only  be  saved  by  the  taxation  being  fixed  by
moderate  rules,  so  that  the  Indians  may  enjoy  liberty  and  be
masters  of  their  own  persons  and  estates,  without  other  duty
than  the  payment  by  each  village  of  what  has  been  fixed  by
rule.  I  shall  treat  of  this  subject  a  little  more  fully  further  on.

When  the  officers  sent  by  the  Incas  made  their  inspection,
they  entered  a  province  and  ascertained,  by  means  of  the  quvpus,
the  number  of  men  and  women,  of  old  and  young.  Then
they  took  account  of  the  mines  of  gold  and  silver,  and,  with
so  many  thousand  Indians  at  work,  the  quantity  that  should
be  extracted  was  fixed.  An  order  was  given  that  such  quan-
tity should  be  delivered  to  the  overseers.  As  those  who  were
employed  to  work  at  the  extraction  of  silver  could  not  attend
to  the  cultivation  of  their  fields,  the  Inca  imposed  the  duty
upon  the  neighbouring  province  to  find  labour  for  the  sowing
and  reaping  of  the  crops  of  the  miners.  If  the  mining  province
was  large,  its  own  inhabitants  were  able  both  to  carry  on  the
mining  works  and  to  cultivate  the  ground.  In  case  one  of  the
miners  fell  ill,  it  was  arranged  that  he  should  return  to  his
home,  and  that  another  should  take  his  place.  No  one  was
employed  in  the  mines  who  was  not  married,  because  the
wives  had  to  supply  their  food  and  liquor ;  besides  which,
arrangements  were  made  to  send  sufficient  provisions  to  the
mines.  In  this  manner,  although  men  might  be  at  the  mines
all  their  lives,  they  were  not  overworked.  Besides,  there  was
provision  to  rest  for  certain  days  in  each  month,  for  their
festivals  and  for  pleasure.  But  in  fact  the  same  Indians  did
not  always  remain  at  the  mines  ;  for  there  were  periodical
reliefs.

The  Incas  so  arranged  the  mining  industry,  that  they
extracted  great  abundance  of  gold  and  silver  throughout  the
empire,  and  there  must  have  been  years  when  more  than  fifty
thousand  arrobas  of  silver  and  fifteen  thousand  of  gold
were  produced.  It  was  always  used  for  the  royal  service.
The  metal  was  brought  to  the  principal  place  of  the  province,


54  FORMS   OF   TRIBUTE.

.and  in  the  manner  that  the  mines  were  worked  in  one  district
in  the  same  way  were  they  ordered  in  all  the  others  through-
out the  empire.  If  there  were  provinces  where  no  metal  could
be  extracted  as  a  tribute,  the  people  paid  taxes  in  smaller
things,  and  in  women  and  boys,  who  were  taken  from  the
villages  without  causing  any  discontent.  For  if  a  man  had
an  only  child  it  was  not  taken,  but  if  he  had  three  or  four
children,  one  was  required  in  payment  of  his  dues.

Other  provinces  made  their  contributions  in  the  form  of  so
many  thousand  loads  of  maize,  at  each  harvest.  Others  pro-
vided, on  the  same  scale,  a  certain  number-  of  loads  of  dried
chunus,1  in  the  same  way  as  the  maize,  and  others  again  paid
in  quinna?  or  other  products.  In  other  provinces  the  tribute
consisted  of  so  many  cloth  mantles,  and  in  others  of  shirts,
according  to  the  number  of  inhabitants.  Another  form  of
tribute  was  the  supply  of  so  many  thousand  loads  of  lances,
another  of  slings  and  ayllos,  and  all  other  kinds  of  weapons
that  they  used.  Other  provinces  were  required  to  send  so
many  thousand  labourers  to  Cuzco,  to  be  employed  on  the
public  edifices  of  the  city  and  of  the  kings,  with  supplies  of
their  needful  provisions.  Other  provinces  contributed  cables
to  move  the  great  stones,  while  others  paid  tribute  in  coca.
The  system  was  so  arranged  that  all  the  provinces  of  Peru
paid  something  to  the  Incas  in  tribute,  from  the  smallest  to
the  most  important.  Such  perfect  regularity  was  maintained
that  while  the  people  did  not  fail  to  provide  what  was  re-
quired, those  who  made  the  collections  never  took  even  a
grain  of  maize  too  much.  All  the  provision  and  warlike  stores
that  were  contributed,  were  served  out  to  the  soldiers,  or  sup-
plied to  the  garrisons  which  were  formed  in  different  parts,
for  the  defence  of  the  empire.

When  there  was  no  war,  a  large  proportion  was  eaten  and
used  by  the  poor ;  for  when  the  kings  were  at  Cuzco  they

1  Potatoes  frozen  and  dried  in  the  sun. — See  G.  dt  la  Vega,  i,  lib.  v,
cap.  5.  2  Chenopodium  Quinoa.


REVISION    OF   THE   TRIBUTE.  00

were  served  by  the  auaco/ias,1  which  is  the  name  for
perpetual  servants  who  sufficed  to  till  the  royal  fields,  and
do  service  in  the  palaces.  Besides  which,  there  was  always
brought  for  the  royal  table,  from  the  provinces,  many  lambs
and  birds,  fish,  maize,  coca,  edible  roots,  and  all  kinds  of  fruits.

Such  order  was  maintained  in  the  tribute  paid  by  the
Indians  that  the  Incas  became  very  powerful,  and  never
entered  upon  any  war  which  did  not  extend  their  dominions.

To  understand  how,  and  in  what  manner,  the  tributes  were
paid,  and  the  other  taxes  were  collected,  it  must  be  known
that  in  each  huata,2  which  is.  the  name  for  a  year,  certain
Oiejones  were  sent  as  judges,  but  only  with  powers  to  inspect
the  provinces,  and  give  notice  to  the  inhabitants  that  if  any
felt  aggrieved  he  was  to  state  his  complaints,  in  order  that
the  officer  who  had  done  him  the  injury  might  be  punished.
Having  received  the  complaints,  and  also  ascertained  whether
any  tribute  had  not  been  paid,  the  judges  returned  to  Cuzco  ;

1  Yanacuna.  Yana  means  " a  servant".  Also  "black".  Literally,
Yanacuna  seems  to  be  merely  the  plural  form  of  Yana.  But  the  word
was  applied  to  Indians  bound  to  service.  Balboa  says  that  six  thousand
Indians,  accused  of  rebellion  against  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui,  were  as-
sembled in  the  village  of  Yanayacu.  They  were  pardoned,  but  they  and
their  descendants  were  ordered  henceforth  to  be  employed  solely  in  the
service  of  the  Yncas  and  of  the  temples.  They  were  called  Yanayacu-
cuna,  or  men  of  Yanayacu,  corrupted  to  Yanaconas.  Hence,  domestic
servants  were  called  Yanaconas  by  the  Spanish  settlers. — Balboa,  p.
120.

In  the  time  of  the  Viceroy  Toledo  (1570),  the  Yanaconas  numbered
about  forty-six  thousand  souls.  The  Viceroy  Marquis  of  Monies  Claros,
in  1601,  described  them  as  Indians  domiciled  in  the  houses  or  on  the
estates  of  Spaniards,  like  servants.  Their  masters  found  them  iD  food
and  clothes,  and  gave  them  a  patch  of  land,  also  paying  their  tribute  for
them.  Lest  the  system  should  degenerate  into  slavery,  the  King  of
Spain  declared  that  the  Yanaconas  were  free,  and  desired  that  this
should  be  made  known  to  them. — Memorias  de  los  Vvreyes,  i,  p.  27.

2  Huata,  "a  year".  A  sun  circle  for  astronomical  observations  was
called  Ynti-huatana.  Huatana  means  "a  halter",  from  huatani,  "I
seize".  "  The  place  where  the  sun  is  tied  up  or  encircled."  Hence,
huata  means  "a  year".


56  REVISION    OF   THE   TRIBUTE.

whence  others  set  out  with  power  to  inflict  punishment  on
those  who  were  in  fault.  Besides  this,  it  was  the  rule  that,
from  time  to  time,  the  principal  men  of  the  provinces  should
be  permitted  to  appear  before  the  lord,  and  report  upon  the
condition  of  the  provinces,  on  their  needs,  and  on  the  in-
cidence of  taxation.  Their  representations  then  received
attention,  the  Lords  Incas  being  certain  that  they  did  not  lie,
but  spoke  the  truth  ;  for  any  deceit  was  severely  punished,
and  in  that  case  the  tribute  was  increased.  The  women  con-
tributed by  the  provinces  were  divided  between  the  service
of  the  kings,  and  that  of  the  temples  of  the  Sun.


REGISTRATION    OF   STATISTICS.  57


CHAPTER  XIX.

How  the  Kings  of  Cuzco  ordered  that  every  year  an  account
should  he  taken  of  all  persons  who  died  and  were  horn
throughout  their  dominions,  also  how  all  men  worked,  and
how  none  could  he  'poor  hy  reason  of  the  storehouses.

THE  Orcjones  who  gave  me  information  at  Cuzco  concurred
in  saying  that  formerly,  in  the  time  of  the  Kings  Incas,
orders  were  given  throughout  all  the  towns  and  provinces  of
Peru,  that  the  principal  lords  and  their  lieutenants  should
take  note,  each  year,  of  the  men  and  women  who  had  died,
and  also  of  the  births.  For  as  well  for  the  assessment  of
tribute,  as  for  calculating  the  number  of  men  that  could  be
called  upon  to  serve  as  soldiers,  and  for  the  defence  of  the
villages,  such  information  was  needed.  This  was  easily  done,
I  >ecause  each  province,  at  the  end  of  the  year,  was  ordered  to
set  down  in  the  quipus,  by  means  of  the  knots,  all  the  men
who  had  died  in  it  during  the  year,  as  well  as  all  who  were
born.  In  the  beginning  of  the  following  year,  the  quipus
were  taken  to  Cuzco,  where  an  account  was  made  of  the
births  and  deaths  throughout  the  empire.  These  returns
were  pre] tared  with  great  care  and  accuracy,  and  without  any
fraud  or  deceit.  When  the  returns  had  been  made  up,  the
lord  and  his  officers  knew  what  people  were  poor,  the  number
of  widows,  whether  they  were  able  to  pay  tribute,  how  many
men  could  be  taken  for  soldiers,  and  many  other  facts  which
were  considered,  among  these  people,  to  be  of  great  importance.
As  this  empire  was  of  such  vast  extent,  a  fact  which  I
have  frequently  pointed  out  in  many  parts  of  this  work,  and
as  in  each  province  there  were  a  great  number  of  storehouses
for  provisions  and  other  necessaries  for  a  campaign,  and  for
the  equipment  of  soldiers,  if  there  was  a  war  these  great
resources  were  used  where  the  camps  were  formed,  without


58  ORGANIZATION    OF   LABOUR.

touching  the  supplies  of  allies,  or  drawing  upon  the  stores  of
different  villages.  If  there  was  no  war,  all  the  great  store  of
provisions  was  divided  amongst  the  poor  and  the  widows.
The  poor  consisted  of  those  who  were  too  old  to  work,  or  who
were  maimed,  lame,  or  infirm  ;  but  those  who  were  well  and
able  to  work  received  nothing.  Then  the  storehouses  were
again  filled  from  the  obligatory  tributes;  and  if,  by  chance,
there  came  a  year  of  great  sterility,  the  storehouses  were,  in
like  manner,  ordered  to  be  opened,  and  the  necessary  pro-
visions were  given  out  to  the  suffering  provinces.  But  as
soon  as  a  year  of  plenty  came,  the  deficiencies  so  caused  were
made  up.  Although  the  tributes  given  to  the  Incas  did  not
serve  for  other  purposes  than  the  above,  yet  they  were  well
expended,  and  the  kingdom  was  well  supplied  and  cared  for.
It  was  not  permitted  that  any  should  be  idle,  or  should
profit  by  the  labour  of  others,  all  being  commanded  to  work.
Each  lord,  on  certain  days,  went  to  his  farm,  took  the  plough
in  his  hand  and  made  a  furrow,  besides  working  at  other
things.  Even  the  Incas  themselves  did  so,  to  give  a  good
example  to  others ;  for  they  intended  it  to  be  understood
that  there  must  not  be  any  one  so  rich  that,  on  account  of
his  riches,  he  could  affront  the  poor :  and  by  this  system,
there  was  no  one  in  the  whole  land,  being  in  good  health,
who  did  not  work.  The  infirm  were  fed  and  clothed  from
the  storehouses.  No  rich  man  was  allowed  to  wear  more
ornaments  than  the  poor,  nor  to  make  any  difference  in  his
dress,  except  the  lords  and  the  Curacas.  These,  as  well  as  the
Orejones,  to  maintain  their  dignity,  could  use  great  freedom
in  this  respect,  and  they  were  made  much  of,  among  all  the
nations.


CAPITALS   OF   PROVINCES.  59


CHAPTEK    XX.


How  Governors  were  appointed  to  the  provinces,  and  of  the
manner  in  which  the  Kings  visited  their  dominions,  and
how  they  lore,  for  their  arms,  certain  waving  serpents  with
sticks.

It  is  well  known  that  the  lords  of  this  kingdom  had  their
lieutenants  or  representatives  in  the  principal  places,  in  the
time  of  their  sovereign  power ;  such  as  Vilcas,1  Xauxa,2
Bombon,3  Caxamalca,4  Guancabamba,5  Tomebamba,6  Lata-
cunga,7  Quito,  Coranqui,8  and  on  the  other  side  of  Cuzco
towards  the  south,  in  Hatuncana,  Hatuncolla,9  Ayavire,10
Chuquiabo,11  Chucuito,12  Paria,13  and  others  as  far  as  Chile.

In  these  places  there  were  larger  houses  and  more  resources
than  in  many  of  the  other  towns  of  this  great  empire,  so  that
they  were  the  central  positions  or  capitals  of  the  provinces ;
for  the  tribute  was  brought  into  these  centres  from  certain
distant  places  at  so  many  leagues  distance  to  one,  and  at

1  Yilcas  is  between  Cuzco  and  Ayacucho,  on  the  left  of  the  road,  and
near  the  left  bank  of  the  river  Pampas.  The  buildings  of  the  Yncas  are
described  by  our  author  in  his  First  Part  (chap.  Ixxxix,  p.  312  of  my
Translation).  The  only  modern  traveller  who  has  visited  and  described
the  ruins  is  M.  Wiener.  They  are  called  Vilcas  Huaman. — See  Perou
et  Bolivie,  Recit.  tie  Voyage  par  Charles  Wiener,  Paris,  1880,  pp.  264-
271.

2  The  principal  place  in  the  valley  of  the  same  name,  in  the  sierra  east
of  Lima.     The  valley  of  Xauxa  was  inhabited  by  the  tribe  of  Huaucas.

3  On  the  heights  above  the  river  Pampas,  on  the  road  from  Ayacucho
to  Cuzco.

4  The  city  in  the  north  of  Peru,  where  Atahualpa  was  seized  and  put
to  death  by  Pizarro.  5  North  of  Caxamarca.

6  In  the  kingdom  of  Quito.  r  In  Quito.

8  In  the  northern  part  of  Quito.  9  See  p.  3.

10  See  p.  4.

11  On  the  site  of  the  modern  city  of  La  Paz,  in  Bolivia.
u  On  the  western  shore  of  lake  Titicaca.

11  In  the  province  of  Charcas.


60  POWERS    OF    GOVERNORS.

so  man)*  to  another.  The  rules  were  so  clear  that  every
village  knew  to  which  centre  it  had  to  send  its  tribute.  In
all  these  capitals  the  kings  had  temples  of  the  Sun,  and
houses  with  great  store  of  plate,  with  people  whose  only  duty
it  was  to  work  at  making  rich  pieces  of  gold  and  great  vases
of  silver.  There  were  also  many  soldiers  as  a  garrison,  and
also  a  principal  agent  or  lieutenant  who  was  over  all,  and  to
whom  an  account  had  to  be  rendered  of  all  that  came  in,
while  he  was  expected  to  keep  the  account  of  all  expenditure.
These  governors  were  not  allowed  to  interfere  in  the  adminis-
tration of  any  neighbouring  province ;  but  within  his  own
jurisdiction,  if  there  was  any  disturbance  or  uproar,  he  had
the  power  of  inflicting  punishment,  much  more  if  there  was
any  treasonable  movement  or  rebellion  of  one  denying  alle-
giance to  the  king.  For  it  is  certain  that  full  powers  were
entrusted  to  these  governors.1

If  the  Incas  did  not  make  these  appointments  and  establish
colonists,  the  natives  would  often  rise  and  assume  the  royal
power  for  one  of  themselves.  But  with  so  many  soldiers,  and
such  resources,  it  was  not  easy  to  set  any  treason  or  insur-
rection on  foot.  For  the  governors  had  the  full  confidence
of  their  sovereign  and  all  were  Orejones,  generally  with
chacaras  or  estates  in  the  Cuzco  district,  with  their  houses
and  families.  If  one  proved  to  be  incompetent  as  a  ruler
with  an  important  charge,  another  was  presently  appointed  in
his  place.

If  the  governors,  at  certain  times,  came  to  Cuzco  on  private
business  or  to  consult  with  the  king,  they  left  lieutenants  in
their  place,  not  men  selected  by  favour,  but  those  who  knew
their  duties  and  would  perform  them  with  greatest  fidelity,
and  with  most  care  for  the  service  of  the  Incas.  If  one  of  the

1  The  governors  or  viceroys  were  called  Tucuyricoc. — See  Balboa,  p.
115 ;  Monte  sinos,  p.  55 ;  G.  de  la  Vega,  Part  i,  lib.  n,  cap.  14,  says  that
the  Tucuyricoc  was  a  commissioner  who  secretly  visited  the  provinces
and  reported  the  shortcomings  of  officials.


AUDIT   OF   ACCOUNTS.  61

governors  or  lieutenants  died  at  his  post,  the  natives  quickly
sent  a  report  of  the  cause  of  the  death,  with  proofs,  to  the
lord  ;  and  even  the  bodies  of  the  dead  were  sent  by  the  post
road  when  it  was  considered  desirable.

The  tribute  which  was  paid  to  the  central  station  by  the
natives,  as  well  gold  and  silver  as  weapons,  clothes  and
all  other  things,  was  delivered  to  the  camayos  who  had
charge  of  the  quvpos,  that  an  account  might  be  taken.  These
officers  kept  the  records  with  reference  to  the  issue  of  stores
to  the  armies,  or  to  others,  respecting  whom  they  might
receive  orders,  or  to  be  sent  to  Cuzco.  When  overseers  came
from  the  city  of  Cuzco  to  examine  the  accounts,  or  the  officers
went  there  to  submit  their  quipus  for  inspection,  it  was  neces-
sary that  there  should  be  no  mistake,  but  that  the  accounts
should  be  balanced.  And  few  years  were  allowed  to  pass
without  these  examinations  of  the  accounts  being  made.

These  governors  had  full  authority  to  assemble  soldiers  and
organize  an  army  if  any  disturbance  or  rising  should  make  it
necessary  to  meet  a  sudden  emergency,  either  to  put  down  an
insurrection  or  to  oppose  an  invasion.  The  governors  were
honoured  and  favored  by  the  lords,  and  many  of  them  con-
tinued in  perpetual  command  in  the  provinces  when  the
Spaniards  came.  I  know  some  of  them  who  are  now  in  office,
and  the  sons  of  others  who  have  inherited  their  posts.

"When  the  Incas  visited  the  provinces  of  their  empire  in
time  of  peace,  they  travelled  in  great  majesty,  seated  in
rich  litters  fitted  with  loose  poles  of  excellent  wood,  long  and
enriched  with  gold  and  silver  work.  Over  the  litter  there
were  two  high  arches  of  gold  set  with  precious  stones,  and
long  mantles  fell  round  all  sides  of  the  litter  so  as  to  cover  it
completely.  If  the  inmate  did  not  wish  to  be  seen,  the
mantles  remained  down,  but  they  were  raised  when  he  got  in
or  came  out.  In  order  that  he  might  see  the  road,  and  have
fresh  air,  holes  were  made  in  the  curtains.  Over  all  parts  of
these  mantles  or  curtains  there  was  rich  ornamentation.     On


62  JOURNEYS    OF   THE   YNCA.

some  were  embroidered  the  sun  and  the  moon,  on  others  great
curving  serpents,  and  what  appeared  to  be  sticks  passing
across  them.  These  were  borne  as  insignia  or  arms.  The
litters  were  raised  on  the  shoulders  of  the  greatest  and  most
important  lords  of  the  kingdom,  and  he  who  was  employed
most  frequently  on  this  duty,  was  held  to  be  most  honoured
and  in  highest  favour.

Eound  the  litter  marched  the  king's  guard  with  the  archers
and  halberdiers,  and  in  front  went  five  thousand  slingers,  while
in  rear  there  were  lancers  with  their  captains.  On  the  flanks  of
the  road,  and  on  the  road  itself,  there  were  faithful  runners
who  kept  a  lookout  and  announced  the  approach  of  the  lord.
So  many  people  came  out  to  see  him  pass,  that  the  hill  sides
were  covered,  and  they  all  blessed  their  sovereign,  raising
a  great  cry  and  shouting  their  accustomed  saying,  which
was: — "Ancha  hatun  apu  intip  churi,canqui za pallet,  apu  tucuy
pacha  ccampa  uyay  sullull."1  This  means,  "  Very  great  and
powerful  lord,  son  of  the  Sun,  thou  only  art  lord,  all  the  world
hears  thee  in  truth."  Besides  this  they  said  other  things  in  a
loud  voice,  insomuch  that  they  went  little  short  of  wor-
shipping their  king  as  a  god.

Along  the  whole  road  Indians  went  in  front,  cleaning  it  in
such  a  way  that  neither  weed  nor  loose  stone  could  be  seen,
but  all  was  made  smooth  and  clean.  The  Inca  travelled  as
far  as  he  chose  each  day,  but  generally  about  four  leagues.
He  stopped  at  certain  places  where  he  could  examine  into  the
state  of  the  country  ;  hearing  cheerfully  those  who  came  with
complaints,  punishing  those  who  had  been  unjust,  and  doing

1  Ancha  is  a  superlative  form.  Hatun,  "  great".  Apu,  "  chief"  or
"lord".  Yntip  is  the  genitive  of  Ynti,  "the  sun".  Churi,  "a  son".
Canqui,  second  person  singular,  present  indicative  of  Cani,  "  I  am".
Sapa,  "only":  lla,  a  particle  expressive  of  love.  Apu,  "  lord".  Tucuy,
"entire".  Pacha,  "  the  earth".  Ccampa,  genitive  of  Cam,  "thou".
Uyay,  from  Uyani,LlI  obey".  Sullull.  "truth".  "Most  high  Lord,
Child  of  the  Sun  Thou  art  the  sole  and  beloved  lord.  The  whole  earth
truly  obeys  thee."


JOURNEYS   OF   THE   YNCA.  63

justice  to  those  who  had  suffered.  Those  who  came  with
him,  did  not  demand  anything,  neither  did  they  go  a  single
pace  off"  the  road.  The  natives  supplied  what  was  necessary,
besides  which  there  was  more  than  enough  of  all  provisions
in  the  storehouses,  so  that  nothing  was  wanting.  By  the
way,  many  men  and  women  and  lads  came  to  do  personal
service  if  it  was  needed.  The  lords  were  thus  carried  from
one  village  to  another,  where  they  were  taken  up  by  those  of
the  next  village,  and  as  it  was  only  one  day,  or  at  most  two,
they  did  not  feel  this  service  to  be  any  hardship.  Travelling
in  this  way,  the  lord  went  over  his  dominions  for  as  long  a
time  as  pleased  him,  seeing  what  was  going  on  with  his  own
eyes,  and  giving  necessary  instructions  on  great  and  import-
ant matters.  He  then  returned  to  Cuzco,  the  principal  city
of  the  whole  empire.


64  SYSTEM    OF   RUNNERS.

CHAPTEE    XXI.

Hovj  the  Posts  of  the  Kingdom  were  arranged.

The  empire  of  Peru  is  so  vast,  that  the  Incas  ordered  a  road
to  be  made,  as  I  have  already  stated  on  many  occasions,  from
Chile  to  Cuzco,  and  even  from  the  river  of  Maule1  as  far  as
the  river  Angasmayu.2  If  the  king  was  at  one  of  these  ex-
treme points,  he  could  be  informed  of  what  had  taken  place
at  the  other  ;  but  for  one  man  to  make  such  a  journey,  even
by  very  long  marches,  it  would  take  a  considerable  time.
At  the  end  of  a  journey,  of  a  1,000  leagues,  there  might  be  no
time  left  to  take  the  needful  measures,  and  to  remedy  any
wrong  step  that  had  been  made.  The  Incas  therefore,  with  a
view  to  the  efficient  government  of  the  empire,  invented  a
system  of  posts,  which  was  the  best  that  could  be  thought  of
or  imagined.  The  system  is  entirely  due  to  the  Inca  Yu-
panqui,  who  was  son  of  Yiracocha  Inca,  and  father  of  Tupac
Ynca,  according  to  the  accounts  given  in  the  songs  of
the  people,  and  in  the  statements  of  the  Orejones.  The
Inca  Yupanqui  not  only  invented  the  system  of  the  posts,
but  he  did  other  great  things,  as  I  shall  presently  relate.

From  the  time  of  his  reign,  throughout  all  the  royal  roads,
there  were  built,  from  half-league  to  half -league,  a  little  more
or  less,  small  houses  well  roofed  with  wood  and  straw ;  and
among  the  mountains  they  were  constructed  against  the
rocks.  Thus  the  roads  were  lined  with  these  small  houses
at  regular  intervals.  The  order  was  that  in  each  house  there
should  be  two  Indians  with  provisions,  stationed  there  by
the  neighbouring  villages.3  They  were  not  permanently  left
there,  but  were  relieved  by  others  from  time  to  time ;  and

1  The  extreme  southern  limit  of  the  empire,  in  Chile.

2  The  northern  limit  of  the  empire,  to  the  north  of  Quito.

3  These  post  runners  were  called  Chasqui,


SYSTEM   OF  RUNNERS.  65

the  system  of  government  was  so  efficient  that  it  was  only-
necessary  to  give  the  order,  to  ensure  that  these  men  should
always  be  at  their  stations  so  long  as  the  Incas  reigned.

Each  province  took  charge  of  the  posts  within  its  boun-
daries, including  those  which  were  on  the  coast  deserts  or
in  the  region  of  snowy  heights.  When  it  was  necessary  to
give  notice  to  the  kings  in  Cuzco,  or  in  any  other  part,
of  any  event  that  had  taken  place,  or  which  was  connected
with  their  service,  the  men  at  the  posts  set  out  from  Quito  or
Tomebamba,  or  from  Chile  or  Caranqui,  or  from  whatever
other  part  of  the  empire,  whether  along  the  coast  or  in  the
mountains,  and  they  ran  with  great  speed,  without  stopping,
each  one  over  his  half  league.  For  the  Indians  who  were
stationed  at  the  post  houses,  were  chosen  from  among  the
most  active  and  swiftest  of  all  their  countrymen.  When  one
approached  the  next  post  house,  he  began  to  call  out  to  the
men  who  were  in  it,  and  to  say  : — "  Start  at  once,  and  go  to
the  next  post  with  news  that  so  and  so  has  happened,  which
such  a  Governor  wishes  to  announce  to  the  Inca."  When  the
other  runner  heard  what  was  shouted  to  him,  he  started  with
the  utmost  speed,  while  the  runner  who  arrived  went  into  the
house  to  rest,  and  to  eat  and  drink  of  what  was  always  kept
in  store  there  ;  while  the  other  did,  in  like  manner,  at  the
next  post  house.

So  well  was  this  running  performed,  that  in  a  short  time
they  knew,  at  a  distance  of  300  leagues,  500,  and  even  800,
what  had  passed,  or  what  was  needed  or  required.  With
such  secrecy  did  the  runners  keep  the  messages  that  were
entrusted  to  them,  that  neither  entreaty  nor  menace  could  ever
extort  a  relation  of  what  they  had  thus  heard,  although  the
news  had  already  passed  onwards.  The  roads  pass  over  rugged
mountains,  over  snow  covered  ridges,  over  stony  wildernesses,
and  forests  full  of  thorny  thickets,  in  such  sort  that  it  may  be
taken  as  quite  certain  that  the  news  could  not  have  been  con-
veyed with  greater  speed  on  swift  horses  or  on  mules,  than  1  >y

F


GG  '  POST   ROADS.

these  foot  posts.  For  the  men  on  foot  have  no  impediments,
and  one  of  them  can  do  more  in  a  day  than  a  mounted
messenger  could  do  in  three.  I  do  not  mean  one  single
Indian,  but  one  running  for  one  half  league,  and  another  for
the  next,  according  to  the  established  order.  And  it  must  be
understood  that  neither  storms  nor  anything  else  prevent
the  due  service  of  the  posts  in  the  wildest  parts,  and  as
soon  as  one  started  another  arrived  to  wait  in  his  place.

In  this  way  the  lords  were  kept  informed  of  all  that
happened  in  every  part  of  the  empire,  and  they  arranged  all
that  was  needful  for  the  ordering  of  the  government,  in  the
same  way.  In  no  other  part  of  the  world  do  we  read  of  any
such  invention  ;  although  I  am  aware  that  when  Xerxes  the
Great  was  defeated,  the  news  was  conveyed  by  men  on  foot,
in  a  short  time.  Certainly  this  system  of  posts  was  very  im-
portant in  Peru,  and  by  it  we  may  well  see  how  good  was  the
government  of  these  lords.  At  the  present  day  some  of  these
post-houses  may  be  seen  near  the  royal  roads,  in  many  parts
of  the  mountains,  and  they  bear  testimony  to  the  truth  of
what  has  been  said.  I  have  also  seen  some  of  the  topos,
which  as  I  have  already  explained,  are  like  heaps  for  land-
marks, except  that  these  are  larger  and  better  made,  and  were
used  for  counting  the  distance,  each  interval  between  them
being  one  and  a  half  leagues  of  Castille.


EMIGRANTS    CALLED    MITIMAES.  G7


CHAPTEE    XXII.


How  the  Mitimaes  were  established,  and  of  the  different  kinds  of
titan,  and  how  they  were  highly  esteemed  by  the  Incas.

In  this  chapter  I  wish  to  describe  that  which  appertains  to
those  Indians  called  mitimaes,  for  many  things  are  related
concerning  them  in  Peru,  and  they  were  honoured  and
privileged  by  the  Incas,  being  next  in  rank  to  the  Orejones,
while  in  the  History  which  they  entitle  Of  the  Indies,  it  is
written  by  the  author,1  that  they  were  slaves  of  Huayna
Capac.  Into  this  error  all  those  writers  fall  who  depend  upon
the  relations  of  others,  without  having  such  knowledge  of
the  land  concerning  which  they  write,  as  to  be  able  to  affirm
the  truth.

In  most,  if  not  in  all  parts  of  the  provinces  of  Peru  there
were  and  still  are  these  mitimaes,  and  we  understand  that
there  were  three  classes  of  them.  The  system  conduced
greatly  to  the  maintenance,  welfare,  and  peopling  of  the
empire.  In  considering  how  and  in  what  manner  these
mitimaes  were  stationed,  and  the  nature  of  their  services,  my
readers   will  appreciate  the  way  in  which  the  Incas  under-

1  Francisco  Lopez  de  Gomara  was  the  author  in  question.  In  the
chapter  referred  to,  entitled  "  The  Rule  made  by  Gasca  respecting  the
Tribute",  he  confuses  the  mitimaes  with  the  yanaconas.  The  latter  were
not  exactly  slaves,  but  hereditary  domestic  servants.  The  words  of
Gomara  are — "Also  he  left  many  whom  they  call  mitimaes,  and  who  are
in  the  position  of  slaves  in  the  manner  they  were  held  to  service  by
Guainacapa,  and  he  ordered  the  others  to  return  to  their  homes.  But
many  of  them  wished  for  nothing  but  to  remain  with  their  masters,  say-
ing  that  they  were  well  with  them,  and  could  learn  Christianity  by  hear-
ing mass  and  sermons,  and  could  earn  money  by  selling,  buying,  and  by
service."     Clearly  he  is  referring  to  the  yanaconas,  not  to  the  mitimaes.

This  criticism  of  our  author  proves  that  this  Second  Part  was  written
after  1552,  in  which  year  the  first  edition  of  the  work  of  Gomara  was
published.

F  2


68  EMIGRATION   POLICY.

stood  how  best  to  order  and  regulate  the  government  of  so
many  regions  and  provinces.

Mitimaes  is  the  name  of  those  who  are  transported  from  one
land  to  another.  The  first  kind  of  mitimaes,  as  instituted  by
the  Incas,  were  those  who  were  moved  to  other  countries,
after  a  new  province  had  been  conquered.  A  certain  number
of  the  conquered  people  were  ordered  to  people  another  land
of  the  same  climate  and  conditions  as  their  original  country.
If  it  was  cold,  they  were  sent  to  a  cold  region,  if  warm,  to  a
warm  one,  where  they  were  given  lands  and  houses  such
as  those  they  had  left.  This  was  done  that  order  might  be
secured,  and  that  the  natives  might  quickly  understand  how
they  must  serve  and  behave  themselves,  and  learn  all  that
tho  older  vassals  understood  concerning  their  duties,  to  be
peaceful  and  quiet,  not  hasty  to  take  up  arms.  At  the  same
time,  an  equal  number  of  settlers  was  taken  from  a  part
which  had  been  peaceful  and  civilized  for  a  long  time,  and
sent  into  the  newly  conquered  province,  and  among  the
recently  subjugated  people.  There  they  were  expected  to
instruct  their  neighbours  in  the  ways  of  peace  and  civiliza-
tion ;  and  in  this  way,  both  by  the  emigration  of  some  and  the
arrival  of  others,  all  was  made  secure  under  the  royal  gover-
nors and  lieutenants.

The  Incas  knew  how  much  all  people  feel  the  removal
from  their  country  and  their  home  associations,  and  in  order
that  they  might  take  such  banishment  with  good  will,  they  did
honour  to  those  who  were  selected  as  emigrants,  gave  bracelets
of  gold  and  silver  to  many  of  them,  and  clothes  of  cloth  and
feathers  to  the  women.  They  were  also  privileged  in  many
other  ways.  Among  the  colonists  there  were  spies,  who  took
note  of  the  conversations  and  schemes  of  the  natives,  and
supplied  the  information  to  the  governors,  who  sent  it  to
Cuzco  without  delay,  to  be  submitted  to  the  Inca.  In  this
way  all  was  made  secure,  for  the  natives  feared  the  mitimaes,
while  the  mitimaes  suspected  the  natives,  and  all  learnt  to


MILITARY   EMIGRANTS.  69

serve  and  to  obey  quietly.  If  there  were  turmoils  or  disturb-
ances they  were  severely  punished.  Among  the  Incas  there
were  some  who  were  revengeful,  and  who  punished  without
moderation  and  with  great  cruelty.

The  mitimacs  were  employed  to  take  charge  of  the  flocks
of  the  Inca  and  of  the  Sun,  others  to  make  cloth,  others  as
workers  in  silver,  and  others  as  quarrynien  and  labourers.
Some  also  were  sculptors  and  gravers  of  images ;  in  short,
they  were  required  to  do  such  service  as  was  most  useful,  and
in  the  performance  of  which  they  were  most  skilfuL  Orders
were  also  given  that  mitimacs  should  go  into  the  forests  of
the  Andes  to  sow  maize  and  to  cultivate  coca  and  fruit-trees.
In  this  way  the  people  of  the  regions  where  it  was  too  cold
to  grow  these  things  were  supplied  with  them.

The  second  class  of  mitimaes  were  those  who  formed  garri-
sons under  captains,  some  of  whom  were  Orejones,  on  the
frontiers,  in  forests  east  of  the  Andes.  For  the  Indians,  such
as  the  Chunchos,  Moxos,  Chiriguanas,  and  others  whose
lands  are  on  the  slopes  eastward  of  the  Andes,  are  wild  and
very  warlike.  Many  of  them  eat  human  flesh;  and  they
certainly  came  forth  to  make  war  and  destroy  the  villages
and  fields  of  their  neighbours,  carrying  off  those  they  could
capture  as  prisoners.  To  guard  against  this  evil,  there  were
garrisons  in  many  parts,  in  which  there  were  some  Orejones.
In  order  that  the  burden  of  war  might  not  fall  upon  one
tribe,  and  that  they  might  not  be  able  quickly  to  concert  a
rising  or  rebellion,  it  was  arranged  that  the  mitimacs  should
be  taken  from  provinces  that  were  conveniently  situated,  to
serve  as  soldiers  in  these  garrisons ;  whose  duty  it  was  to  hold
and  defend  the  forts,  called  pucaras,  if  it  should  be  necessary.
Provisions  were  supplied  to  the  soldiers  of  the  maize  and
other  food  which  the  neighbouring  districts  paid  as  tribute.
The  recompense  for  their  service  consisted  in  orders  that
were  given,  on  certain  occasions,  to  bestow  upon  them
woollen  clothing,  feathers,  or   bracelets  of  gold  and  silver,


70  PEOPLING    OF   DESERTS.

after  they  had  shewn  themselves  to  he  valiant.  They  were
also  presented  with  women  from  among  the  great  number
that  were  kept,  in  each  province,  for  the  service  of  the  Ynca,
and  as  most  of  these  were  beautiful  they  were  highly  valued.
Besides  this,  the  soldiers  were  given  other  things  of  little
value,  which  the  governors  of  provinces  were  required  to
provide,  for  they  had  authority  over  the  captains  whom  these
mitimaes  were  obliged  to  obey.

Besides  the  frontiers  already  mentioned,  they  maintained
these  garrisons  in  the  borders  of  Chachapoyas  and  Bracamoros,
and  in  Quito,  and  Caranque,  which  is  beyond  Quito  to  the
northward,  next  to  the  province  called  Popayan,  and  in  other
parts  where  it  was  necessary,  as  well  in  Chili,  as  in  the  coast
valleys  and  the  mountains.

The  other  manner  of  stationing  mitimaes  was  more  strange.
The  system  of  planting  captains  and  garrisons  on  the  frontiers,
although  done  on  a  large  scale,  is  no  new  thing,  for  there  are
not  wanting  other  governments  who  have  adopted  a  similar
policy.  But  the  other  manner  of  colonising  was  different.
In  the  course  of  the  conquests  made  by  the  Yncas,  either  in
the  mountains,  or  plains,  or  valleys,  where  a  district  appeared
to  be  suitable  for  cultivation,  with  a  good  climate  and  fertile
soil,  which  was  still  desert  and  uninhabited,  orders  were  at
once  given  that  as  many  colonists  as  would  be  sufficient  to
people  it  should  be  brought  from  a  neighbouring  province
with  a  similar  climate.  The  land  was  then  divided  amongst
them,  and  they  were  provided  with  flocks  and  all  the  provi-
sions they  needed,  until  they  had  time  to  reap  their  own
harvests.  These  colonists  worked  so  well,  and  the  king  re-
quired their  labours  to  be  proceeded  with  so  diligently,  that
in  a  short  time  the  new  district  was  peopled  and  cultivated,
insomuch  that  it  caused  great  content  to  behold  it.  In  this
way  many  valleys  on  the  coast  and  ravines  on  the  mountains
were  peopled,  both  such  as  had  been  personally  examined  by
the  Yncas,  and  such  as  they  knew  of  from  report.    No  tribute


ANTIQUITY    OF    THE   EMIGRATION    SYSTEM.  71

was  required  from  the  new  settlers  for  some  years ;  and  they
were  provided  with  women,  provisions,  and  coca,  that  they
might,  with  more  goodwill,  be  induced  to  establish  them-
selves in  their  new  homes.

In  this  way  there  were  very  few  cultivable  lands  that
remained  desert  in  the  time  of  the  Incas,  but  all  were
peopled,  as  is  well  known  to  the  first  Christians  who
entered  the  country.  Assuredly,  it  causes  no  small  grief  to
reflect  that  these  Incas,  being  gentiles  and  idolaters,  should
have  established  such  good  order  in  the  government  and
maintenance  of  such  vast  provinces,  while  we,  being  Christ-
ians, have  destroyed  so  many  kingdoms.  For  wherever  the
Christians  have  passed,  discovering  and  conquering,  nothing
appears  but  destruction.

It  must  be  understood  that  the  city  of  Cuzco  was  also  full
of  strangers,  all  occupied  in  some  industry.  As  there  were
many  different  tribes  and  lineages  of  men,  it  was  necessary  to
guard  against  risings  or  other  troubles  which  would  be  con-
trary to  the  wishes  of  the  king.  To  this  day  there  are  in
Cuzco  men  of  Chachapoyas  and  Cariaris,  and  people  from
other  parts,  descended  from  the  settlers  who  had  been  placed
there.

It  is  held  as  certain,  that  these  systems  of  colonisation  have
been  in  use  since  the  days  of  Inca  Yupanqui,  the  same  who
established  the  posts,  and  the  first  who  planned  the  enrich-
ment of  the  temple  of  Curicancha,  as  will  be  recounted  in  its
place.  Although  some  Indians  say  that  the  mitimaes  were
planted  from  the  time  of  Viracocha  Inca,  the  father  of  Inca
Yupanqui,  those  may  believe  it  who  please  to  do  so.  For  my
part,  I  took  such  pains  to  ascertain  the  facts,  that  I  do  not
hesitate  to  afhrni  the  colonising  system  to  have  been  insti-
tuted by  Inca  Yupanqui.  Such  is  my  belief;  and  this  being
the  case  we  will  now  pass  on  to  another  part  of  the  subject.


72  DISTINGUISHING   HEAD-DRESSES.


CHAPTER  XXIII.


Of  the  great  preparations  that  were  made  when  the  Lords  set
out  from  Cuzco  on  warlike  expeditions ;  and  how  robbers
were  punished.

In  former  chapters  I  related  the  manner  in  which  the  lords
travelled,  when  they  went  to  examine  the  condition  of  the
provinces ;  and  now  I  wish  to  explain  to  the  reader  the  way
in  which  the  same  lords  set  forth  on  their  warlike  expeditions.
As  these  Indians  are  all  brown  and  noisy,1  and  are  so
like  each  other,  as  we,  who  have  dealings  with  them,  can
see  at  the  present  day ;  in  order  that  they  might  be  intelligible
to  each  other,  it  was  ordered  that  they  should  all  speak  the
language  of  Cuzco.  If  this  rule  was  not  made,  each  man
would  talk  in  his  native  tongue  when  the  Orejones  visited  the
provinces.  The  same  rules  applied  to  the  camps.  It  is  clear
that  when  the  Emperor  assembles  a  camp  in  Italy,  and  the
army  consists  of  Spaniards,  Germans,  Burgundians,  Flemings,
and  Italians,  each  would  speak  in  his  own  language.  Here
tliis  confusion  was  avoided.  Each  tribe  was  also  distinguished
by  differences  in  the  head-dress.  If  they  were  Yuncas  of  the
coast,  they  went  muffled  like  gipsies.  The  Collas  wore  caps  in
the  shape  of  a  pump  box  made  of  wool.  The  Canas  wore
another  kind  of  cap,  larger,  and  of  greater  width.  The  Canaris
had  crowns  of  thin  lathes,  like  those  used  for  a  sieve.  The
Huancas  had  short  ropes,  which  hung  down  as  low  as  the  chin,
with  the  hair  plaited.  The  Canchis  had  wide  fillets,  red  or
black,  passing  over  the  forehead.  These  and  all  other  tribes
were  known,  one  from  the  other,  by  their  head-dresses,  and
these  were  so  clear  and  distinct  that,  when  fifteen  thousand
men  assembled,  one  tribe  could  easily  be  distinguished  from
another.     To  this  day,  when  we  see  an  assemblage  of  people,

1  Alharaquientos ;   those  who   make   a  great   noise,  from  alharaca,

confused  noise.


ORDER    OF    MARCHING.  73

we  presently  say  that  these  come  from  such  a  part  and  those
from  such  another  part ;  for  in  this  way,  as  I  have  explained,
they  were  known  one  from  another.

The  kings  established  the  following  order  in  their  wars,
that  the  great  concourse  of  people  might  not  cause  confusion.
In  the  great  square  of  Cuzco  was  the  stone  of  war,  in  the
shape  of  a  sugar  loaf,  well  enclosed,  and  full  of  gold.  The
king  came  forth,  with  his  councillors  and  favourites,  to  a
place  where  the  chiefs  of  provinces  were  assembled,  to  learn
from  them  who  were  most  valiant  among  their  people,  and
best  fitted  to  be  leaders  and  captains.  One  Indian  had  charge
of  ten  men,  another  received  authority  over  fifty,  another  over
a  hundred,  another  over  five  hundred,  another  over  a  thousand,
another  over  five  thousand,  and  another  over  ten  thousand.
All  these  had  authority  over  men  of  their  own  tribe,  and  all
obeyed  the  captain-general  of  the  king.  Thus,  if  it  was  in-
tended to  send  ten  thousand  men  to  any  battle  or  campaign,
it  was  only  necessary  to  open  the  mouth  and  give  the  order ;
and  the  same  with  five  thousand  or  any  other  number ;  and
in  the  same  way  with  smaller  parties  for  exploring  the
ground  or  going  the  rounds,  when  fewer  men  were  required.
Each  captain  carried  his  banner,  and  some  led  men  armed
with  slings,  others  with  lances,  darts,  ayllos  or  slings,  and
some  with  heavily  knobbed  sticks.

When  the  Lord  of  Cuzco  set  out,  the  greatest  order  was
preserved,  even  when  there  were  three  hundred  thousand  men
in  his  army.  The  march  was  regulated  each  day,  from  tamho
to  tambo,  where  sufficient  food  was  found  for  all,  so  that  none
were  forgotten,  besides  arms,  sandals,  tents  for  the  soldiers,
and  porters  and  women  to  carry  the  loads  from  tambo  to
tambo.  The  lord  lodged  in  a  house  provided  at  each  stage,
with  the  guard  near  him,  and  the  rest  of  the  soldiers  all
round ;  and  there  were  always  dances  and  drinking  bouts,  the
soldiers  rejoicing  among  themselves.

The  natives  of  the  districts  through  which  the  army  passed


74  PUNISHMENT   OF   OFFENCES.

were  not  allowed  to  be  absent,  or  to  fail  in  supplying  all  that
was  wanted,  on  pain  of  severe  punishment.  But  neither
soldiers  nor  captains,  nor  even  the  sons  of  the  Incas,  were
allowed  to  ill-use  or  oppress  the  people,  or  to  take  from
them  so  much  as  a  grain  of  maize ;  and  if  this  command  was
infringed,  the  punishment  was  death.  Bobbery  was  punished
by  whipping  with  greater  severity  than  in  Spain,  and  fre-
quently the  punishment  of  death  was  inflicted.  All  things
were  ordered  and  regulated  on  an  established  system.  The
natives  did  not  fail  to  supply  the  soldiers  sufficiently,  while
the  soldiers  had  no  desire  to  do  evil  or  to  rob,  fearing  the
punishment.  If  there  were  any  outbreaks  of  rebellion  or
mutiny,  the  principal  ringleaders  were  brought  to  Cuzco,  well
guarded,  where  they  were  cast  into  a  prison  full  of  wild
animals,  such  as  serpents,  vipers,  tigers,  bears,  and  other  evil
creatures.  If  any  one  denied  the  accusation,  it  was  said  that
those  serpents  would  do  him  no  harm,  but  that  if  he  lied  they
would  kill  him  ;  and  this  they  held  and  kept  for  certain.  In
this  dreadful  prison  they  always  kept  many  people  for  crimes
they  had  committed,  whom  they  looked  at  from  time  to  time.
If  their  fate  had  been  that  they  had  not  been  bitten  by  any
of  the  wild  creatures,  they  were  taken  out,  great  sorrow  was
shown  at  their  evil  case,  and  they  were  allowed  to  return  to
their  homes.  In  these  prisons  there  were  keepers  sufficient
to  guard  the  captives,  and  to  give  food  as  well  to  them  as  to
the  evil  lizards.  Certainly,  I  laughed  heartily  when  I  heard
that  they  used  to  have  this  prison  in  Cuzco ;  but  although
they  told  me  the  name,  I  do  not  remember  it,  and  for  that
reason  I  have  not  put  it  down.1

1  It  was  called  Samca-huasi,  or  samca-cancha.


PARTITION    OF   LAND.  10


CHAPTER  XXIV.


How  the  Incas  ordered  the  people  to  form  settled  towns,  dividing
the  lands  concerning  which  there  tuns  any  dispute,  and  how
it  was  ordered  that  cdl  should  speak  the  language  of  Cuzco.

In  former  times,  before  the  Incas  reigned,  it  is  well  under-
stood that  the  natives  of  these  provinces  had  no  towns  as  is
now  the  case,  but  only  strong  places  with  forts,  which  they
call  pucaras,  whence  they  came  forth  to  make  war  one  with
another ;  and  so  they  always  passed  their  time,  living  in  great
trouble  and  unrest.  The  Incas,  reigning  over  them,  con-
sidered their  manner  of  living  to  be  evil,  and  induced  them,
partly  by  menaces  and  partly  by  favours,  to  see  the  wisdom
of  ceasing  to  live  like  savages,  but  rather  as  reasonable  beings,
establishing  themselves  in  towns,  both  on  the  plains  of  the
coast  and  in  the  mountains,  and  settling  on  the  land  accord-
ing to  the  regulations  that  were  made.  In  this  way  the
Indians  abandoned  the  pucaras  in  which  they  originally
dwelt,  and  formed  themselves  into  communities  in  towns,  as
well  in  the  valleys  of  the  coast  as  in  the  mountains,  and  on
the  plain  of  the  Collao.  The  Incas  caused  the  boundaries  of
fields  to  be  set  up,  in  order  to  prevent  quarrels,  settling  the
land  which  each  man  was  to  occupy,  for  their  knowledge  and
for  that  of  those  who  might  be  born  after  them.  The  Indians
at  the  present  day  clearly  state  that  this  division  was  made.
They  told  me  at  Xauxa  that  one  of  the  Incas  divided  the
plains  and  valleys  amongst  them  which  they  now  hold,  and
that  this  arrangement  was  then  in  force,  and  would  continue.
In  many  places  in  the  mountains  there  are  irrigating  channels
taken  from  the  rivers  with  great  skill  and  ingenuity,  while
all  the  towns  were  full  of  lodgings  and  store-houses  of  the
kings,  as  I  have  already  stated  in  many  places.

It  was  understood  by  them  that  it  would  be  very  trouble-


76  A   GENERAL   LANGUAGE.

some  to  travel  for  great  distances  over  the  land,  and  at  each
league  to  have  a  new  language ;  while  it  would  be  very  dif-
ficult to  find  interpreters  for  all  of  thern.  Selecting  the  best
language,  the  Incas  ordered,  on  pain  of  serious  punishment,
that  all  the  natives  of  the  empire  should  understand  the
tongue  that  was  spoken  at  Cuzco,  as  well  the  men  as  the
women.  Even  a  child  had  scarcely  left  the  breast  of  its
mother  before  they  began  to  teach  it  the  language  which  it
was  bound  to  know.  Although  this  rule  was  difficult  to  en-
force at  first,  and  many  only  wished  to  talk  in  their  own
native  tongue,  yet  the  power  of  the  kings  was  such  that  they
succeeded  in  enforcing  their  intention,  and  the  people  found
it  to  be  best  to  comply  with  their  order.  So  completely  was
this  policy  enforced,  that  in  a  few  years  the  language  was
understood  and  used  over  an  extent  of  more  than  twelve
hundred  leagues.  Yet  although  this  language  was  used,  all
the  tribes  also  spoke  their  own,  which  were  so  numerous  that
if  they  should  be  written  down  it  would  not  be  believed.

When  a  captain  of  Cuzco,  or  some  one  of  the  Orejones,  set
out  to  take  an  account  of  the  revenues,  or  to  act  as  judge  on
commission  among  the  provinces,  or  on  any  other  duty,  he
did  not  speak  any  other  language  than  that  of  Cuzco  to  the
people,  nor  they  to  him.  This  language  is  very  good,  concise,
and  comprehensive,  and  composed  of  many  words.  It  is  so
clear,  that  in  the  few  days  that  I  studied  it,  I  knew  sufficient
to  ask  for  many  things  in  the  part  where  I  wished  to
travel.     They  call


A  man

-

Runa.

Night    -

-  Tufa.

A  woman

-

■  Huarmi.

Head     -

-  Uma.

A  father

-

■  Yaya.

Ear

-  Rlncri.

A  brother

-

Huaitque.

Eye       -

-  Naui.

A  sister

-

Nana.

Nose

-  Senca.

The  moon

(mouth)

-  Quilla.

Teeth     -

-  Quiru.

The  year

-

Iluata.

Arm

-  Man  in

Day       -

-

Punchau.

Leg       -         -

-  Chaqv.

A    GENERAL   LANGUAGE.  77

I  only  insert  these  words  in  my  chronicle  because  I  now
see,  that  even  as  regards  the  language  that  was  formerly  used
in  Spain,  they  are  varying  and  altering  it  bit  by  bit ;  and  as
regards  the  days  that  are  to  come,  it  is  only  God  that  knows
what  will  happen  in  them.  If  the  time  should  come  when  a
language  which  was  used  by  so  many  people  shall  be  forgotten,
it  should  at  least  be  known  which  words  belonged  to  the  first
and  general  language,  and  whence  they  came.  Further,  I
declare  that  it  was  a  great  advantage  to  the  Spaniards  to  have
found  this  language,  for  with  it  they  could  travel  in  all  direc-
tions ;  but  now  in  some  places  it  is  beginning  to  be  lost.


78  ABSENCE   OF   VICIOUS   PRACTICES.


CHAPTEE    XXV.

How  the  Incas  were  free  from  the  abominable  sin,  and  from
other  evil  customs  ivhich  have  been  seen  to  prevail  in  the
world,  among  other  princes.

In  this  kingdom  of  Peru,  the  public  fame  among  all  the
natives  is  that  the  abominable  sin  was  practised  in  some  of
the  villages  of  the  district  of  Pueblo  Viejo,  as  well  as  in  other
lands  where  there  were  evil  people,  as  in  the  rest  of  the
world.  I  shall  record  a  great  virtue  in  these  Incas ;  for,  being
lords  with  such  freedom,  and  with  no  one  to  whom  to  give  an
account,  besides  being  able  to  take  their  pleasure  with  women,
night  and  day,  and  enjoy  themselves  as  their  fancies  dictated,
it  has  never  been  alleged,  or  even  hinted,  that  any  of  them
committed  the  above  crime.  On  the  contrary,  they  abhorred
those  who  were  guilty  of  it,  looking  upon  them  as  vile
wretches  for  glorying  in  such  filthy  conduct.  Not  only  were
they  free  from  such  vices  in  their  own  persons,  but  they
would  not  permit  any  one  who  was  guilty  of  such  practices  to
remain  in  the  royal  houses  or  palaces.  I  believe,  also,  and  I
have  heard  it  related  that,  even  if  it  came  to  their  knowledge
that  any  one  had  committed  an  offence  of  that  kind,  they
punished  it  with  such  severity  that  it  was  known  to  all.

It  therefore  should  not  be  doubted,  but  rather  believed  im-
plicitly, that  this  vice  was  unknown  among  the  Orejones  and
many  other  nations.  Those  who  have  written  generally  of
the  Indians,  condemning  them  for  being  guilty  of  this  sin,
should  retract  what  they  have  said  as  regards  many  nations
who  are  innocent.  "With  the  exception  of  Puerto  Viejo,
sinners  of  this  class  were  unknown  throughout  Peru,  except
that,  as  is  the  case  in  all  countries,  there  may  be  eight  or  ten
here  and  there  who  do  evil  secretly.  Those  who  were  kept
as  priests  in  the  temples,  with  whom  it  was  rumoured  that


ABSENCE    OF    CANNIBALISM.  79

the  lords  joined  in  company  on  days  of  festivity,  did  not  medi-
tate the  committing  of  such  sin,  but  only  the  offering  of
sacrifice  to  the  demon.  If  the  Incas,  by  chance,  had  some
knowledge  of  such  proceedings  in  the  temple,  they  may  have
ignored  them,  thinking  that  it  was  enough  if  they  ordered
that  the  Sun  and  their  other  gods  should  be  worshipped  in
all  parts,  without  considering  it  necessary  to  prohibit  other
ancient  customs  and  religions,  to  abandon  which  would  have
been  as  bad  as  death  itself,  to  those  who  were  born  in  their
practice.

We  understand  that  in  ancient  times,  before  the  Yncas
reigned,  the  inhabitants  of  many  provinces  went  about  like
savages ;  coming  forth  to  make  war  upon  each  other,  and
eating  their  prisoners,  as  is  now  the  case  in  the  province  of
Anna1  and  others  in  that  neighbourhood.  But  as  soon  as  the
Incas  began  to  reign,  being  a  reasonable  people,  with  good
and  holy  customs  and  laws,  they  not  only  did  not  themselves
eat  such  food,  but  they  exerted  their  power  to  put  a  stop  to
it  among  all  the  people  with  whom  they  came  in  contact,  with
many  of  whom  it  was  much  esteemed.  Such  was  their  energy,
that  in  a  short  time  the  practice  was  forgotten  throughout
their  vast  empire,  where  no  such  food  had  been  eaten  for
many  years  before  the  Spaniards  came.  Those  who  have  now
succeeded  the  Incas  give  evidence  that  they  confened  a  great
benefit  by  not  imitating  their  ancestors  in  eating  such  food,
in  the  sacrifices  of  men  and  children.

Some  have  published — among  those  who  hastily  write
down  what  they  hear — that  the  Incas,  on  their  days  of  festi-
val, killed  a  thousand  or  two  thousand  children,  and  a  greater
number  of  Indians.  This  and  other  things  are  proofs  that  we
Spaniards  falsely  impute  crimes  to  the  Indians,  using  the
stories  they  recount  to  us  to  justify  our  ill-treatment  of  them
and  the  bad  usage  they  have  suffered  at  our  hands.  I  do  not  say
that  they  did  not  sacrifice,  and  that  they  did  not  kill  men  and
1  See  chapter  xix  of  my  translation  of  the  First  Book.  p.  71.


80  MORALITY   OF   THE   YNCAS.

children  in  such  sacrifices ;  but  it  was  not  in  the  way  that
has  been  asserted,  nor  were  the  victims  so  numerous.  They
sacrificed  animals  from  their  flocks,  but  fewer  human  beings
than  I  thought,  as  I  shall  explain  in  its  place.

I  know,  from  the  statements  of  the  aged  Orejones,  that
these  Incas  were  innocent  of  any  abominable  sin,  that  they
did  not  practise  the  evil  custom  of  eating  human  flesh,  nor
were  they  guilty  of  public  vices  and  irregularities.  On  the
contrary,  they  punished  such  crimes  in  others.  If  God  had
permitted  that  one  influenced  by  Christian  zeal,  and  not  by
avarice,  should  have  given  them  complete  knowledge  of  our
sacred  religion,  they  were  a  people  who  would  have  been  im-
pressed by  it,  as  we  now  see  in  the  good  order  in  which  con-
version works.  But  we  must  leave  what  has  been  done  to
the  judgment  of  God,  who  knows  all ;  and  in  what  may  be
done  hereafter  we  must  beseech  Him  to  give  us  grace  to
enable  us  in  some  measure  to  repay  those  people  to  whom  we
owe  so  much,  and  who  had  given  such  slight  offence  to  justify
the  injury  we  have  done  them,  Peru  and  the  rest  of  the  Indies
being  so  many  leagues  from  Spain,  and  separated  by  so  vast
an  ocean.


PUNISHMENT   OF   CRIME.  81


CHAPTER   XXVI.


How  the  Lie/*  employed  councillors  and  executors  of  justice  ;  and.
of  their  method  of  reckoning  time.

As  Cuzco  was  the  principal  city  in  all  Peru,  where  the  kings
resided  during  the  greater  part  of  their  time,  many  of  the
chief  people  of  the  empire  lived  there  also,  whose  knowledge
and  ability  fitted  them  for  royal  councillors.  All  affirm  that,
before  any  measure  of  importance  was  decided  upon,  these
councillors  were  consulted.  The  most  trustworthy  travelled
much,  in  all  parts,  inspecting  the  roads,  superintending  the
government  of  the  city,  seeing  that  no  offences  were  over-
looked, and  that  culprits  were  punished.  The  Incas  under-
stood so  well  the  administration  of  justice  that  no  one  ven-
tured to  commit  an  offence.  This  is  to  be  understood  with
regard  to  such  crimes  as  robbery,  rape,  or  conspiracy.  But
many  provinces  carried  on  wars,  the  one  with  the  other,  and
the  Incas  were  not  always  able  to  prevent  them.

Justice  was  executed  at  the  river  which  flows  near  Cuzco,
on  those  who  were  taken  there,  or  who  were  brought  as
prisoners  from  other  parts.  Here  their  heads  were  cut  off,  or
death  was  inflicted  in  other  ways.  Mutinies  and  conspiracies
were  punished  more  severely  than  other  crimes.  Thieves,
and  those  who  were  convicted  as  such,  were  also  severely
punished,  and  their  women  and  children  were  looked  upon  as
degraded.

In  observing  natural  things  these  Indians  were  much  ad-
vanced, as  well  the  movements  of  the  sun  as  of  the  moon.
Some  of  them  said  that  there  were  four  great  heavens,  and  all
affirm  that  the  seat  and  residence  of  the  great  God,  the
Creator  of  the  world,  is  in  the  heaven.  I  often  asked  them  if
they  understood  that  the  world  would  some  day  come  to  an
end,  but  at  this  they  laughed.     For  they  understand  little  on

G


82  ASTRONOMICAL   KNOWLEDGE.

this  subject ;  and  if  they  know  anything,  it  is  what  God  per-
mits the  devil  to  tell  them.  They  call  the  whole  world  pacha,
understanding  the  movements  of  the  sun,  and  the  increasing
and  waning  of  the  moon.  They  count  the  year  by  the  moon,
and  call  it  huata,  consisting  of  twelve  moons.  They  had
small  towers,  many  of  them  near  Cuzco,  but  now  in  a  ruined
state,  and  by  the  shadow  which  the  sun  threw  from  them  they
calculated  the  time  of  sowing  and  other  matters.1  These
Indians  watched  the  heavens  and  the  signs  very  constantly,
which  made  them  such  great  soothsayers.  When  the  stars  fall,
great  is  the  cry  that  they  make,  and  the  murmurings  be-
tween one  and  another.

1  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  (i,  p.  177)  gives  a  fuller  account  of  these
solstitial  towers ;  and  Cieza  de  Leon  himself  refers  to  them  in  his  first
part  (chap,  xcii,  p.  225).     Acosta  also  describes  them  (ii,  p.  395).


TEMPLE   OF   THE   SUN.


CHAPTER   XXVII.

Which  traits  of  the  riches  of  the  temple  of  Curicancha,  and  of
the  veneration  in  whdch  the  Incas  held  it.

Having  completed  an  account  of  some  things  that  it  is  neces-
sary for  my  purpose  that  I  should  describe,  we  will  then
return  to  the  succession  of  the  kings  that  ruled  down  to
Huascar,  recounting  the  events  of  each  reign  with  great
brevity.  But  now  I  will  speak  of  the  great,  most  wealthy,
and  most  renowned  temple  of  Curicancha,  which  was  the
principal  one  in  all  these  kingdoms.

It  is  a  received  fact  among  the  Indians  that  this  temple  is
as  ancient  as  the  city  of  Cuzco  itself.  But  the  Inca  Yupanqui,
son  of  Viracocha  Inca,  increased  its  riches  to  the  extent  in
which  it  was  found  when  the  Christians  arrived  in  Peru.
Most  of  the  treasure  was  brought  to  Caxamarca  for  the
ransom  of  Atahualpa,  as  we  shall  relate  in  its  place.  The
Orejones  say  that  after  the  doubtful  war  between  the  inha-
bitants of  Cuzco  and  the  Chancas,  who  are  now  chiefs  of  the
province  of  Andahuaylas,  the  Inca  Yupanqui  found  him-
self very  rich  and  powerful,  and  people  came  to  serve  him
from  all  parts,  bringing  presents;  and  the  provinces  con-
tributed great  service  in  gold  and  silver.  For  in  those
days  there  were  very  rich  mines  and  veins  of  the  precious
metals.  Finding  himself  so  rich  and  powerful,  the  Inca  re-
solved to  ennoble  the  house  of  the  Sun,  which  in  their  lan-
guage is  called  Inti-huasi,  and  also  Curi-cancha, meaning  "the
place  of  gold",  and  to  increase  its  wealth.  That  all  those  who
may  see  and  read  this  may  understand  how  rich  the  temple
at  Cuzco  was,  and  the  merit  of  those  who  built  and  completed
such  great  things,  I  here  will  preserve  the  memory  of  it.  I
will  relate  what  I  saw,  and  what  I  heard  from  many  of  the


84  TEMPLE    OF    THE    SUN.

first  Christians,  who  received  the  account  from  the  three  men1
that  first  came  from  Caxamarca,  and  who  saw  everything.
But  the  Indians  themselves  tell  us  so  much,  and  are  so  truth-
ful, that  other  evidence  is  unnecessary.

This  temple  was  more  than  four  hundred  paces  in  circuit,
entirely  surrounded  by  a  strong  wall.  The  whole  edifice  was
of  excellent  masonry,  the  stones  very  well  placed  and  fixed.
Some  of  the  stones  were  very  large.  There  was  no  mortar,
either  of  earth  or  lime,  but  a  sort  of  bitumen  with  which
they  used  to  fix  their  stones.  The  stones  themselves  are  so
well  worked  that  no  joining  or  cement  can  be  seen.  In  all
Spain  I  have  not  seen  anything  that  could  be  compared  with
the  masonry  of  these  walls,  except  the  tower  which  they  call
Calahorra,  near  the  bridge  of  Cordova,  and  a  work  which  I
saw  at  Toledo,  when  I  came  there  to  present  the  First  Part  of
my  Chronicle  to  the  Prince  Don  Felipe.2  I  allude  to  the
hospital  which  the  Archbishop  of  Toledo,  Tavera,  ordered  to
be  built.3  Although  these  edifices  have  some  resemblance  to
those  I  have  mentioned,  yet  they  are  the  best  as  regards  the
masonry  of  the  walls,  the  stones  being  so  admirably  worked,
and  placed  with  such  great  ingenuity.  The  encircling  wall
was  straight,  and  very  well  traced  out.

The  stone  appeared  to  me  to  be  of  a  dusky  or  black  colour,
and  most  excellent  for  building  purposes.  The  wall  had
many  openings,  and  the  doorways  were  very  well  carved.
Round  the  wall,  half  way  up,  there  was  a  band  of  gold,  two
palmos  wide  and  four  dedos  in  thickness.  The  doorways  and
doors  were  covered  with  plates  of  the  same  metal.     Within

1  According  to  Cieza  de  Leon,  these  three  men  were  Martin  Bueno,
Zarate,  and  Pedro  de  Moguer.  Pedro  Pizarro,  an  eye-witness,  says
there  were  only  two,  Martin  Bueno  and  Pedro  de  Moguer.  But  see  the
note  at  page  9.  2  In  155*2.

3  The  Hospital  of  San  Juan  Bautista.  It  was  commenced  on  Decem-
ber 9th,  1541,  and  up  to  1624  the  first  Mass  had  not  yet  been  said  in
its  chapel  The  activity  in  forwarding  the  work  ceased  on  the  death  of
the  founder,  Archbishop  Tavara,  in  1545.


TEMPLE    OF   THE    SUN.  85

there  were  four  houses,  not  very  large,  but  with  walls  of  the
same  kind,  and  covered  with  plates  of  gold  within  and  with-
out, as  well  as  the  woodwork.  The  covering  was  of  straw,
which  served  as  a  roof.  Against  the  wall  there  were  two
benches,  from  which  the  Sun  could  be  seen  when  it  rose.  The
stone  in  front  was  subtly  bored,  and  the  holes  were  adorned
with  emeralds  and  other  precious  stones.  These  benches  were
for  the  kings,  and  no  one  else  was  allowed  to  use  them  on
pain  of  death.

At  the  doors  of  these  houses  porters  were  stationed  to  keep
guard  over  the  virgins,  many  of  whom  were  daughters  of
great  lords,  the  most  beautiful  and  charming  that  could  be
found.  They  remained  in  the  temple  until  they  became  old.
If  one  of  them  had  knowledge  of  a  man,  they  killed  her  by
burying  her  alive ;  and  the  same  penalty  was  suffered  by  the
man.  These  women  were  called  mama-cunas.  Their  only
occupations  were  to  weave  and  dye  woollen  cloth  for  the
service  of  the  temple,  and  to  make  chicha,  which  is  the  wine
they  make,  of  which  they  always  kept  large  full  jars.

In  one  of  these  houses,  which  was  the  richest,  there  was
the  figure  of  the  sun,  very  large  and  made  of  gold,  very  ingen-
iously worked,  and  enriched  with  many  precious  stones.
This  temple  also  contained  some  of  the  figures  of  the  former
Incas  who  had  reigned  in  Cuzco,  and  also  a  vast  quantity  of
treasure.

Round  the  temple  there  were  numerous  small  dwellings  of
Indians  who  were  employed  in  its  service ;  and  there  was  an
enclosure  where  they  kept  the  white  lambs,  children,  and  men
for  sacrifice.  They  had  also  a  garden,  the  clods  of  which
were  made  of  pieces  of  fine  gold ;  and  it  was  artificially  sown
with  golden  maize,  the  stalks,  as  well  as  the  leaves  and  cobs,
being  of  that  metal.  They  were  so  well  planted,  that  even
when  there  was  a  high  wind  they  were  not  torn  up.  Besides
all  this,  they  had  more  than  twenty  golden  sheep  with  their
lambs,  and  the  shepherds  with  their  slings  and  crooks  to  watch


86  TEMPLE   OF   THE    SUN.

them,  all  made  of  the  same  metal.  There  was  a  great  quantity
of  jars  of  gold  and  silver,  set  with  emeralds ;  vases,  pots,  and
all  sorts  of  utensils,  all  of  fine  gold.  On  other  walls  were
sculptured  and  painted  various  notable  things  ;  and,  in  fine,  it
was  one  of  the  richest  temples  in  the  world.

The  High  Priest,  called  Villac  Umu,  resided  in  the  temple,
and  offered  up  the  ordinary  sacrifices,  accompanied  by  super-
stitious rites,  with  the  help  of  the  other  priests,  according  to
their  custom.  At  the  important  festivals  the  Inca  was  pre-
sent at  the  sacrifices,  and  there  were  great  rejoicings.  Within
the  enclosure  of  the  temple  there  were  more  than  thirty
granaries  of  silver  in  which  the  maize  was  stored ;  and  many
provinces  sent  their  tribute  for  the  service  of  the  temple.  On
certain  days  the  devil  was  seen  by  the  priests,  who  gave  them
deceptive  answers,  in  conformity  with  what  might  be  ex-
pected from  him.

Many  other  things  might  be  said  of  this  temple,  which  I
omit  because  it  seems  to  me  that  I  have  said  enough  to  shew
what  a  grand  place  it  was ;  so  I  shall  not  treat  further  of  the
silver  work,  of  the  chaguira,  of  the  plumes  of  gold  and  other
things,  which,  if  I  wrote  down,  T  should  not  be  believed.  That
which  I  have  described  has  been  seen,  or  the  greater  part,  by
Christians  who  are  still  alive,  when  it  was  brought  to  Caxa-
marca  as  a  ransom  for  Atahualpa.  But  a  great  deal  was
hidden  by  the  Indians,  and  is  now  buried  and  lost.  Although
all  the  Incas  added  to  the  adornment  of  the  temple,  in  the
time  of  the  Inca  Yupanqui  its  riches  were  increased  to  such
an  extent  that  when  he  died,  and  his  son  Tupac  Inca  succeeded,
it  remained  in  its  complete  state.


TEMPLE    OF    HUANACAUEI.  8/

CHAPTEE   XXVI 1 1.
Which  treats  of  the  other  principal  temples,  and  of  their  names.

Many  were  the  temples  in  this  land  of  Peru,  and  some  were
looked  upon  as  very  ancient  because  they  were  founded  bef<  >re
the  time  of  the  Incas,  as  well  in  the  high  mountains  as  in  the
valleys  of  the  coast.  During  the  reigns  of  the  Incas  many
other  new  temples  were  built,  where  sacrifices  and  festivals
were  celebrated.  It  would  take  very  long  to  enumerate  each
temple  in  the  different  provinces,  so  I  have  determined  only
to  allude,  in  this  place,  to  those  which  were  held  in  most
esteem.

Next  after  the  temple  of  Curicancha,  the  second  huaca  of
the  Incas  was  the  hill  of  Guanacauri,  which  is  within  sight  of
the  city,  and  was  much  honoured  and  frequented.  For  some
say  that  the  brother  of  the  first  Inca  was  turned  into  stone  in
that  place,  at  the  time  when  they  set  out  from  Pacari  Tambo,
as  was  explained  at  the  beginning  of  this  work.  In  ancient
times  there  was  an  oracle  in  this  place  from  which  the
accursed  devil  spoke.  A  great  amount  of  treasure  was  buried
around  it ;  and  on  certain  days  they  sacrificed  men  and
women,  to  whom,  before  they  were  put  to  death,  the  priest
addressed  a  discourse,  explaining  to  them  that  they  were
going  to  serve  that  god  who  was  being  worshipped,  there  in
the  glorious  place  that  they,  in  their  ignorance,  believed  that
he  inhabited  Those  who  were  to  be  sacrificed  also  believed
it  for  certain,  and  dressed  themselves  in  clothes  of  fine  cloth,
with  fringes  of  gold,  and  bracelets,  and  with  gold  lace  in  their
sandals.  After  they  had  heard  the  discourse  which  those
liars  of  priests  addressed  to  them,  they  were  given  much
chicha  to  drink,  out  of  great  vases  of  gold.  The  sacrifice  was
celebrated  with  songs,  declaring  that  such  lives  were  offered
up  to  serve  the  gods,  the  victims  holding  themselves  fortunate


88  TEMPLE    OF    VILCANOTA.

to  receive  death  in  such  a  place.  Having  thus  celebrated  the
rites,  the  victims  were  strangled  by  the  ministers.  A  ccepi1
of  gold  and  a  small  jar  of  gold  were  placed  in  the  hands  of
each  body,  and  they  were  buried  in  tombs  around  the  oracle.
These  victims  were  looked  upon  as  canonized  saints,  for  the
people  believed  that,  without  any  doubt,  they  were  in  heaven
serving  their  Guanacauri.  The  women  who  were  sacrificed  also
came  richly  dressed  in  fine  cloths  and  plumes  of  feathers,  with
their  topus  of  gold,  like  spoons,  and  small  breastplates  all  of  gold.
And  they  also,  after  they  had  drunk  deeply,  were  strangled
and  interred,  both  they  and  those  who  killed  them  believing
that  they  went  to  serve  their  demon  or  Guanacaure.  They
celebrated  these  and  similar  sacrifices  with  much  dancing  and
singing.  This  idol  was  kept  where  they  heard  the  oracle,
with  its  farms,  yanaconas  or  servants,  flocks,  virgins,  and
priests  who  profited  by  all  the  rest.

The  third  oracle  or  huaca  of  the  Incas  was  the  temple  of
Vilcanota,  renowned  throughout  these  kingdoms.  Here  the
devil,  our  Lord  God  permitting  it,  had  great  power,  and  spoke
by  the  mouths  of  the  false  priests  who  were  there  to  serve  the
idol.  This  temple  of  Vilcanota  was  a  little  more  than  twenty
leagues  from  Cuzco,  near  the  village  of  Chungara.  It  was
very  much  esteemed  and  venerated,  and  many  offerings  and
gifts  were  presented  to  it,  as  well  by  the  Inca  and  lord,  as  by
the  rich  men  of  the  districts  whence  people  came  to  sacrifice.
The  temple  had  its  priests,  virgins,  and  cultivated  lands,  and
almost  every  year  the  offering  of  capacocha  was  made,  which
is  what  I  will  nowT  explain.  They  gave  great  credit  to  what
the  devil  said  in  his  replies,  and  on  certain  occasions  they
offered  up  sacrifices  of  birds,  sheep,  and  other  animals.

The  fourth  temple  that  was  venerated  and  frequented  by

the  Incas  and  the  natives  of  the  provinces  was  the  huaca  of

Ancocagua,  where  there  was  also  a  very  ancient  oracle  which

was  famous.     It  was  in  the  province  of  Hatun  Cana,  and  on

1   Burden  or  load.


TEMPLES   OF   A.NCOCAGUA   AND    COROPUNA.  89

certain  occasions  people  came  from  many  parts,  with  great
veneration,  to  hear  the  vain  replies  of  the  demon.  Here
there  was  great  store  of  treasure  offered  up  by  the  Incas  and
other  worshippers.  They  say  also  that,  besides  the  numerous
animals  sacrificed  to  this  demon,  whom  the  people  believed  to
be  God,  they  also  sacrificed  some  men  and  women,  in  the
same  way  as  I  have  described  in  recounting  the  offerings  made
on  the  hill  of  Guanacauri.

That  the  treasure  alleged  to  have  been  in  this  temple  was
really  there,  seems  clear  from  the  following  circumstance.
After  the  Spaniards  had  occupied  Cuzco  for  more  than  three
years,  and  the  priests  and  chief  lords  had  produced  the  great
treasures  which  all  these  temples  contained,  I  heard  that  a
Spaniard  named  Diego  Eodriguez  Elemosin  took  from  this
he  oca  more  than  30,000  -pesos  of  gold.  Besides  this,  still
more  has  been  found ;  and  there  is  a  rumour  that  an  im-
mense quantity  of  gold  and  silver  is  in  places  which  no  one
but  God  knows,  and  they  will  never  be  discovered,  except  by
accident  or  good  luck.

Besides  these  temples,  there  was  another  which  was  as
much  venerated  and  frequented  by  them,  named  Coropuna,  in
the  province  of  Condesuyo.  It  is  on  a  very  lofty  mountain
which  is  covered  with  snow  both  in  summer  and  winter.
The  kings  of  Peru,  with  the  principal  lords,  visited  this
temple,  making  presents  and  offerings  as  at  the  others.  It  is
held  for  very  ceitain  that  among  the  gifts  and  capaeoclta
offered  to  this  temple,  there  were  many  loads  of  gold,  silver,
and  precious  stones  buried  in  places  which  are  now  unknown.
The  Indians  concealed  another  great  sum  which  was  for  the
service  of  the  idol,  and  of  the  priests  and  virgins  who  attended
upon  it.  But  as  there  are  great  masses  of  snow,  people  do
not  ascend  to  the  summit,  nor  is  it  known  where  these  great
riches  are  hidden.  This  temple  possessed  many  flocks,  farms,
and  service  of  Indians  and  yanaconas.  There  was  always  a
large   concourse   of  people  in  it,  from  many  parts,  and  the


90  OTHEE    TEMPLES    AND    OEACLES.

devil  talked  here  more  freely  than  in  the  other  oracles,
for  he  constantly  gave  numerous  replies,  and  not  occa-
sionally, as  in  the  other  temples.  Even  now,  at  the  present
time,  for  some  secret  reason  known  to  Gocl,  it  is  said  that
devils  visibly  walk  about  in  that  place,  and  that  the  Indians
see  them  and  are  much  terrified.  I  have  also  heard  that  these
devils  have  appeared  to  Christians  in  the  form  of  Indians,
appearing  and  disappearing  in  a  very  short  space  of  time.
Occasionally  they  offered  great  services  to  this  oracle,  killing
many  sheep  and  birds,  and  some  men  and  women.

Besides  these  oracles  there  was  that  of  Aperalma,  where
the  oracle  answered  out  of  the  trunk  of  a  tree,  and  near  it  a
large  quantity  of  gold  was  found.  Also  that  of  Pachacamac,
which  is  in  the  country  of  the  Yuncas,  and  many  others,  as
well  in  the  provinces  of  Anti-suyu,  as  in  Chincha-suyu,
Omasayu,  and  other  parts  of  this  empire,  of  which  I  might
say  somewhat  more.  As  in  the  first  part  of  my  work  I  treat
of  the  founding  of  temples,  I  shall  now  only  dwell  upon  the
oracles.  To  those  which  the  Incas  and  other  nations  held  in
most  veneration,  they  sacrificed  some  men  and  women,  with
many  sheep.  But  before  those  which  were  not .  so  much  re-
spected, they  did  not  shed  human  blood  nor  kill  men,  only
offering  up  gold  and  silver.  The  huacas  of  little  account,
like  our  chapels,  were  worshipped  by  offering  chaquira,
plumes,  and  other  small  things  of  slight  value.  I  say  this
owing  to  the  opinion  held  by  us  Spaniards,  that  they  sacrificed
human  beings  in  all  the  temples,  which  is  false.  What  I
have  stated  is  the  truth,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  obtain
it,  without  deducting  or  putting  down  more  than  I  myself
understand  and  hold  to  be  certainly  true.


THE   CAPACOCHA.  91


CHAPTER    XXIX.


Hon:  the  Capacocha  was  made,  and  to  what  extent  it  was  prac-
tised by  the  Incus;  by  which  is  to  be  understood  the  gifts
and  offerings  that  were  made  to  idols.

In  this  place  it  will  be  well  that  I  should  explain  what  was
understood  by  the  Capacocha,  as  all  that  has  just  gone  before
related  to  the  service  of  the  temples.  I  speak  on  the  authority
of  old  Indians  who  are  still  living,  and  who  saw  what  passed
concerning  this  matter,  and  I  shall  write  what  I  gather  from
them  to  be  the  truth.

It  was  the  custom  in  Cuzco  for  the  kings  to  cause  all  the
statues  and  figures  of  idols  in  the  huacas  or  temples  where
they  were  worshipped,  to  be  brought  to  the  city  once  a  year.
They  were  conveyed  with  much  veneration  by  the  priests
and  camayocs  or  guardians,  and  when  they  entered  Cuzco
they  were  received  with  great  feasting  aud  processions,  being
deposited  in  the  places  that  were  set  apart  for  that  purpose.
A  great  number  of  people  having  come  from  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  city,  and  indeed  from  all  parts  of  the  empire,  as
well  men  as  women,  the  reigning  sovereign,  accompanied  by
all  the  Incas  and  Orejones,  courtiers,  and  principal  men  of
the  city,  inaugurated  a  succession  of  great  festivals,  drinking-
bouts,  and  taquis.

The  great  chain  of  gold  which  encircled  all  was  brought  out
into  the  square  of  Cuzco,  and  such  riches  and  precious  stones
as  he  is  able  to  imagine  who  has  read  what  has  been  written
touching  the  treasures  possessed  by  these  kings.  The  busi-
ness of  this  annual  ceremony  was  to  receive  a  forecast  of
the  events  of  the  vear  to  come,  from  the  statues  and  fiuuies
and  their  priests ;  whether  it  would  be  fertile  or  sterile ;
whether  the  Inca  would  have  a  lung  life  or  would  die;  whether
enemies  would  come  from  any  direction;  and,  in  conclusion,


92  THE    CAPACOCHA.

other  enquiries,  of  more  or  less  import,  were  made,  such  as
whether  there  would  be  any  pestilence,  or  murrain  in  the
flocks,  and  whether  the  flocks  would  be  largely  multiplied.
These  enquiries  were  not  made  of  all  the  oracles  together,
but  of  each  one  by  itself.  If  the  Incas  did  not  do  this  every
year,  they  felt  discontent  and  fear,  and  did  not  consider  their
lives  to  be  safe.

First,  the  people  made  merry,  with  their  solemn  drinking-
bouts,  banquets,  great  taquis  or  musical  entertainments,  and
other  festivities,  which  are  entirely  different  from  ours.  Then
the  Inca  invited  those  around  him,  with  great  triumph ;  and
at  this  feast  there  were  great  jars  of  gold  and  silver;  for  all  the
service  of  his  kitchen,  down  to  the  pots  and  pans,  was  of
that  metal.  The  High  Priest  was  also  present  at  the  festival
with  the  same  pomp  and  magnificence  as  the  king,  accom-
panied by  the  mama  conas  and  priests  who  had  come  together
for  the  occasion.  Those  who  were  appointed  for  the  purpose
were  commanded  to  put  the  questions  concerning  future  events
to  each  of  the  idols ;  and  the  idols  replied  by  the  mouths  of
the  priests  who  had  charge  of  their  images.  These,  having
drunk  deeply,  answered  in  the  way  which  seemed  to  be  most
to  the  taste  of  those  who  made  the  enquiries,  finding  out
what  to  say  from  the  devils  who  were  in  the  statues.  The
enquiry  being  made  of  each  idol,  the  priests,  being  so  cunning
in  their  wicked  art,  asked  for  some  time  to  answer,  that  their
nonsense  might  be  listened  to  with  more  credit  and  respect.
T.bey  said  that  they  must  offer  up  sacrifices  that,  their  great
gods  being  pleased,  it  might  please  them  to  answer  as  to  what
would  happen.  So  many  animals,  such  as  sheep  and  lambs,
cuiis1,  and  birds,  exceeding  the  number  of  2,000  sheep  and
lambs,  were  beheaded.  Meanwhile  the  prests  made  their
diabolical  exorcisms  and  vain  sacrifices,  according  to  their
custom.  Presently  they  announced  what  they  had  dreamt  or
imagined,  or  perhaps  what  the  devil  had  told  them.  Great
1  Guinea  pigs.


THE   CAPACOCHA.  93

attention  was  paid  to  what  they  said,  and  to  the  number
which  concurred  in  foretelling  good  or  evil.  The  same  thing
was  gone  through  with  regard  to  the  other  replies,  and  care
was  taken  to  note  who  spoke  truly,  and  ascertained  what  was
about  to  come  to  pass  in  the  coming  year.

This  being  done,  the  almoners  of  the  king  came  forth  with
the  offerings  which  they  call  capacocha,  and  the  general
almsgiving  having  been  gone  through,  the  idols  were  taken
back  to  their  temples.  If.  before  the  year  had  passed,  the
saying  of  any  one  of  those  dreamers  happened  to  come  true,
the  Inca  joyfully  sent  for  him,  to  be  one  of  his  household.

The  capacocha,  as  I  have  said,  was  an  offering  paid  instead
of  a  tithe  to  the  temples.  It  consisted  of  many  vases  of
gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones,  loads  of  rich  mantles,
and  large  flocks.  In  the  following  years  no  gifts  were
bestowed  on  those  whose  sayings  proved  to  be  false  or  un-
certain, and  they  forfeited  their  reputations.  At  these  cere-
monies great  things  were  done  at  Cuzco,  much  more  than  I
have  written.  In  these  days,  after  the  Royal  Audience  had
been  established,  and  Gasca  had  returned  to  Spain,1  mention
was  made  of  this  capacocha  in  certain  lawsuits,  and  it  is
certain  that  the  custom  prevailed,  as  well  as  all  else  that  we
have  written.  "We  will  now  describe  the  great  festival  of
Hutu n  Baymi.

1  In  January  1550.


94  THE  HATUX  RAYMI.


CHAPTEE   XXX.

How  they  made  great  festivities  and  sacrifices  at  the  grand  and
solemn  feast  called  Hatun  Eaymi.

The  Incas  held  many  festivals  during  the  year,  at  which  they
offered  great  sacrifices  according  to  their  custom  ;  but  to
notice  them  all  would  require  a  separate  volume.  It  is  also
well  not  to  dwell  long  on  the  sorceries  and  follies  that  were
practised  on  these  occasions ;  but  only  to  describe  the  feast
of  Hatun  Eaymi,  which  is  very  famous.  It  was  kept  in
many  provinces,  and  was  the  principal  ceremony  of  the
whole  year,  and  the  occasion  on  which  the  greatest  number  of
sacrifices  was  offered  up.

Tins  festival  was  celebrated  in  the  end  of  August,  when
the  maize  harvest  had  been  got  in,  as  well  as  the  potatoes,
quinuas,1  ocas,2  and  the  other  seeds  that  they  sow.  They  call
this  feast  Hatun  Eaymi,  which  in  our  language  means  "a  very
solemn  festival";  and  in  it  they  had  to  offer  up  thanks  and
praise  to  God,  the  Creator  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  whom  they
called,  as  has  often  been  mentioned  before,  Ticiviracocha,  as
well  as  to  the  Sun,  to  the  Moon,  and  to  their  other  gods,  for
having  granted  them  a  good  harvest  of  food  for  their  support.
In  order  to  celebrate  this  festival  with  greater  devotion  and
solemnity,  it  is  said  that  they  fasted  for  ten  or  twelve  days,
abstaining  from  too  much  food,  and  from  intercourse  with
women ;  drinking  chicha  only  in  the  morning,  which  is  the
time  when  they  eat,  and  at  other  times  only  water ;  abstaining
from  the  use  of  aji  and  from  carrying  anything  in  the  mouth,
and  practising  other  usages  such  as  were  observed  on  these
occasions  of  fasting.  This  time  of  fasting  being  over,  the
people  brought  to  Cuzco  a  great  number  of  lambs,  of  sheep,

1   Chenopodiwm  Quhiua.  2   O.ralis  tuberosa.


THE   HATTJN    RAYMI.  95

of  doves  and  cuys,  and  of  other  birds  and  beasts  which  were
killed  for  the  sacrifices.  Having  killed  a  vast  number,  they
anointed  the  statues  and  figures  of  their  gods,  or  rather
devils,  with  the  blood,  as  well  as  the  doors  of  the  temples
and  oracles.  After  an  interval,  the  soothsayers  and  diviners
looked  for  omens  in  the  entrails,  announcing  what  they  pro-
gnosticated, to  which  the  people  gave  great  credit.

When  the  sacrifice  was  finished,  the  High  Priest,  with  the
other  priests,  went  to  the  temple  of  the  Sun;  and,  after  reciting
their  accursed  psalms,  they  ordered  the  mama  conas,  or  virgins,
to  come  forth  richly  dressed,  with  the  great  store  of  chicha
they  had  prepared;  and  all  those  who  were  in  the  great  city  of
Cuzco  ate  of  the  sheep  and  birds  which  had  been  killed  for
the  vain  sacrifices,  and  drank  of  that  chicha  which  was  held
to  be  sacred.  It  was  contained  in  jars  of  silver,  out  of  the
great  numbers  there  were  in  the  temple ;  and  they  drank  it
out  of  cups  of  gold.

Having  eaten  and  drunk  many  times,  and  the  Inca,  High
Priest,  and  all  the  rest  being  merry  in  consequence,  it  was
still  only  a  little  after  noon.  They  then  formed  in  procession,
and  the  men  began  to  sing,  with  loud  voices,  the  romances
and  chaunts  which  had  been  prepared  for  use  at  this  festival
by  their  ancestors.  The  purport  of  them  all  was  to  give
thanks  to  the  gods,  promising  to  do  them  services  for  the
blessings  received.  To  accompany  the  songs  they  had  many
drums  of  gold,  some  of  them  encrusted  with  precious  stones,
which  their  women  played  upon,  who,  together  with  the  sacred
mama  conas,  joined  in  the  song-.

In  the  centre  of  the  plaza  it  is  said  that  a  great  theatre
was  placed,  with  steps,  adorned  with  cloths  and  plumes  richly
embroidered  with  golden  beads,  very  large  mantles  of  their
exceedingly  fine  cloth,  also  garnished  with  silver  and  gold
work,  and  precious  stones.  On  the  summit  of  this  throne
was  placed  the  figure  of  Ticiviracocha,  large  and  richly
adorned.     As  they  held  it  to  be  the  sovereign  God,  maker  of


96  THE    HATUN    RAYMI.

all  created  things,  they  gave  it  the  highest  place  ;  and  all
the  priests  were  near  it.  The  Inca  and  all  the  principal  men
and  the  people  came  to  worship  it,  taking  off  their  sandals
with  much  humility,  bending  their  shoulders,  filling  out  their
cheeks,  and  sighing  towards  it,  thus  performing  mucha,  which
is  their  word  for  worship.

Below  this  throne  was  placed  the  figure  of  the  Sun,  but
they  do  not  state  of  what  it  was  made,  and  also  that  of  the
Moon,  and  other  figures  of  idols  sculptured  in  wood  and
stone.  We  hold  it  to  be  very  certain  that  neither  in  Jeru-
salem, nor  in  Rome,  nor  in  Persia,  nor  in  any  other  part  of
the  world,  by  any  state  or  king  of  this  earth,  was  such  wealth
of  gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones  collected  together,  as
in  this  square  of  Cuzco  when  this  festival  and  others  like  it
were  celebrated.  For  the  images  of  the  Incas,  their  deceased
kings  were  brought  out,  each  one  with  its  service  of  gold  and
silver.  That  is  to  say,  such  of  them  as  had  been  good  and
brave  fathers  of  their  people,  generous  in  granting  favours,
pardoners  of  injuries.  These  were  canonized  as  saints,  in
their  blindness,  and  their  bones  were  honoured  by  those  who
did  not  comprehend  that  their  souls  were  burning  in  hell,
thinking  that  they  were  in  heaven.

It  was  the  same  with  some  other  Orejones,  or  chiefs  of
another  nation,  whom,  for  some  cause  or  other,  they,  in  their
heathen  minds,  looked  upon  as  saints.  They  call  those  who
were  canonized  in  this  wTay  Ylla,  which  signifies  the  body  of
him  who  did  good  in  his  lifetime.  Another  meaning  of  Yllapa
is  thunder  and  lightning.  Hence  the  Indians  call  discharges
of  artillery  Yllapa,  from  the  loud  report.

The  Inca  and  High  Priest,  with  all  the  courtiers,  and  the
great  concourse  of  people  that  came  from  the  neighbourhood,
did  mucha  (which  means  reverence  and  worship), to  the  gods
arranged  round  the  square.  They  also  made  many  offerings,
such  as  small  golden  figures  of  idols,  sheep,  women,  and  many
other  trinkets.     This  festival  of  Hatun  Baymi  continued  for


HAEVEST   CEREMONIES.  97

fifteen  or  twenty  days,  during  which  there  was  much  sing-
ing and  dancing,  drinking  bouts,  and  other  feasting,  accord-
ing to  their  custom.  At  the  end  of  the  time  they  finished
with  the  sacrifices,  and  put  back  the  images  of  the  idols
info  the  temples,  and  those  of  the  deceased  Incas  into  their
houses.

The  High  Priest  enjoyed  that  dignity  during  his  life.
He  was  married,  and  was  so  respected  that  he  vied  in
dignity  with  the  Inca,  and  had  jurisdiction  over  all  the
oracles  and  temples,  appointing  and  removing  priests.
The  Inca  and  the  High  Priest  often  played  together  at
their  games,  and  these  functionaries  were  of  high  lin-
eage and  had  powerful  relations.  The  dignity  was  not
conferred  upon  obscure  persons,  even  if  they  should  pos-
sess great  merit.  All  those  who  lived  in  the  parts  of
Cuzco  which  they  called  Hurin-Cuzco  and  Hanan-Cuzco,
and  their  descendants,  were  considered  to  be  noble,  although
they  should  reside  in  other  parts.  I  remember  when  I
was  in  Cuzco  in  the  year  1550,  during  the  month  of
August,  after  the  harvests  had  been  got  in,  that  a  great
crowd  of  Indians  entered  the  city  with  their  wives,  making
much  noise.  They  carried  their  ploughs  in  their  hands,
and  some  stalks  of  maize,  to  make  a  festival  by  merely
singing  and  reciting  as  had  been  their  custom  at  harvest
time.  The  Ajpus  and  Priests  do  not  consent  that  these
heathen  festivals  shall  be  performed  in  public  as  in  former
times,  nor  in  secret  if  they  can  prevent  it.  But  as  there
are  so  many  thousands  of  Indians  who  have  not  become
Christians,  it  is  probable  that  these  rites  are  still  performed
in  secret.

The  figure  of  Ticiviracocha,  and  those  of  the  Sun  and
Moon,  and  the  great  chain  of  gold,  besides  other  recorded
pieces  of  great  value,  have  not  been  found.  There  is  neither
Indian   nor    Christian   who   knows   where   they   are.      But

H


98  LOST   TREASURE.

although  their  value  is  great,1  it  is  small  when  compared  with
all  that  has  been  buried  in  Cuzco,  in  the  places  of  the  oracles,
and  in  other  parts  of  this  great  empire.

1  The  statue  of  the  Sun  was  found  by  the  Spaniards  in  1572,  in  pos-
session of  Tupac  Amaru,  at  the  time  when  this  Ynca  and  his  camp  were
captured  by  the  expedition  under  the  command  of  Garcia  de  Loyola.


DRAINAGE    OF   THE   .SWAMP    AT    CUZCO.  99


CHAPTEE   XXXI.

Of  the  second  king  or  Inca  who  reigned  in  Cuzco,  named
Sinchi  Boca.

With  as  much  conciseness  as  I  am  able  to  use,  I  have  written
what  I  learnt  touching  the  government  and  customs  of  the
Incas ;  and  I  now  propose  to  return  to  my  narrative  of  what
happened  from  the  time  of  Manco  Capac  to  that  of  Huascar,
as  I  have  already  promised.  Touching  the  first  Inca,  and
those  who  followed  him,  the  Orejones  do  not  give  many  par-
ticulars, because,  in  truth,  they  did  not  perform  many  great
deeds.  For  the  most  valorous  of  all  were  the  Inca  Yupanqui,
and  Tupac  Inca  his  son,  and  Huayna  Capac  his  grandson.
But  the  reason  may  be  that  which  I  have  already  written,
namely,  that  these  kings  were  the  most  modern.

As  soon,  then,  as  Manco  Capac  was  dead,  and  the  general
mourning  and  obsequies  had  been  performed  for  him,  Sinchi
Eoca1  assumed  the  fringe  or  crown,  with  the  accustomed
ceremonies.  He  contrived  to  enlarge  the  house  of  the  Sun,
and  induced  as  many  people  as  possible  to  flock  to  the  new
settlement,  by  gifts  and  large  offers.  The  place  was  then,  as
it  is  now,  called  Cuzco.  Some  of  the  natives  of  it  affirm  that,
in  the  place  where  was  the  great  square,  being  the  same  then
as  now,  there  was  a  small  lake  and  slough  of  water,  so  that  it
was  difficult  to  raise  the  great  edifices  which  they  had  begun
to  build.  As  soon  as  this  was  known  to  the  king,  Sinchi
Eoca,  he  contrived,  with  the  aid  of  his  allies  and  neighbours,
to  get  rid  of  this  swamp,  covering  it  with  great  slabs  and
huge  beams,  and  levelling  the  ground  on  the  top,  where  the
water  used  to  be,  in  such  sort  that  it  remained  as  we  now  see

1  Sinchi  means  strong,  valiant.  Rocca  1ms  no  meaning  in  the  Quichua
language.

II  'I


100  REIGN    OF   SINCHI    ROCCA.

it.  The}7  further  state  that  the  whole  valley  of  Cuzco  was
barren,  and  that  the  land  never  yielded  good  fruit  from  the
seed  which  they  sowed.  So  they  brought  many  thousands  of
loads  of  earth  from  the  great  forests  of  the  Andes,  and  spread
it  all  over  the  land ;  by  which  means,  if  the  tale  be  true,  the
valley  became  very  fertile,  as  we  now  see  it.

This  Inca  had,  by  his  sister  and  wife,  many  children :  and
they  named  the  eldest  Lloque  Yupanqui.  The  people  round
Cuzco  beheld  the  good  order  in  which  the  settlers  lived,  and
how  they  brought  people  under  their  friendly  influence  more
through  love  and  benevolence  than  by  recourse  to  severity
and  force.  Some  of  the  captains  and  principal  men  came  to
hold  discourse  with  those  of  the  city,  and  rejoiced  to  see  the
temple  of  Curi-cancha,  and  the  good  order  that  reigned
around  it.  By  this  means  treaties  of  friendship  were  made
in  many  directions.  They  relate  that,  among  those  chiefs
that  I  have  mentioned,  there  came  to  Cuzco  a  captain  of  the
town  called  Zanu,  which  is  not  very  distant.  He  asked
Sinchi  Koca,  with  great  vehemence,  that  he  would  see  fit  to
take  his  very  fair  and  beautiful  daughter  as  a  wife  for  his  son.
When  the  Inca  understood  the  request  he  was  very  sorry,  for
what  the  chief  asked  was  contrary  to  the  rule  established  and
ordained  by  his  father.  Yet,  if  he  did  not  grant  the  request
of  this  captain,  he  and  others  would  hold  the  Incas  to  be  in-
human men,  declaring  that  they  only  thought  of  themselves.
Having  taken  counsel  with  the  Orejones  and  principal  men
of  the  city,  it  appeared  to  all  that  the  maiden  ought  to  be
received  for  marriage  with  the  Inca's  son.  It  was  thought
that,  until  they  became  more  powerful,  it  would  not  be
prudent  to  follow  the  mandate  of  the  Inca's  father  in  this
matter.  Thus  it  was  that  the  answer  to  the  father  of  the
proposed  bride  was  that  she  should  be  brought,  and  the  mar-
riage was  solemnised  according  to  their  method  and  custom,
and  she  was  called  Coya  in  Cuzco.1   The  king's  daughter,  who

1  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  says  that  the  legitimate  wife  of  Lloque  Yu-
panqui  was  named  Mama  Cava.


REIGN    OF    SINCHI   ROCCA.  101

was  to  have  been  the  wife  of  her  brother,  was  immured  in
the  temple  of  Curi-cancha,  where  priests  were  appointed  to
offer  up  sacrifices  before  the  statue  of  the  Sun,  and  where
there  were  men  to  guard  the  sacred  women  in  the  manner
already  described.

By  reason  of  this  marriage,  the  Indians  relate  that  the
bride's  people  united  with  the  citizens  of  Cuzco,  making  great
rejoicing,  thus  confirming  their  union  of  brotherhood  and
friendship.  On  account  of  this,  great  sacrifices  were  offered
up  on  the  hill  of  Guanacauri1  and  at  Tampu-quiru,2  as  well
as  in  the  temple  of  Curi-cancha.  This  being  done,  there
was  an  assembly  of  more  than  4,000  youths,  and  the  cere-
monies wTere  performed  which  had  been  ordained  for  them.
They  were  armed  as  knights,  and  continued  to  be  looked  upon
as  nobles.  Their  ears  were  bored,  and  the  round  pieces  were
put  in  them,  in  accordance  with  custom.

When  these  things  had  taken  place,  and  others  of  which
we  have  no  record,  in  the  time  of  the  king  Sinchi  Eocca,  he
became  old,  and  was  surrounded  by  many  sons  and  daughters.
So  he  died,  and  was  mourned  for,  and  his  obsequies  were
celebrated  in  a  very  sumptuous  fashion.  His  image  was  pre-
served as  a  memorial  that  he  had  been  a  good  ruler,  and  that
his  soul  rested  in  heaven.3

1  See  p.  17.  2  See  p.  14.

3  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  also  says  that  Sinchi  Rocca  waged  uo  wars  ;
but  that  the  Caliches  submitted  to  him,  aud  that  by  peaceful  means  he
extended  his  dominions  as  far  as  Chuncara,  about  twenty  leagues  beyond
his  father's  frontier.


102  REIGN   OF   LLOQUE   YUPANQUL


CHAPTER  XXXII.

Of  the  third  king  that  reigned  in  Cuzco,  named  Lloque
Yupanqui.

The  Inca  Sinchi  Rocca  being  dead  in  the  manner  that  has
been  described,  his  son,  Lloque  Yupanqui,1  was  received  as
lord,  having  first  performed  a  fast  during  the  days  appointed.
As,  in  his  divinations  and  omens,  he  found  great  reason  to
hope  that  the  city  of  Cuzco  "would  flourish  in  the  future,  the
new  king  began  to  ennoble  it  with  new  edifices.  He  asked
his  father-in-law,  with  all  his  allies  and  confederates,  to  come
and  live  in  the  city,  where  their  honour  would  be  respected
and  they  would  receive  such  a  share  of  the  land  as  they
needed.

The  lord  or  captain  of  Zanu  consented,  and  the  more
western  part  of  the  city  was  assigned  to  him,  which,  being  on
hills  and  slopes,  was  named  Anan-Cuzco.  The  lower  part
remained  for  the  king,  with  his  house  and  retinue.  As  all
were  now  Orejones,  which  is  as  much  as  to  say  nobles,  and
nearly  all  had  been  concerned  in  the  foundation  of  the  new
city,  the  people  who  lived  in  the  two  parts  of  the  city,  called
Hanan-Cuzco,  and  Hurin-Cuzco,  were  always  held  to  be  illus-
trious. Some  Indians  even  wished  to  have  it  understood  that
one  Inca  had  to  be  of  one  of  these  lineages,  and  the  next  of  the
other.  But  I  do  not  hold  this  to  be  certain,  nor  is  it  what
the  Orejones  relate,  and  that  is  what  is  here  written  down.
In  most  parts  of  the  city  there  were  large  wards  on  the  hill-
slopes,  because  the  ground  was  broken  up  into  ravines  and
hills,  as  I  explained  in  the  first  part  of  this  chronicle.2

1  Lloque  means  left-handed,  and  Yupanqui  is  the  second  person  singu-
lar of  the  indicative  future  of  a  verb  meaning  "to  count".  "  You  will
count",  and  it  is  understood  that  he  will  count  as  great,  virtuous,  and
excellent.  2  Chajiter  xcii.


REIGN  OF  LLOQUE  YUPANQUI.  103

They  do  not  give  any  account  of  notable  wars  in  those
times.  On  the  contrary,  they  affirm  that  those  of  Cuzco,
little  by  little,  through  the  good  policy  they  employed,  suc-
ceeded in  making  friends  with  many  neighbouring  people,
and  in  enlarging  the  temple  of  Curi-cancha,  both  as  regards
edifices  and  riches.  For  now  they  sought  for  gold  and  silver,
of  which  much  came  to  the  market  held  in  the  city ;  and  they
shut  up  women  in  the  temple,  who  were  not  allowed  to  come
forth,  as  has  been  explained  in  other  places.

Reigning  in  this  manner  in  Cuzco,  and  passing  most  of  his
time  there,  Lloque  Yupanqui  became  very  old,  without  having
any  children  by  his  wife.  The  people  of  the  city  showed
much  grief  at  this,  making  many  sacrifices  and  offering  up
prayers  as  well  in  the  Curi-cancha,  as  at  Guanacauri  and
Tampu-quiru.  They  say  that,  through  one  of  those  oracles
whence  issued  vain  replies,  they  heard  that  the  Inca  would
beget  a  son  who  would  succeed  in  the  kingdom.  At  this  they
were  well  satisfied,  and,  rejoicing  with  the  hope,  they  put  the
old  king  on  his  wife  the  Coya,  so  that  at  the  end  of  some
days  it  was  known  that  she  had  conceived,  and  in  due  time
she  gave  birth  to  a  son.

Lloque  Yupanqui  died,1  leaving  orders  that  the  fringe  or
crown  of  the  empire  should  be  deposited  in  the  temple  of
Curi-cancha  until  his  son  was  of  an  age  to  reign.  The  name
given  to  the  son  was  Mayta  Capac,  and,  as  governors,  they
say  that  the  old  Inca  nominated  two  of  his  brothers,  whose
names  I  did  not  hear.

The  Ynca  Lloque  Yupanqui  was  mourned  for  by  all  the
servants  of  his  household,  and  in  many  parts  of  the  city,  and,
in  conformity  with  their  heathen  blindness,  they  killed  many
women  and  boys,  in  the  belief  that  they  would  go  to  serve
the  dead  lord  in  heaven,  where  they  held  it  to  be  certain  that

1  According  to  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  this  Ynca  Lloque  Yupanqui
not  only  conquered  the  Cauas  and  Ayaviri,  but  tbe  whole  Collao  sub-
mitted to  him,  as  tar  as  Hatuu-colla  and  Chucuito.


104  OBSEQUIES    OF   AN    YNCA.

his  soul  rested.  Considering  him  to  be  a  saint,  the  chief
people  of  the  city  ordered  that  his  image  should  be  made,  to
be  brought  out  at  their  festivals.  Assuredly  the  preparations
they  make  for  the  obsequies  of  one  of  these  kings  are  very
great.  Generally  they  mourned  in  all  the  provinces,  and  in
many  of  them  the  women  were  shorn,  and  their  heads  bound
with  cords  of  reed.  At  the  end  of  a  year  they  make  greater
lamentations  and  heathen  sacrifices  than  Can  be  imagined.  As
regards  this,  those  who  were  at  Cuzco  in  the  year  15c  0,  beheld
what  took  place  in  honour  of  Paullu,1  when  they  celebrated
the  end  of  his  mourning  year.  It  was  such  that  most  of  the
ladies  of  the  city  went  to  his  house  to  see  the  ceremony,  and
I  was  myself  present.  Certainly  it  was  calculated  to  excite
admiration,  and  we  were  given  to  understand  that  it  was
nothing  compared  to  what  used  to  take  place  in  former  days.
Now  I  will  speak  of  Mayta  Capac.

1  Paullu  Tupac  Yupanqui  was  a  son  of  the  Ynca  Huayna  Ccapac.  He
lived  at  Cuzco,  in  the  house  which  belonged  to  his  brother  Huascar ;
much  beloved  and  respected  both  ,by  Spaniards  and  Indians.  The
Governor  Vaca  de  Castro  induced  him  to  be  baptised  with  the  name  of
Cliristobal.     He  died  in  May  1549.


REIGN    OF   MAYTA   CCAPAC.  105


CHAPTEE   XXXIII.

Of  the  fourth  Inca  who  reigned  at  Cuzco,  named  Mayta  Capae,
and  of  what  happened  during  his  reign.

WHAT  lias  been  described  having  taken  place,  Mayta  Capac1
began  to  increase  in  stature.  So,  after  the  usual  ceremonies,
his  ears  were  bored.  Then,  when  he  was  still  nearer  to  man's
estate,  he  received  the  crown  or  fringe  of  empire  in  presence
of  a  great  multitude,  as  well  natives  as  strangers,  who  assem-
bled for  the  purpose.  As  he  had  no  sister  with  whom  to
many,  he  took  for  his  wife  the  daughter  of  a  lord  or  captain
of  a  place  called  Oma,  which  is  at  a  distance  of  two  leagues
from  Cuzco.     Her  name  was  Mama  Cahua  Pata.2

After  the  marriage,  there  was  a  district  near  the  city  where
dwelt  a  tribe  called  Alcaviquiza,3  who  had  shown  no  desire  to
form  a  friendship  with  those  of  Cuzco.  They  were  full  of  sus-
picion, the  one  of  the  other.  It  is  related  that,  when  a
woman  went  to  certain  springs  to  draw  water,  a  boy  came
forth  from  the  other  district,  and  broke  her  pitcher,  making-
use  of  I  know  not  what  words.  She  went  back  to  Cuzco
shrieking;  and  presently  the  two  parties  came  forth  with
their  arms,  which  they  had  taken  up  on  hearing  the  noise.
The  Inca,  with  his  followers,  arrived,  and  they  put  them-
selves in  array  to  fight,  having  taken  as  the  pretext  so  slight
a  cause  as  this  quarrel  between  the  woman  and  the  boy.
This  was  the  motive  for  subjugating  that  tribe,  and  for  making
all  memory  of  it  to  disappear.

1  Mayta  has  no  special  meaning  in  Cuzco.  Ccapac  means  rich,  not
in  gold,  but  in  the  qualities  of  mind.

2  According  to  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  the  Ynca  Mayta  Ccapac  married
his  sister  Mama  Cuca.

:;  Allcay-villcas,  as  written  by  Balboa ;  and  Alcaciya,  according  to
BetanzoB.  In  the  report  on  the  first  Lords  of  Cuzco  by  the  Viceroy
Don  Francisco  de  Toledo,  written  in  1572,  it  is  Alca-uizas.


106  EEIGN    OF   MAYTA   CCAPAC.

The  object  was  well  understood  by  those  of  Alcaviquiza,
and,  as  valiant  men,  they  resolutely  came  forth  to  the  battle,
which  was  the  first  that  took  place  in  those  days.  They
fought  together  for  a  long  time,  and,  as  the  affair  had  arisen
so  suddenly,  those  of  Alcaviquiza  had  not  been  able  to  seek
for  help.  Though  they  fought  well,  they  were  defeated  in
such  sort  that  nearly  all  were  killed,  scarcely  fifty  of  them
escaping  with  life.  Then  the  king  Mayta  Capac  took  posses-
sion of  the  fields  and  inheritances  of  the  dead  as  conqueror,
and  divided  them  among  the  people  of  Cuzco.  There  was
great  rejoicing  for  the  victory,  and  sacrifices  were  offered  up
to  the  oracles,  which  they  held  to  be  sacred.

Of  this  Inca  the  Orejones  do  not  relate  more  than  that
Mayta  Capac  reigned  in  Cuzco  several  years ;  and,  when
people  were  arriving  to  set  out  for  the  province  called  Con-
desuyo,  he  became  so  ill  that  he  died,1  leaving,  as  his  heir,  his
eldest  son,  named  Capac  Yupanqui.

1  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  gives  a  very  different  account  of  the  reign  of
Mayta  Ccapac,  whom  he  makes  out  to  have  been  a  great  conqueror.  He
says  that  Mayta  Ccapac  marched  to  the  river  Desaguadero,  crossed  it,
and  conquered  the  great  province  called  Hatun-pacasa,  on  the  other  side.
His  captains  crossed  the  Cordilleras  to  Moquegua,  where  the  Ynca  estab-
lished a  colony.  Mayta  Ccapac  then  conquered  the  provinces  on  the
eastern  side  of  lake  Titicaca,  including  Caravaya,  and  eventually  over-
ran the  whole  of  Charcas  as  far  south  as  the  lake  of  Paria.  Not  satisfied
with  this  great  acquisition  to  the  south,  Garcilasso  also  attributes  to  this
Ynca  the  annexation  of  the  provinces  of  Chumpivilicas,  Parinacochas,
and  Pumatampu  to  the  west  of  Cuzco ;  and  the  colonisation  of  Arequipa.
— See  my  Translation,  i,  pp.  210-234.


REIGN   OF   CCAPAC   YUPANQUI.  107


CHAPTEE  XXXIV.

Of  the  fifth  king  who  reigned  at  Cuzco,  named  Capac
YwpanquA.

It  seems  to  me  that  the  Indians  related  few  things  of  those
Incas  who  reigned  in  Cuzco  soon  after  the  foundation  of  that
city.  Certainly  it  must  be  as  they  say  that  three  or  four  of
the  Incas  were  those  who  ordained  and  performed  all  that  has
already  been  written.

Mayta  Capac  being  dead,  his  obsequies  were  performed  in
the  usual  way,  and,  his  image  having  been  placed  in  the
temple,  he  was  canonized  as  a  saint  in  conformity  with  their
blindness.  Capac  Yupanqui  then  assumed  the  fringe.  This
was  done  with  great  feasting,  and  people  came  from  all  parts
to  attend  the  solemnity  of  the  coronation.  These  rejoicings
having  been  completed,  drinking  and  singing  being  the  chief
part  of  them,  the  Inca  determined  to  go  and  make  sacrifice
on  the  hill  of  Guanacauri,  accompanied  by  the  High  Priest,  the
ministers  of  the  temple,  and  many  Orejones  and  inhabitants
of  the  city.

In  the  province  of  Condesuyo  it  was  known  that  at  the
time  when  the  late  Inca  died  he  had  intended  to  make  war,
and  the  people  were  prepared,  that  they  might  not  be  taken
unawares.  After  a  few  days  they  received  news  of  his  death,
and  of  the  intended  visit  of  Capac  Yupanqui  to  Guanacauri.
So  they  determined  to  make  war  upon  him,  and  to  secure
spoils  if  they  obtained  the  victory.  Setting  out  from  a  town
in  that  district  called  Marca,  they  came  to  the  place  where  the
Inca  then  was.  He  had  been  warned  of  what  was  going  on,
and  was  ready  for  their  coming.  Many  days  did  not  pass
before  they  joined  battle  one  with  the  other,  the  struggle
continuing  for  a  long  time,  as  both  sides  fought  with  spirit.
In  the  end,  those  of  Condesuyos  were  defeated  with  much


108  KEIGN    OF    CCAPAC    YUPANQUI.

slaughter.  The  sacrifice  was  then  performed  with  great
rejoicing,  some  men  and  women  being  offered  up  in  accord-
ance with  their  blindness,  and  many  flocks  of  sheep  and
lambs,  in  the  entrails  of  which  they  prognosticated  their
extravagancies  and  follies..  When  these  sacrifices  were
finished,  the  Inca  returned  to  Cuzco,  where  there  was  great
feasting  and  rejoicing  for  the  victory.

Those  of  the  enemy  who  escaped,  returned  to  their  homes
as  best  they  could,  where  they  again  began  to  assemble
troops,  declaring  that  they  would  either  die  or  destroy  the
city  of  Cuzco,  and  kill  all  the  strangers  who  were  in  it.
Inflamed  with  pride  and  anger,  they  hurried  their  prepara-
tion, and  before  they  had  seen  the  temple  of  Curi-cancha,
they  divided  the  ladies  who  were  in  it  among  themselves.
Having  assembled  together,  they  marched  towards  the  hill  of
Guanacauri,  whence  they  intended  to  enter  Cuzco.  Capac
Yupanqui  had  been  informed  of  their  movements,  and  had
called  together  all  the  people  of  Cuzco  and  the  confederates.
With  the  Orejones,  he  then  waited  until  he  knew  the  enemy
were  near  Cuzco.  He  then  went  forth  to  meet  them,  and
there  wTas  a  battle,  in  which  each  captain  animated  his  troops.
Although  those  of  Condesuyo  fought  obstinately,  they  were
defeated  a  second  time,  with  a  loss  of  more  than  6,000  men,
and  those  who  escaped,  turned  and  fled  to  their  own  land.

Capac  Yupanqui  followed  the  fugitives  to  their  homes,
where  He  waged  war  upon  them  in  such  wise  that  they  came
to  sue  for  peace,  offering  to  recognise  the  Lord  of  Cuzco,  as
the  other  tribes  had  done  which  were  in  friendship  with  him.
Capac  Yupanqui  pardoned  them,  and  showed  himself  very
friendly  to  them  all,  ordering  his  people  not  to  do  any  harm
to  those  whom  he  now  considered  as  friends.  Some  beau-
tiful maidens  were  then  looked  for  in  that  land,  to  be  con-
veyed to  the  temple  at  Cuzco.  Capac  Yupanqui  travelled  for
some  days  in  the  conquered  region,  requiring  the  people  to
live  in  an  orderly  way,  and  not  to  build  their  towns  in  the


REIGN    OF    CCAPAC    YUPANQUI.  109

heights  or  on  the  snow-covered  rocks.  All  was  done  as  he
ordered,  and  he  returned  to  Cuzco.

He  continued  to  enrich  the  city  and  the  temple  more  and
more ;  and  he  ordered  a  house  to  be  built  for  his  residence,
which  was  the  best  that  up  to  that  time  had  been  erected  in
Cuzco.  They  relate  that  he  had  legitimate  sons  to  succeed
him  by  the  Coya,  that  the  fame  of  his  state  and  of  the  temple
he  had  founded  spread  abroad  among  all  the  neighbouring
provinces,  and  that  all  the  people  were  astonished  at  the
good  order  and  reason  that  reigned  in  Cuzco,  and  at  the
inhabitants  being  well  dressed,  in-so-much  that  these  things
were  noised  abroad  in  all  directions.

In  those  days,  the  people  who  occupied  the  region  to  the
west  of  Cuzco  as  far  as  Andahuaylas,  having  heard  the
tidings,  sent  ambassadors  to  Capac  Yupanqui  with  gifts  and
offerings,  and  the  request  that  he  would  receive  them  as
friends  and  confederates.  The  Inca  gave  a  very  favourable
answer,  giving  them  rich  pieces  of  gold  and  silver  to  deliver
to  those  who  sent  them.  These  messengers  were  several  days
in  the  city,  receiving  kind  treatment  and  hospitality,  judging
more  by  what  they  saw  than  by  what  they  had  heard ;  and
thus  they  recounted  all  things  on  their  return.  Some  of  the
Orejones  of  Cuzco  affirm  that  the  general  language  used  in
all  the  provinces  was  that  which  was  spoken  by  these
Quichuas,1  who  were  held  by  their  neighbours  to  be  very
valiant  until  the  Chancas  destroyed  them.2    After  the  Inca

1  The  language  was  first  called  Quichua  by  Friar  Domingo  de  Santo
Tomas,  in  his  grammar  printed  at  Valladolid  in  1560.  Quehani  is  "  I
twist",  and  the  participle  quehuasca  means  twisted.  Ychu  is  "straw" —
together,  Quehuasca-ychu,  "twisted  straw",  corrupted  and  abbreviated
into  Quichua.  A  Quichua  is  properly  an  Indiau  who  inhabits  the  temperate
slopes,  so  called  from  the  abundance  of  straw  in  that  region.  According
to  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  the  name  of  Quechua  was  applied  to  the  basin
of  the  river  Abancay  (i,  p.  243).

2  Garcilasso  refers  to  the  enmity  between  the  Quichuas  and  Chancas
(i,  p.  345).


110  KEIGN    OF    CCAPAC    YUPANQUI.

Capac  Yupanqui  had  lived  many  years,  he  died  at  a  great
age.1  When  the  days  of  mourning  were  passed,  his  son  was
received  without  any  opposition  as  King  of  Cuzco,  as  his
father  had  been.     The  new  king's  name  was  Inca  Eocca.

1  Garcilasso  attributes  the  conquest  of  the  provinces  of  Cotabambas
and  Aymaraes  to  Ccapac  Yupanqui ;  as  well  as  the  sea-coast  from  Acari
to  Quilca.  He  also  attributes  the  settlement  of  the  feud  between  Cari
and  Sapana,  two  great  chiefs  of  the  Collao,  to  Ccapac  Yupanqui.  It
will  be  seen  further  on  that  Cieza  de  Leon  places  that  event  in  the  reign
of  the  Ynca  Huira-ccocha.  Ccapac  Yupanqui  is  also  made,  by  Garci-
lasso, to  extend  his  conquests  to  Cochabamba,  Chayanta.  and  the  ex-
treme south  of  Charcas ;  while  his  son  Rocca,  during  his  life-time,  over-
ran Lucanas  and  advanced  the  limits  of  the  empire  to  the  valley  of  Nasca
on  the  coast.


REIGN    OF    INCA    ROCCA.  Ill


CHAPTEK    XXXV.

Of  the  sixth  king  who  reigned  in  Cuzco  and  of  what  hap-
pened in  his  time ;  and  of  the  fable  or  history  they  relate
touching  the  river  that  passes  through  the  midst  of  the  city
of  Cuzco.

Capac  Yupanqui  being  dead  in  the  way  that  has  been  re-
lated, he  was  succeeded  in  the  lordship  by  Inca  Eocca  his  son  ;
and  a  vast  concourse  of  people  came  from  all  directions  to  be
present  at  the  ceremony  of  his  taking  the  fringe.  Great
sacrifices  were  offered  up  at  the  oracles  and  temples  in
accordance  with  their  blindness.  These  Indians  relate  that
when  the  ears  of  this  Inca  were  bored,  to  place  in  them  those
round  plates  which  are  worn  by  the  Orejones  to  this  day,  one
of  them  hurt  him  very  much.  The  pain  was  such  that  he
went  forth  from  the  city  to  a  very  high  hill  which  they  call
Chaca,  where  he  summoned  his  women  and  the  Coya  his
sister,  named  Macay  Cuca,  whom  he  had  received  as  his  wife
in  his  father's  time.  They  further  relate  that,  at  the  time,
there  happened  a  mysterious  event,  which  was  this.  Pre-
viously, neither  stream  nor  river  flowed  by  the  city,  and  this
was  felt  to  be  no  small  want  and  inconvenience.  For,  when
it  was  warm,  the  inhabitants  went  to  bathe  in  the  rivers  that
flowed  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  city,  and  they  even
bathed  when  it  was  not  warm  ;  and  there  were  small  foun-
tains for  the  use  of  the  people,  as  there  are  at  the  present
day.

The  Inca  being  on  this  hill,  somewhat  apart  from  his
people,  he  began  to  offer  up  a  prayer  to  the  great  Ticivira-
cocha  and  to  Guanacauri,  and  to  the  Sun,  and  to  the  Incas
his  ancestors,  that  they  would  be  pleased  to  declare  how  and
from  what  direction,  a  river  could  be  brought  by  human


112  KIVEKS   OF    CUZCO.

labour  to  the  city.  While  he  was  praying  he  heard  a  great
peal  of  thunder,  insomuch  that  all  present  were  terrified.
The  Inca  himself,  owing  to  the  fright  he  received,  bowed  his
head  until  the  left  ear  touched  the  ground,  from  which
flowed  much  blood.  Suddenly  he  heard  a  great  noise  of
running  water  underneath  that  place.  So,  with  great  joy,  he
ordered  many  Indians  of  the  city  to  come,  who  quickly  dug
down  until  they  reached  the  water  which  had  opened  for
itself  a  way  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  and  had  hitherto
flowed  without  being  of  any  use.

Continuing  this  narrative,  they  say  further  that,  after  they
had  dug  much  and  seen  the  source  of  the  water,  solemn
sacrifices  were  offered  to  the  gods,  for  they  believed  that  this
benefit  had  come  to  them  through  divine  interposition.  With
great  rejoicing  they  contrived  so  skilfully  that  they  led  the
water  through  the  centre  of  the  city,  having  first  paved  the
ground  with  large  flags,  and  raised  walls  with  strong
foundations  on  either  side  of  the  watercourse,  placing
some  bridges  of  stone  across,  to  pass  from  one  side  to  the
other.

I  have  seen  this  river,  and  it  is  true  that  it  flows  in  the
way  they  describe,  coming  from  its  source  in  the  direction  of
that  hill.  But,  as  for  the  rest,  I  know  not  the  truth,  and
merely  write  down  what  they  assert.  Yet  a  stream  might
well  flow  under  the  ground  without  being  either  seen  or
heard ;  for,  in  many  parts  of  this  great  kingdom,  both  large
and  small  rivers  flow  under  the  ground,  as  those  report  who
have  travelled  over  the  plains  and  mountains.  In  these  days
there  are  large  sewers  on  the  banks  of  this  river,  full  of  filth
and  refuse.  But,  in  the  time  of  the  Incas,  it  was  kept  very
clean,  the  water  flowing  over  the  large  flags,  and  occasionally
the  Inca  and  his  women  went  to  bathe  there.  At  divers
times  some  Spaniards  have  found  a  quantity  of  gold,  not
crude,  but  worked  into  small  ornaments  and  tojms,  which  had


REIGN    OF   YNCA    EOCCA.  113

been  left  or  had  fallen  when  the  Incas  and  their  retinue
bathed  in  the  river.1

After  this  event,  the  Inca  Eocca  came  forth  from  Cuzco  to
make  sacrifices,  contriving  by  great  subtilty  and  kind  words
to  bring  as  many  people  as  he  could  into  friendship  with  him.
He  advanced  towards  the  region  called  Condesuyo,  where,  in
a  place  called  Pomatambo,2  he  fought  a  battle  with  the
natives  of  that  district,  and  remained  conqueror  and  lord  of
them  all.  He  pardoned  them,  conferred  many  benefits  on
them,  instructed  them  in  his  rules  and  order  of  government,
and  they  offered  to  become  his  subjects  and  to  pay  tribute.
After  haying  been  for  some  days  in  Condesuyo,  and  having
visited  the  oracles  and  temples  in  that  region,  the  Inca
returned  in  triumph  to  Cuzco,  the  principal  chiefs  marching
before  him  to  guard  his  person,  with  axes  and  halberds  of  gold.

1  There  are  two  rivulets  which  flow  through  Cuzco,  the  Huatanay  and
Tulumayu  or  Kodadero,  coming  from  either  side  of  the  Sacsahuaman
hill  on  which  the  Ynca  fortress  was  built.  The  two  streams  unite
beyond  the  convent  of  San  Domingo,  at  Pumap-chupan  or  the  i4lion"s
tail".  Both  these  streams  are  confined  by  walls  of  cut  stone,  with  stair-
ways descending  to  the  water,  and  stone  bridges,  consisting  of  long
slabs  at  frequent  intervals.  The  houses  oh  the  western  side  of  the  great
square  are  built  over  the  Huatanay  river  ;  but  these  are  modern,  and  did
not  exist  in  the  time  of  the  Yncas.  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  says  that  the
Huatanay  was  lined  and  paved  with  masonry,  the  floor  being  of  large
flags,  and  that  this  masonry  work  extended  for  a  quarter  of  a  league
beyond  the  city.  Although  there  is  very  little  water  in  ordinary  times,
the  stream  is  subject  to  violent  freshes,  when  the  rush  of  water  some-
times injures  the  masonry.  The  name  is  composed  of  two  words,  Iluata
(a  year),  and  A nanay  an  ejaculation  of  weariness,  indicating  the  fatigue
caused  by  the  yearly  necessity  for  renewing  the  river  banks.

Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  mentions  other  springs  which  conveyed  water
to  the  temple  and  gardens  of  the  sun,  under  the  Huatanay.  He  says  that,
in  1558,  a  flood  tore  up  the  flag-stones  in  the  bed  of  the  river,  just  over
the  place  where  the  pipe  leading  water  to  the  temple  was  laid  down,  and
broke  the  pipe  itself.  The  silt  then  covered  the  place,  concealing  the
position  of  the  pipe,  so  that  no  sign  was  left  of  it  (i,  p.  281).

2  According  to  Garcilasso  it  was  Mayta  Ccapac  who  conquered  the
province  of  Puma-tampu  (corruptly  Pomatambo).

1


114  DEATH  OF  YNCA  ROCCA.

This  Inca  had  many  sons  and  not  a  single  daughter.  After
having  ordained  some  important  matters  relating  to  the
government,  he  died,  having  first  married  his  eldest  son,
named  Inca  Yupanqui,  to  a  lady  who  was  a  native  of  Ayam-
arca,  named  Mama  Chiquia.1

1  Garcilasso  says  that  Inca  Rocca  made  the  bridge  over  the  Apurimac,
and  conquered  Curarapa,  and  the  tribe  of  Chancas  in  Andahuaylas.  He
is  also  said  to  have  annexed  Vilca,  and  two  provinces  called  Sullu  and
Utunsullu,  while  his  son  subdued  Paucartarnbo  and  part  of  the  forest
region  to  the  eastward.  Inca  Rocca  is  also  said,  by  Garcilasso,  to  have
founded  schools  at  Cuzco,  and  to  have  built  his  own  palace  near  them.
He  left  a  son,  named  Yahuar-huaccac,  by  his  legitimate  wife  Mama
Mi  cay.

Bias  Valera  relates  that  Inca  Rocca  reigned  for  more  than  fifty  years;
and  this  writer  preserved  some  of  his  laws,  regulations  for  his  schools,
and  wise  sayings,  which  are  given  in  Garcilasso  (i,  p.  336).


OBSEQUIES  OF  YXCA  ROCCA.  115


CHAPTER  XXXVI.

Of  the  seventh  King  or  Inca  who  reigned  in  Cuzco,  named  Inea

Yupanqui.

When  Inca  Eocca  died,  many  people,  both  men  and  women
came  from  Condesuyo,  Vicos,  and  Ayamarca,  and  there  was
great  mourning  for  the  deceased  king.  Many  women,  from
among  those  who  in  life  had  loved  and  served  him,  in  accord-
ance with  the  general  blindness  of  those  Indians,  hung  them-
selves by  their  own  hair,  and  others  were  killed  in  divers
ways  ;  that  their  souls  might  go  quickly  to  serve  their  lord.
In  the  sepulchre,  which  was  sumptuous  and  magnificent,  they
put  great  treasures,  and  a  still  greater  number  of  women  and
servants,  with  provisions  and  fine  clothing.

No  sepulchre  of  these  kings  has  been  found,  but  to  form  a
judgment  as  to  whether  they  were  rich  or  not,  it  is  not  neces-
sary to  seek  further  proof  than  the  fact  that  in  ordinary  bury-
ing places  60,000  pesos  of  gold,  more  or  less,  have  been  found.
What  then  must  have  been  the  quantity  deposited  in  a  royal
tomb,  when  they  possessed  so  much  of  the  precious  metals,
and  held  it  to  be  most  important  to  leave  this  life  well  pro-
vided with  riches  ?

They  also  made  an  image  of  Inca  Eocca,  accounting  him  as
one  of  their  gods,  and  believing  that  he  took  his  rest  in
heaven.

As  soon  as  the  mourning  was  over,  and  the  obsequies  were
completed,  the  new  Inca  retired  to  perform  his  fast ;  and  lest
any  sedition  or  disturbance  should  be  caused  by  his  absence,
he  ordered  that  one  of  the  principal  nobles  of  his  lineage
should  represent  his  person  in  public  ;  to  whom  he  gave
authority  to  punish  offences,  and  to  maintain  the  city  in
peace  and  rest,  until  the  Inca  should  come  forth  with  the

i2


116  ACCESSION    OF   YXCA   YUPAXQUI    I.

royal  insignia  of  the  fringe.  They  say  that  they  have  the
tradition  that  this  Inca  was  of  gentle  presence,  grave,  and  of  im-
posing mien.  He  retired  into  the  most  secret  part  of  his
palace,  where  he  remained  to  perform  his  fast  on  maize.  At
the  end  of  the  fast  he  came  forth,  the  people  showing  great
joy  on  beholding  him.  They  made  feasts  and  great  sacrifices,
and  afterwards  the  Inca  ordered  that  quantities  of  gold  and
silver  should  be  brought  from  all  parts  for  the  temple.  And
in  Cuzco  they  made  the  stone  which  they  called  "of  the  war"
It  was  large,  and  was  enriched  with  gold  and  stones.1

1  u  Y  se  hizo  en  el  Cuzco  la  piedra  que  llaman  de  la  guerra,  grande,
y  las  engastonadas  en  ore-  y  piedras."  So  in  the  Escurial  copy,  but  the
meaning  is  not  clear.


DEATH  OF  YNCA  YUPANQUI  I.  117


CHAPTER   XXXVII.

How  when  this  Ynca  wanted  to  make  war  in  the  province  oj
Collao,  a  certain  disturbance  arose  in  Cuzco ;  and  how  the
Chancas  conquered  the  Quichuas,  and  got  possession  of  their
dominions.

Inca  Yupanqui  being  in  Cuzco  with  the  desire  of  ennobling
it,  he  determined  to  go  to  Colla-suyu,  which  includes  the  pro-
vinces to  the  southward  of  the  city,  because  he  had  received
intelligence  that  the  descendants  of  Zapana,  who  reigned  in
Hatun-colla,  were  very  proud  and  powerful,  and  that  they
had  assembled  forces  to  march  upon  Cuzco.  So  he  ordered
his  people  to  prepare.  The  Indians  relate  that  many  men  had
arrived  for  the  campaign  which  Inca  Yupanqui  wanted  to
undertake,  and,  being  on  the  point  of  setting  out,  some  cap-
tains of  Condesuyo,  with  their  warriors,  plotted  amongst
themselves  to  kill  the  Inca.  For  they  said  that  if  he  returned
victorious,  he  would  be  in  such  high  estimation  that  he  would
desire  to  bring  all  men  under  vassalage  and  servitude.  At
the  time  when  the  Inca  was  engaged  in  his  festivities,  and
somewhat  joyous  from  the  quantity  of  wine  he  had  drunk,
one  of  the  conspirators  approached  and  delivered  a  blow  with
a  stick  on  the  royal  head.  The  Inca,  disturbed  and  excited,
rose  up  saying,  "What  do  you  do,  traitor  ?"  By  this  time,  the
men  of  Condesuyos  had  killed  many  persons,  and  the  Inca
himself  thought  of  seeking  safety  in  the  temple.  But  it  was
of  no  avail  to  think,  for  he  was  overtaken  by  his  enemies  and
killed,  with  many  of  his  women.1

1  This  Ynca  Yupanqui  of  Cieza  de  Leon,  son  of  Ynca  Rocca,  is  the
Yahuar-huaccac  of  Garcilasso  and  other  writers.  When  he  was  a  child
he  is  said  to  have  wept  blood,  and  hence  the  name.  Yahuar  (blood),  and
Huaccac  (weepiug).  Others  declared  that  he  was  born  weepirig  blood.
During  his  reign,  according  to  the  account  of  Garcilasso,  all  the  coast


118  REVOLT   OF   THE'CONDESUYOS.

There  was  great  confusion  in  the  city,  insomuch  that  one
man  could  not  understand  another.  The  priests  had  retired
to  the  temple,  and  the  women  tore  their  hair,  horrified  at  the
death  of  the  Inca  by  bloodshed,  as  if  he  had  been  some  vile
person.  Many  of  the  inhabitants  were  preparing  to  abandon
the  city,  and  the  murderers  wanted  to  plunder.  They  relate
that  at  this  juncture  there  was  a  great  noise  of  thunder  with
li&htning,  and  there  fell  so  much  water  from  heaven  that
those  of  Condesuyo  were  afraid.  "Without  following  up  their
success,  they  retired,  contenting  themselves  with  the  mischief
they  had  done.

They  further  state  that,  at  that  time,  the  Quichuas  were
lords  of  the  province  called  Andahuaylas,  and  that  from  the
neighbourhood  of  a  lake  called  Choclococha  there  came  a
great  multitude  of  people  under  two  captains  named  Huaraca
and  Uasco ;  who  went  forward,  conquering  as  they  advanced,
until  they  came  to  that  province.    When  the  inhabitants  knew


region  from  Arequipa  to  the  desert  of  Atacama  was  annexed  to  the
empire  by  the  Ynca's  general  and  brother  named  Apu  Mayta.  The
Ynca  was  much  troubled  by  the  headstrong  disposition  of  his  son,  whom
he  banished  to  a  lofty  plateau  called  Chita,  to  the  eastward  of  Cuzco,  to
live  with  shepherds  who  tended  the  flocks  of  the  Sun.  Three  years
afterwards,  the  son  returned  to  Cuzco  and  told  the  Ynca  his  father  that
an  apparition,  calling  itself  Uira-ccocha  Ynca,  had  appeared  to  him
while  he  slept  under  a  rock.  It  ordered  him  to  repair  to  Cuzco  and  re-
port that  there  was  a  great  rebellion  in  the  western  province,  threatening
the  existence  of  the  empire.  Yahuar-huaccac  did  not  believe  the  story,
and  ordered  his  son  to  return  to  his  banishment  in  the  pastures  of  Chita.
But  soon  the  news  came  of  the  great  rebellion  of  the  Chancas,  Yahuar-
huaccac  fled  to  Muyna,  five  leagues  south  of  Cuzco,  while  his  son  put
himself  at  the  head  of  the  army,  and  defeated  the  rebels.  He  took  the
name  of  the  apparition,  calling  himself  Ynca  Uira-ccocha,  and  dethroned
his  father.

There  is  little  resemblance  between  the  stories  told  by  Cieza  de  Leon
of  Ynca  Yupanqui,  and  by  Garcilasso  of  Yahuar-huaccac,  except  that
they  were  both  unfortunate.  It  will  be  seen  further  on  that  Cieza  de
Leon  places  the  great  rebellion  of  the  Chancas  after  the  reign  of  Uira-
ccocha,  and  tells  quite  a  different  story  about  it.


THE    QUICHUAS   AND    CHANCAS.  119

of  their  approach,  they  prepared  for  war,  encouraging  each
other,  and  saying,  that  it  would  be  right  to  kill  those  who  had
come  to  attack  them.  Coming  forth  by  a  pass  which  leads
towards  the  Aymaraes,  these  Chancas  with  their  captains  ap-
proached their  opponents,  until  they  were  close  together,  when
some  speeches  were  made  between  them.  Then  they  joined
battle.  According  to  the  tradition,  the  fighting  was  desperate,
and  the  result  long  doubtful.  Finally,  the  Quichuas  were  de-
feated and  cruelly  treated,  for  all  who  fell  into  the  hands  of
the  enemy  were  killed,  without  sparing  tender  youth  or  help-
less old  age,  and  carrying  off  the  women.  Having  done  other
evil  things,  they  made  themselves  lords  of  that  province,  and
possessed  it  as  their  descendants  do  to  this  day.  And  I  have
related  this  event  because  hereafter  there  will  be  frequent
mention  of  these  Chancas.

Eeturning  to  the  previous  subject  of  the  retreat  of  the
Condesuyos  from  Cuzco,  the  city  was  cleared  of  the  dead,  and
great  sacrifices  were  offered  up.  Moreover,  it  is  said  to  be
certain  that,  in  the  interment  of  Inca  Yupanqui,  the  same
honors  as  were  done  to  his  ancestors  were  not  accorded  to
him,  nor  was  his  image  set  up,  and  he  left  no  son.


120  ACCESSION    OF   UIRA-CCOCHA   YNCA.


CHAPTEE   XXXVIII.

How  the  Orejones  considered  who  should  be  Inca,  and  what
passed  until  Viracocha  Inca  assumed  the  fringe,  who  was
the  eight  Inca  that  reigned.

When  what  lias  been  related,  in  accordance  with  the  account
given  by  the  Orejones  of  Cuzco  of  these  things,  had  taken
place,  there  was  great  lamentation  for  the  death  of  the  Inca.
Then  the  principal  people  of  the  city  considered  who  should
be  chosen  for  king,  and  who  was  worthy  to  be  raised  to  such
a  post  of  dignity.  There  were  several  opinions,  some  pro-
posing that  there  should  be  no  king,  but  that  the  city  should
be  governed  by  those  who  might  be  elected ;  while  others
maintained  that  all  would  be  lost  if  there  was  no  head.

Over  this  question  there  was  a  great  dispute,  and  while  it
was  at  its  height,  they  say  that  a  woman  came  forth,  in  front
of  the  Anan-Cuzcos  and  said,  "What  are  you  about  ?  Why  do
you  not  take  Viracocha  Inca,  seeing  that  he  is  so  worthy?"
On  hearing  these  words,  the  people  left  their  cups  of  wine,
and  went  hastily  for  Viracocha  Inca,  son  of  Inca  Yupanqui,1
saying,  as  soon  as  they  saw  him,  that  he  should  perform  the
accustomed  fast,  and  then  receive  the  fringe,  which  they
desired  to  confer  upon  him.  Viracocha  agreeing,  he  com-
menced the  fast,  and  committed  the  charge  of  the  city  to  his
relation  Eocca  Inca.  In  due  time  he  came  forth  with  the
crown,  and  they  celebrated  solemn  festivals  in  Cuzco,  which
lasted  for  many  days,  all  showing  great  satisfaction  at  the
election  of  the  new  Inca.

Some  have  pretended  that  this  Inca  was  called  Viracocha  be-
cause he  came  from  other  parts  and  brought  with  him  a  different

1  He  contradicts  himself,  for,  at  the  end  of  the  last  chapter,  he  said
that  Ynca  Yupanqui  had  no  son.


REIGN    OF   UIRA-CCOCHA   YNCA.  121

dress,  and  that  in  Ids  features  and  aspect  lie  appeared  like  a
Spaniard,  because  he  had  a  beard.1  They  relate  other  things
which  would  be  tedious  if  they  were  written  down.  I  inquired
touching  this  matter,  of  Cayu  Tupac  Yupanqui,  and  the  other
principal  people  in  Cuzco,  who  gave  me  the  account  of  the
Incas  which  I  am  now  writing,  and  they  replied  that  it  was
nonsense,  without  any  foundation.  For  Viracocha  was  born
and  brought  up  in  Cuzco  like  his  parents  and  grandparents,
and  the  name  of  Viracocha  was  given  him  as  a  special  name,
such  as  each  one  receives.

As  soon  as  he  received  the  crown,  he  married  with  one  of
the  principal  ladies  named  Kuntu  Coya,2  who  was  very  beau-
tiful. When  the  festivities  were  concluded  he  resolved  to  set
out  for  the  conquest  of  some  people  near  Cuzco,  who  had  not
consented  to  come  into  friendly  relations  with  former  Incas,
confiding  in  the  strength  of  their  pucar as.  With  the  force
that  he  saw  fit  to  assemble,  he  set  out  from  Cuzco  in  a  rich
litter  guarded  by  the  principal  people,  and  directed  his  march
to  a  place  called  Calca,3  where  his  messenger  had  been
received  with  much  insolence.  When  those  of  Calca  knew
that  the  army  of  Cuzco  was  approaching,  they  assembled  in
arms  and  posted  themselves  in  the  heights,  whence  they
hurled  great  stones  on  the  troops  of  the  Inca,  that  they  might
kill  those  who  were  struck.  The  Incas  climbed  up  the  hills,
and,  in  spite  of  opposition,  succeeded  in  occupying  one  of  the
forts  or  strongholds.  When  those  of  Calca  saw  the  Cuzco
soldiers  in  their  fastnesses,  they  came  forth  in  a  body,  and
fought  resolutely.  The  battle  continued  from  morning  until
noon,  and  many  were  killed  on  both  sides,  still  more  being
made  prisoners.    The  victory  remained  with  those  of  Cuzco.

1  Garcilasso  describes  the  apparition  which,  according  to  his  story,
appeared  to  the  prince  who  was  afterwards  Ynca  Uira-ccocha,  as  having
had  a  beard.

2  Garcilasso  gives  the  same  name  to  the  wife  of  Ynca  Uira-ccocha
(ii,  p.  88).     Runtu  means  an  egg.

:i  in  the  valley  of  the  Vilcamayu.  near  Cuzco.


122  EEIGN    OF   UIRA-CCOCHA   YNCA.

The  Inca  was  near  a  river,1  where  his  camp  was  pitched,
and  when  he  knew  of  the  victory  he  felt  much  joy.  Then  his
captains  came  down  with  the  spoil  and  the  captives.  The
Indians  who  had  escaped  from  the  battle,  with  other  captains
of  Calca  and  of  the  neighbourhood,  saw  that  their  plans  had
turned  out  so  badly,  and  that  the  only  course  for  them  was  to
try  the  good  faith  of  the  conqueror,  and  to  seek  for  peace,  and  a
moderate  servitude  such  as  many  others  had  agreed  to.  They
came  forth  to  a  place  on  the  mountain  and  said,  in  a  loud
voice,  "Live  for  ever!  live,  0  powerful  Inca  Viracocha,  our
lord  I"  At  the  noise  caused  by  the  voices  the  Cuzco  troops
flew  to  arms,  but  very  little  time  elapsed  before  the  conquered
were  prostrate  on  the  ground  before  Viracocha  Inca,  where
without  rising,  one  who  was  held  to  be  the  wisest  amongst
them,  raising  his  voice  began  to  say:  "You  ought,  0  Inca,
neither  to  become  proud  at  the  victory  which  God  has  given
you,  nor  to  despise  us  for  having  been  defeated ;  for  to  you
and  to  the  Incas  it  is  permitted  to  be  lords  over  other  tribes,
and  to  us  it  is  given  to  defend  the  liberty  which  we  received
from  our  fathers,  with  all  our  power,  and  when  we  are  unable
to  succeed  in  this,  it  is  for  us  to  obey  and  submit  with  a  good
grace.  Therefore  give  the  order  that  no  more  of  us  are  to  be
killed,  and  no  more  harm  to  be  done,  and  dispose  of  us  accord-
ing to  your  will."  And  when  the  principal  Indian  had  spoken
these  words,  the  rest  asked  for  mercy  with  loud  groans.

The  Inca  replied  that  if  harm  had  come,  their  anger  had
been  the  occasion  of  it,  for  at  first  they  would  not  believe  his
words  nor  receive  his  friendship ;  that  now  he  freely  granted
them  their  lands  and  property  as  at  first,  and  that,  in  con-
formity with  the  laws,  they  would  pay  tribute  and  do  service.
He  ordered  them  to  build  two  palaces,  one  within  the  city  of
Cuzco,  and  the  other  in  Saqui,  as  a  place  of  recreation.  They
answered  that  they  would  do  so,  and  the  Inca  ordered  the
captives  to  be  released  and  their  property  to  be  restored.  In
1  The  river  Vilcamayu.


REIGN    OF   UIRA-CCOCHA   YNCA.  123

order  that  they  might  understand  what  they  had  to  do,  and
that  no  dissensions  might  arise  among  them,  he  ordered  a
delegate  with  great  power  to  remain  among  them,  without
depriving  the  native  lord  of  his  jurisdiction.

These  events  having  passed,  the  Inca  Viracocha  sent  a  mes-
senger to  summon  those  of  Caitomarca,  who  had  made  strong
places  on  the  other  side  of  a  river,  without  ever  having  shown
a  desire  of  friendship  with  the  Incas  who  were  lords  of  Cuzco.
When  the  messenger  of  the  Inca  Viracocha  arrived,  they
reviled  him,  calling  the  Inca  a  mad  man,  for  believing  that
they  would  easily  submit  to  his  rule.


124  REIGN   OF   UIRA-CCOCHA   YNCA.


CHAPTER   XXXIX.

How  Viracocha  Inca  threw  a  stone  of  fire  ivith  a  sling  at  Caito-
marca, and  hotv  they  made  reverence.

As  soon  as  Viracocha  Inca  had  despatched  the  messenger,  he
ordered  the  camp  to  be  raised,  and  a  march  to  be  undertaken
in  the  direction  of  Caitomarca.  Advancing  by  the  road,  they
arrived  at  a  river,  where  the  Inca  ordered  a  halt  for  rest.
Being  in  this  place,  the  messenger  arrived,  who  reported  how
those  of  Caitomarca  had  mocked  at  him,  and  how  they  had
said  that  they  felt  no  fear  of  the  Incas.  When  this  message
was  understood  by  the  Inca  Viracocha,  he  rose  up  on  the
litter  with  great  anger,  ordering  the  troops  to  advance  with
all  speed.  This  was  done,  until  they  came  to  a  large  and
rapid  river,  which  I  believe  must  have  been  the  river  of
Yucay.1  Here  the  Inca  ordered  his  tents  to  be  pitched,  in-
tending to  attack  the  enemy's  town  on  the  other  side ;  but  the
current  was  so  strong  that  this  was  not  possible.  Those  of
Caitomarca  came  to  the  river  side,  whence  they  hurled  many
stones  from  their  slings  at  the  Inca's  camp,  and  began  to
utter  cries  and  great  shouts.  For  it  is  a  strange  custom  with
these  people,  when  they  fight  with  each  other,  how  little  they
allow  their  mouths  to  rest.

For  two  days  the  Inca  was  on  the  banks  of  that  river
without  being  able  to  cross  it,  for  there  was  no  bridge ;  nor
is  it  clear  whether  they  had  those  which  are  now  in  use
before  the  time  of  the  Incas :  some  say  that  they  had  them,
while  others  maintain  the  contrary.  They  relate  that  Vira-
cocha Inca  ordered  a  small  stone  to  be  put  into  a  strong  flame,
and  when  it  was  very  hot  he  applied  a  certain  preparation  to

1  Or  Vilcaiuayu.


REIGN   OF   UIEA-CCOCHA   YNCA.  125

it  which  would  make  it  set  fire  to  anything  it  touched.  He
then  ordered  it  to  be  put  into  a  sling  made  of  gold  wire,  with
which,  when  he  was  inclined,  he  was  accustomed  to  hurl
stones,  and  with  great  force  he  threw  the  heated  missile  into
the  town  of  Caitomarca.  It  fell  on  the  eave  of  a  roof  which
was  thatched  with  very  dry  straw,  and  presently  the  thatch
burnt,  so  that  the  Indians  cried  out  to  know  what  had  hap-
pened, and  who  had  set  fire  to  the  house.  Then  an  old
woman  presented  herself  before  them  and  said,  "Listen  to
what  I  declare,  and  to  what  is  certain.  Think  not  that  the
house  has  been  set  on  fire  by  any  one  here,  but  believe  that
the  fire  came  from  heaven.  For  I  beheld  a  burning  stone,
which,  falling  from  on  high,  struck  the  house  and  destroyed
it  as  you  see."

When  the  principal  leaders,  and  the  elders  of  the  town  heard
this,  being  such  great  soothsayers  and  wizards,  they  believed
that  the  stone  had  been  sent  by  the  hand  of  God  as  a  punish-
ment for  disobeying  the  Inca.  Presently,  without  waiting
for  an  answer  from  the  oracle  or  offering  up  any  sacrifice,
they  crossed  the  river  in  balsas,  bringing  presents  to  the  Inca.
When  they  were  brought  into  his  presence,  they  asked  for
peace  and  made  great  offers  of  their  persons  and  estates,  as
their  allies  had  previously  done.

The  Inca  Yiracocha,  on  learning  what  those  of  Caitomarca
had  said,  replied  with  great  dissimulation  that  if  they  had
not  quickly  come  on  that  day,  he  had  determined  to  attack
them  on  the  following  morning,  in  great  balsas  which  he  had
caused  to  be  prepared.  The  agreement  was  then  made  be-
tween those  of  Caitomarca  and  the  Inca ;  and  that  sovereign
gave  to  the  captain  or  lord  of  Caitomarca  one  of  his  own
women,  a  native  of  Cuzco,  which  was  esteemed  a  great
favor.

The  fame  of  the  Inca's  deeds  was  spread  abroad  in  the
neighbouring  districts,  and  many,  without  seeing  the  arms  of
the  Cuzco  army,  sent  to  offer  friendship  and  alliance  with


126  REIGN   OF    UIRA-CCOCHA   YNCA.

the  king  Inca,  who  was  well  pleased,  speaking  lovingly  to  one
and  another,  showing  great  kindness  to  all,  and  providing
them  with  what  they  needed.  Seeing  that  he  was  now  able
to  assemble  a  great  army,  the  Inca  determined  to  call  troops
together  to  advance  in  person  into  Condesuyo.


KEVOLT   OF   CCAPAC.  127


CHAPTEE   XL.

How  a  tyrant  rose  up  in  Cuzco,  and  of  the  disturbance  he
caused.  Of  the  chastisement  of  certain  Mamaconas  for
having,  contrary  to  their  religion,  used  their  bodies  un-
cleanly ;  and  hoio  Viracocha  returned  to  Cuzco.

The  news  was  received  at  Cuzco  of  everything  that  hap-
pened to  Viracocha ;  and  when  an  account  was  given  in  the
city  of  the  operations  against  those  of  Caitomarca,  they  say
that  a  tyrant  rose  up  in  the  person  of  a  brother  of  the  late
Inca  Yupanqui,  who,  being  much  annoyed  because  the  lord-
ship and  sovereignty  had  been  given  to  Viracocha  and  not  to
him,  was  watching  for  an  opportunity  to  seize  the  supreme
power.  He  entertained  this  design  because  he  had  formed  a
party  among  some  of  the  Orejones  and  principal  persons  of
the  lineage  of  Orin-Cuzcos.  On  receiving  the  news  of  this
war  which  the  Tnca  was  engaged  in,  and  it  seeming  likely
that  he  would  find  a  difficulty  in  bringing  it  to  a  successful
end,  the  conspirator  resolved  to  kill  him  who  had  been  left
as  governor  of  the  city,  and  to  take  possession.

Capac,  for  such  was  his  name,  eager  for  the  command,
assembled  his  party  on  a  day  when  all  the  rest  of  the  Ore-
jones were  in  the  temple  of  the  Sun,  and  among  them  Inca
Rocca,  the  governor  of  the  Inca  Viracocha,  and  took  up  arms.
He  declared  that  Viracocha  could  not  retain  the  sovereignty,
and  he  killed  the  governor,  with  many  others,  whose  blood
stained  the  altars  and  sanctuaries,  and  the  figure  of  the  Sun.
The  mamaconas  and  priests  ran  out  with  much  noise,  cursing
the  murderers  and  declaring  that  so  great  a  crime  deserved
a  great  punishment.  A  crowd  came  forth  from  the  city  to
see  what  had  happened.  Some  approving  of  the  rebellion,
joined  with  Capac  ;  others,  deploring  the  murders,  took  up


128  REVOLT   OF   CCAPAO.

arms,  and  there  was  thus  a  division,  many  being  killed  both
on  one  side  and  on  the  other.  The  city  resounded  with  such
noise  and  shouts,  that  men  could  not  hear  their  own  voices.
In  this  confusion  the  tyrant  got  possession,  killing  many  of
the  women  of  the  Inca.  Some  fled  from  the  city,  and  escaped
to  the  camp  of  Viracocha,  who,  concealing  what  he  felt,
ordered  his  troops  to  march  towards  Cuzco.

To  return  to  the  tyrant  Capac.  When  he  had  got  posses-
sion of  the  city,  he  wanted  to  appear  in  public  with  the
fringe,  that  all  might  receive  him  as  king.  But  when  the
first  excitement  was  over,  during  which  many  had  lost  their
judgment  and  committed  great  crimes,  the  very  same  who
had  incited  the  usurper  to  rise,  now  upbraided  him,  went  out
to  meet  the  Inca,  and  sought  pardon  for  what  they  had  done.

Capac  had  no  lack  of  courage  to  carry  through  the  affair,
but  he  was  much  disturbed  to  see  how  small  was  the  number
of  those  who  adhered  to  him.  He  cursed  those  who  had
deceived  and  deserted  him,  and,  that  he  might  not  behold  the
return  of  the  Inca,  he  took  poison  and  died.  His  women  and
children,  with  other  relations,  imitated  his  example.

The  news  of  all  this  came  to  the  royal  camp,  and  the  Inca,
when  he  reached  the  city,  wTent  straight  to  the  temple  of  the
Sun  to  offer  up  sacrifices.  The  bodies  of  Capac  and  of  the
others  who  had  died  with  him,  were  ordered  to  be  cast  forth
into  the  fields,  to  be  devoured  by  birds  of  prey ;  and  those
who  aided  the  treason  were  condemned  to  death.

The  allies  and  confederates  of  Viracocha  Inca,  when  they
heard  what  had  happened,  sent  many  embassies  with  presents
and  offerings  of  congratulation,  and  to  these  embassies  he
made  joyful  replies.

At  this  time,  the  Orejones  say  that  there  were  many
virgins  of  rank  in  the  temple  of  the  Sun,  who  were  honored
and  esteemed,  as  has  been  explained  in  many  parts  of  this
history.  And  they  further  add  that  four  of  them  used  their
bodies  uncleanly  with  certain  servants  who  guarded  them,


QUESTION   OF   SUCCESSION.  129

and  being  discovered  they  were  taken,  both  the  men  and  the
women,  and  the  high  priest  ordered  that  they  should  be
judged,  and  punished.

The  Inca  had  determined  to  invade  Condesuyo,  but,  feeling
tired  and  old,  he  gave  up  the  plan.  He  then  ordered  that
palaces,  to  be  used  by  him  for  recreation,  should  be  built  in
the  valley  of  Xaquixaguana.  As  he  had  many  sons,  and  as
he  knew  that  the  eldest,  who  was  named  Inca  Urco,  to  whom
the  sovereignty  would  descend,  was  a  man  of  vicious  habits
and  very  cowardly,  he  desired  to  deprive  him  of  the  inherit-
ance, in  order  to  give  it  to  another  who  was  younger  and
more  worthy,  named  Inca  Yupanqui.


130  CHIEFS    OF   THE    COLLAO.


CHAPTER   XLT.


How  ambassadors  from  the  tyrants  of  the  Collao  came  to  Cuzco>
and  of  the  departure  of  Viracocha  Inca  for  the  Collao.

Many  histories  and  events  fell  out  between  the  natives  of
these  provinces  in  early  times ;  but  as  I  make  a  rule  only  to
relate  what  I  hold  to  be  certain,  according  to  the  opinions  of
the  learned  natives  and  to  the  narrative  I  took  down  at
Cuzco,  I  leave  out  what  I  do  not  clearly  understand,  and  treat
of  what  I  feel  sure,  as  I  have  already  explained  several  times.

It  is  well  known,  among  the  Orejones,  that  at  this  time
ambassadors  came  to  Cuzco  from  the  province  of  the  Collao.
For  they  relate  that,  in  the  reign  of  Inca  Viracocha,  a  lord
named  Zapana  ruled  over  Hatun-colla.  In  the  lake  of
Titicaca  there  are  islands  inhabited  by  people  with  large
balsas,  and  another  lord  named  Cari  went  to  the  islands,
where  he  fought  with  the  people  insomuch  that  there  were
great  battles  between  them,  out  of  which  the  Cari  came  forth
a  conqueror.  But  he  had  no  other  object  than  to  destroy  the
villagers  and  carry  off  plunder,  without  troubling  himself  to
take  prisoners.  He  returned  to  Chucuito,  where  he  had  es-
tablished himself,  and  he  had  under  his  sway  the  towns  of
Ylave,  Yuli,  Zepita,  Pomata,  and  others.  With  the  people  he
could  collect,  after  having  offered  up  great  sacrifices  to  his
gods  or  devils,  he  determined  to  march  to  the  province  of  the
Canas.  These  men,  when  they  heard  of  his  approach,  assem-
bled together,  came  forth  to  meet  him,  and  fought  a  battle  in
which  they  were  defeated  with  much  loss.  After  this  victory
Cari  determined  to  continue  his  advance,  and  arrived  at
Luracachi,  where  it  is  said  that  he  fought  another  battle,  and
was  equally  fortunate.

With  these  victories  Cari  became  very  proud,  and  the  news
spread  abroad.    When  Zapana,  the  lord  of  Hatun-colla,  heard


CONSULTATIONS  WITH  ORACLES.  131

of  it,  he  was  very  sad,  and  he  assembled  his  friends  and  vassals
to  take  the  field  and  despoil  Cari.  But  he  could  not  do  this
so  secretly  as  to  prevent  Cari  from  understanding  the  design
of  Zapana,  and  he  retired  in  good  order  to  Chucuito  by  an
unfrequented  road,  so  that  Zapana  could  not  molest  him.
Having  arrived  in  his  own  country,  Cari  assembled  his  prin-
cipal chiefs,  that  they  might  consult  touching  the  designs  for
Zapana,  whose  destruction  was  meditated  by  Cari,  that  there
might  be  only  one  lord  in  the  Collao.  Zapana  had  the  same
thought  in  his  mind.

And  as  the  valour  of  the  Incas,  and  the  great  power  of
Viracocha  was  spread  abroad  over  all  that  region,  each  of
these  chiefs,  desiring  to  obtain  his  friendship,  sent  ambassadors
to  Cuzco  to  secure  his  alliance  and  induce  him  to  take  part
against  the  rival  chief.  These  messengers  set  out  with  great
presents,  and  arrived  at  Cuzco  when  the  Inca  was  at  the
places  or  tamjpus  which,  for  his  diversion,  he  had  ordered  to
be  built  in  Xaquixaguana.  Hearing  that  they  were  coming,
the  Inca  ordered  that  they  should  be  lodged  in  the  city  and
provided  with  all  they  required.

The  Inca  consulted  with  the  Orejones  and  venerable  coun-
cillors touching  the  course  that  ought  to  be  adopted  in  the
matter  of  the  embassies  that  had  come  from  the  Collao  ;  and
it  was  decided  that  a  reply  should  be  sought  from  the  oracles.
This  is  done  by  the  priests  in  front  of  the  idols.  They
bow  down  their  shoulders,  put  their  chins  into  their  breasts,
and  begin  to  speak  in  loud  voices.  Occasionally  I  myself,
with  my  own  ears,  have  heard  the  Indians  converse  with  the
devil.  In  the  province  of  Cartagena,  in  a  seaport  town  called
Bahayre,1  I  heard  the  devil  answer  in  a  clear  whistle,  and  so
loudly,  that  a  Christian  who  was  in  the  same  town  but  more
than  half  a  league  from  where  I  was,  heard  the  same  whistle
and  was  dismayed,  being  rather  unwell.     On  another  day  the

1  Only  Cieza  de  Leon  could  have  said  this.     Bahaire  is  the  town  in
the  bay  of  Cartagena  where  he  was  with  Heredia  in  1533.

K  2


132  ALLIANCE   WITH    CAKI.

Indians  made  great  shoutings,  publishing  the  reply  of  the
devil.  In  some  parts  of  these  lands  where  they  keep  the  dead
in  hammocks,  the  devils  occasionally  enter  into  the  bodies  and
give  answers.  I  heard  a  man  named  Aranda  say  that,  in  the
island  of  Carex,1  he  also  saw  one  of  these  dead  bodies  speak,
and  the  lies  and  nonsense  they  utter  are  laughable.

When  the  Inca  determined  to  seek  for  an  answer  from  the
oracles,  he  sent  for  those  who  were  accustomed  to  manage
those  things,  and  they  say  that  the  reply  was  that  he  should
arrange  to  go  to  the  Collao  and  seek  the  alliance  of  Cari.  So
he  ordered  the  messengers  of  Zapana  to  be  brought  before
him,  and  told  them  to  say  to  their  lord  that  he  would  shortly
leave  Cuzco  and  march  to  the  Collao,  where  he  would  treat  of
the  question  of  friendship.  To  those  who  came  on  the  part
of  Cari  he  said  that  they  were  to  explain  to  the  lord  how  he
was  preparing  to  come  to  his  aid,  and  that  he  would  soon  be
with  him.2  When  this  was  done,  the  Inca  ordered  forces  to
be  assembled  to  march  from  Cuzco,  leaving  one  of  the  prin-
cipal persons  of  his  lineage  as  governor.

1  In  the  bay  of  Cartagena.

2  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  places  this  feud  between  the  two  great  chiefs
of  the  Collao,  Cari  and  Sapana  (or  Chipana),  in  the  reign  of  Ccapac
Yupanqui,  two  generations  earlier.  He  says  that  the  names  were  those
of  dynasties,  each  sovereign  becoming  Cari  or  Sapana  when  he  suc-
ceeded; adding  that,  "Cieza  de  Leon  places  these  events  long  after  the
time  when  they  really  occurred."  His  version  is  that  both  the  chiefs
declared  that  they  would  abide  by  the  arbitration  of  the  Ynca.  They
came  to  the  Ynca's  camp  at  Paria,  near  Oruro,  by  different  roads.  The
Ynca's  decision  was  that  boundary  marks  should  be  set  up,  that  peace
should  be  maintained,  and  that  his  laws  should  be  observed  by  both
chiefs.  Cari  and  Sapana  were,  from  that  time,  faithful  vassals.  Their
territories  comprised  Cochabamba.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  version  of  Garcilasso  is  very  different  from  that
in  the  text.  See  my  translation  of  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  i,  pp.  247  to
252.


DEFEAT    OF    THE   CANCHES,  133


CHAPTEE  XLIL

SbwViracocha  Inca  passed  by  the  provinces  of  the  Candies  and
Cartas,  and  marched  until  he  entered  the  territory  of  the
Collao,  and  of  what  happened  between  Cari  and  Zapana.

Having  determined  to  march  to  the  Collao,  the  Inca  set  out
from  the  city  of  Cnzco  with  a  large  force,  passing  hy  Muyna,
and  by  the  towns  of  Urcos  and  Quiquijana.  When  the
Candies,1  heard  of  his  approach,  they  determined  to  assemble
and  come  forth  with  their  arms,  to  defend  the  passage  through
their  land.  The  Inca,  on  receiving  news  of  their  intention,
sent  messengers  to  represent  that  they  should  not  undertake
such  an  enterprise,  for  that  he  did  not  wish  to  give  them  any
affront,  but  rather  desired  to  be  their  friend,  and  if  their
chiefs  and  captains  would  come  to  him,  he  would  give  them
to  drink  from  his  own  cup.  The  Canches  replied  to  the  mes-
sengers that  the  Inca  should  not  pass  by  reason  of  what  they
said,  and  that  they  were  there  to  defend  their  country  which
had  been  invaded.  Returning  with  this  answer,  the  messen-
gers found  the  IncaViracocha  in  Cangalla,  full  of  anger  at  the
small  account  in  which  the  Canches  held  his  embassy.  He
made  a  rapid  march,  arriving  at  a  town  which  is  called  Com-
pata.  Kear  a  river  which  flows  close  by,  he  found  the
Canches  drawn  up  in  order  of  battle,  and  here  the  combat
between  the  two  forces  took  place.  Many  died  on  both
sides,  and  the  Canches  were  defeated.  Those  who  were  able
to  do  so,  fled,  and  were  followed  by  the  conquerors,  killing
and  taking  prisoners.  After  a  long  time  the  pursuers  re-
turned with  the  spoils,  bringing  with  them  many  prisoners,
both  men  and  women.

After  this  had  happened,   the  Canches,  throughout   the

1  The  territory  of  the  Canches  was  in  the  upper  part  of  the  Yilcainayu
valley.


134  FRIENDSHIP  OF  THE  CANAS.

province,  sent  messengers  to  the  Inca,  beseeching  him  to
pardon  them,  and  to  receive  them  into  his  service.  As  the  Inca
desired  nothing  else,  he  granted  the  usual  conditions,  which
were  that  they  should  receive  those  of  Cuzco  as  sovereign
lord,  and  submit  their  laws  and  customs,  offering  tribute  of
what  they  produced,  in  accordance  with  what  was  done  by
other  subjects.  After  passing  some  days  in  arranging  these
affairs,  and  in  making  the  Candies  understand  that  they  must
live  together  in  towns,  and  must  not  engage  in  quarrels  or
wars  amongst  themselves,  he  passed  onwards.

The  Canas1  had  assembled  together  in  large  numbers,  at  a
place  called  Luracachi ;  and  as  they  had  news  of  what  had
befallen  the  Canches,  and  that  the  Ynca  did  not  injure
those  who  wished  to  be  his  allies,  nor  allow  others  to  do  so,
they  resolved  to  make  friends  with  him.  The  Inca  advanced
and,  when  he  approached  Luracachi  and  heard  of  the  good
will  of  the  Canas,  he  was  much  pleased.  As  there  was  a
temple  of  Aconcagua  in  that  district,  he  sent  great  presents
to  the  idols  and  priests.

When  the  ambassadors  from  the  Canas  arrived,  they  were
well  received  by  the  Inca  Viracocha,  who  replied  to  them
that  the  principal  and  most  venerable  of  the  Canas  should  be
near,  where  they  would  see  him ;  and  when  he  had  been
some  days  at  the  temple  of  Vilcanota  he  would  hasten  to  be
with  them.  He  gave  some  fine  cloth  and  ornaments  to  the
messengers,  and  ordered  his  own  soldiers  not  to  enter  the
houses  of  the  Canas,  nor  to  take  anything  that  belonged  to
them,  that  their  good  will  might  not  be  disturbed  nor  give
place  to  any  other  thought.

The  Canas,  when  they  heard  the  message,  caused  plenty  of
provisions  to  be  placed  along  the  road,  and  came  down  from
their  villages  to  serve  the  Inca,  who,  with  much  regard  to
justice,  took  care  that  they  should  not  be  injured  in  any  way.

1  The  Canas  inhabited  one  side  of  the  valley  of  Vilcamayu,  and  the
Canches  the  other — the  river  dividing  them.


BATTLE    BETWEEN   CHIEFS   OF    THE   COLLAO.  135

They  _were  supplied  with  flocks  and x  which  is  their

wine.  On  arriving  at  their  vain  temple,  they  made  sacrifices
in  accordance  with  their  heathen  practices,  killing  many
lambs.  Thence  the  army  advanced  to  Ayavire,  where  the
Can  as  had  brought  more  provisions.  The  Inca  spoke  to
them  lovingly,  and  arranged  his  peaceful  pact,  as  was  his
custom  with  other  tribes.  The  Canas,  holding  it  to  be  an
advantage  to  them  to  be  governed  by  such  wise  and  just
laws,  did  not  object  to  the  payment  of  tribute,  and  the  duty
of  going  to  Cuzco.

This  being  done,Viracocha  Inca  determined  to  set  out  for
the  Collao,  where  by  this  time  it  was  known  what  had  hap-
pened with  the  Canches  and  Canas.  They  were  waiting  in
Chucuito,  and  in  Hatun  Colla.  Zapana  was  aware  that  Cari
had  been  received  well  by  Viracocha,  and  that  he  was  expect-
ing the  Inca.  He,  therefore,  determined  to  attack  him  before
he  became  more  powerful  by  a  junction  with  the  forces  of  the
Inca.  Cari  was  equally  spirited,  and  came  out  with  his  fol-
lowers to  a  town  called  Paucar-colla.  Near  this  place  the
armies  of  the  two  most  powerful  tyrants  of  the  district  faced
each  other,  in  such  numbers  that  it  was  said  they  amounted
to  one  hundred  and  fifty  huarancas.2  They  joined  in  battle,
and  it  is  related  that  it  was  fiercely  contested,  and  that  the
dead  numbered  more  than  30,000.  After  it  had  lasted  for  a
long  time,  Cari  remained  the  victor,  while  Zapana  and  his
people  were  defeated,  with  the  death  of  many.  Zapana  himself
was  killed  in  this  battle.

1  This  word  is  almost  illegible  in  the  Escurial  manuscript.  Sefior
Jimenez  de  la  Espada,  the  Spanish  editor,  has  suvica.  The  learned
Peruvian,  Dr.  de  la  Rosa,  has  sinica.  The  words  for  intoxicating  liquors
in  Quichua  are  acea,  azua,  huinapu,  sora.  The  Spaniards  also  use  the
word  chkha.     But  it  is  not  like  any  of  these,  unless  it  be  sora.

2  Thousands.


136  CEREMONY   OF   HOMAGE   IN   THE    COLLAO.


CHAPTER    XLIII.

How  Cari  returned  to  Chueuito ;  of  the  arrived  of  the  Inca  Virci-
cocha;  and  of  the  peace  that  was  agreed  to  ochveen  them.

As  soon  as  Zapana  was  dead,  Cari  took  possession  of  his
camp,  and  seized  upon  everything  that  was  in  it,  with  which
he  quickly  returned  to  Chueuito.  There  he  waited  for  Vira-
cocha  Inca,  and  ordered  lodgings  to  be  got  ready  and  provi-
sions to  be  supplied.  The  Inca,  while  he  was  on  the  road,
heard  of  the  victory  gained  by  Cari  and  of  the  end  of  the  war.
Although  he  gave  out  that  he  was  pleased,  in  secret  he  felt
regret  at  the  course  things  had  taken,  because  he  thought  that,
while  there  were  differences  between  the  two  chiefs,  he  would
easily  make  himself  lord  of  the  Collao ;  and  he  intended  to
return  quickly  to  Cuzco,  that  no  untoward  event  might
happen.

When  he  approached  Chueuito,  Cari  came  forth  with  his
principal  men  to  receive  him,  and  he  was  lodged  and  atten-
tively served.  As  he  wished  to  return  to  Cuzco,  he  spoke
with  Cari,  telling  him  how  much  he  had  rejoiced  at  his  good
success,  and  that  he  was  coming  to  his  assistance.  In  order
to  make  sure  that  they  should  always  be  good  friends,  he  ex-
pressed a  desire  to  give  him  a  daughter  of  his  own  for  a  wife.
Cari  answered  that  he  was  very  old  and  very  weary,  and  he
prayed  the  Inca  to  marry  his  daughter  to  a  youth,  seeing  that
there  were  many  to  choose  from,  and  that  he  would  have  him  as
his  lord  and  friend,  and  consent  that  he  should  rule,  and  that
in  this  way  he  would  help  him  in  wars  and  other  affairs  of
moment.  Then,  in  presence  of  the  principal  men  who  were
assembled,  the  Inca  Viracocha  ordered  a  large  cup  of  gold
to  be  brought,  and  the  plighted  homage  between  the  two  was
taken  in  this  way.  They  drank  a  draught  of  the  wine  which
the  women  had,  and  the  Inca  took  the  cup,  and  put  it  on


OBJECTIONS   TO   THE   SUCCESSION   OF  TJECO.  137

the  top  of  a  very  loose  stone,  saying: — "The  sign  is  this,
that  the  cup  shall  be  here,  and  I  do  not  move  it  nor  you
touch  it,  in  token  that  that  which  is  agreed  upon  shall  be
observed."  Then  kissing,  they  made  a  reverence  to  the  sun,
and  they  had  a  great  taqui,  with  much  noise.  Then  the
priests,  having  uttered  certain  words,  carried  the  cup  to  one
of  their  vain  temples,  where  they  deposit  similar  tokens  of
oaths  made  by  their  kings  and  lords.  Having  passed  some
days  in  Chucuito,  Viracocha  Inca  returned  to  Cuzco,  being
attentively  waited  upon  and  well  received  in  all  parts.

And  now  many  provinces  were  organized,  and  the  people
wore  better  clothes  and  had  better  customs  than  before,
being  ruled  according  the  laws  of  Cuzco.  Inca  Urco,  the  son
of  Viracocha  Inca  had  remained  there  as  governor,  of  whom
they  relate  that  he  was  very  cowardly,  remiss,  full  of  vices,
and  with  few  virtues.  As  he  was  the  eldest  he  had  to  succeed
his  father  in  the  kingdom.  His  father  knew  his  character,
and  desired  much  to  deprive  him  of  the  lordship,  and  to  give
it  to  Inca  Yupanqui,  his  second  son,  a  youth  of  great  valour
and  of  good  conduct,  resolute  and  fearless,  and  endowed  with
grand  and  lofty  aspirations.  But  the  Orejones  and  principal
men  of  the  city  did  not  wish  the  laws  to  be  broken,  which
wTere  observed  as  having  been  ordained  by  their  ancestors.
Although  they  knew  how  evil  were  the  inclinations  of  Inca
Urco,  still  they  desired  that  he,  and  not  another  should  be
the  king  after  the  death  of  his  father.  I  relate  this  so  fully
because  those  who  told  me,  also  say  that  Viracocha  Inca  sent
from  Urcos,  his  messengers  to  the  city,  to  treat  on  this
matter,  but  that  he  could  not  obtain  what  he  wanted.  When
he  entered  Cuzco,  he  had  a  grand  reception.  But  he  was  now
very  old  and  weary,  so  he  determined  to  leave  the  government
of  his  kingdom  to  his  son,  to  deliver  up  the  fringe,  and  to
retire  to  the  valley  of  Yucay  and  to  that  of  Xaquixaguana  to
amuse  himself  and  enjoy  the  rest  of  his  life.  He  announced
his  intention  to  the  people  of  the  city,  but  he  was  not  able  to
secure  the  succession  for  Inca  Yupanqui.


138  ACCESSION   OF    INC  A   URCO.


CHAPTEE   XLIV.


How  Inca  Urco  was  received  as  supreme  ruler  of  the  ivhole  empire,
and  assumed  the  croivn  at  Cuzco,  and  how  the  Chancas
determined  to  come  forth  and  make  ivar  on  those  of  Cuzco.

The  Orejones,  and  even  all  the  other  natives  of  these  pro-
vinces, laughed  at  the  proceedings  of  the  Inca  Urco.1  Owing
to  his  trivialities,  they  prefer  that  he  should  not  be  looked
upon  as  having  enjoyed  the  dignity  of  the  kingdom.  Thus
we  see  that  in  the  narrative  derived  from  the  quipus  and
traditions,  which  they  have  of  the  kings  who  reigned  at
Cuzco,  they  are  silent  as  to  this  one.  This  I  will  not  be ;  for
in  fact,  well  or  ill,  with  vices  or  virtues,  he  governed  and
reigned  over  the  kingdom  for  several  days.  When  Viracocha
Inca  departed  for  the  valley  of  Xaquixaguana,  he  sent  the
fringe  or  crown  to  Cuzco,  that  the  elders  of  the  city  might
deliver  it  to  Inca  Urco,  having  said  that  what  he  had  done
for  the  city  of  Cuzco  must  suffice,  and  that  he  wished  to  pass
what  remained  of  life  in  the  enjoyment  of  rest,  for  that  he  was
old  and  unfit  for  war.  His  wishes  being  understood,  presently
Inca  Urco  began  the  fasts  and  other  observances  in  con-
formity with  their  customs  and,  having  finished,  he  came
forth  with  the  crown,  and  went  to  the  temple  of  the  Sun  to
perform  sacrifices,  and  there  were  the  usual  feasts  and  drink-
ing bouts  at  Cuzco.

Inca  Urco  had  married  his  sister,  that  he  might  have  a  son
by  her,  to  succeed  to  the  lordship.  He  was  so  vicious,  and  so
given  to  evil  courses  that,  without  caring  for  her,  he  went
after  common  women,  and  after  the  girls  he  fancied,  and  it  is
even  said  that  he  seduced  some  of  the  mamaconas  in  the
temple  ;  and  he  had  so  little  honour  that  he  did  not  even

1  This  Ynca  is  not  mentioned  by  Ciarcilasso  de  la  Vega.


WAR   WITH   THE   CHANCAS.  139

desire  to  be  respected.  He  went  about  the  city  drinking,
and  when  he  had  an  arroba  or  more  of  liquor  in  his  body,  he
conducted  himself  indecently.  And  he  used  to  say  to  the
Orejones  who  had  beautiful  wives,  "How  are  my  children  ?"  as
much  as  to  say  that  the  children  were  his  and  not  the  children
of  the  husbands.  He  never  built  any  house  or  edifice,  he  dis-
liked arms,  and  in  short  they  relate  no  good  thing  of  him
except  that  he  was  very  liberal.

As  soon  as  he  had  assumed  the  fringe,  after  some  days  had
passed,  he  determined  to  go  and  enjoy  himself  in  the  houses
of  pleasure  which  were  built  for  the  recreation  of  the  Incas,
leaving  as  his  lieutenant  Inca  Yupanqui,  who  was  father  of
Tupac  Inca,  as  we  shall  presently  relate.

Such  being  the  state  of  affairs  at  Cuzco,  the  Chancas,  as  I
have  already  stated,  had  conquered  the  Quichuas  and  occupied
the  greater  part  of  the  province  of  Andabailes.  As  they  were
victorious,  and  hearing  what  was  said  of  the  grandeur  of
Cuzco  and  of  its  riches,  and  of  the  majesty  of  the  Incas,  they
did  not  desire  to  abandon  their  conquests,  but  wished  to  ac-
quire all  they  could  with  their  arms.  So  they  made  a  grand
appeal  to  their  gods,  and  set  out  from  Andabailes,  which  is
the  place  called  by  the  Spaniards  Andaguaylas,1  and  is  now
an  encomienda  of  Diego  Maldonado2  the  rich,  leaving  a  suffi-

1  This  is  a  curious  blunder  of  Cieza  de  Leon,  for  the  Spanish  form  of
Andaguaylas  is  much  more  nearly  correct  than  Andabailes.  The
Quichua  word  is  Anta-huaylla.

2  Diego  Maldonado,  a  native  of  Salamanca,  was  one  of  the  first  con-
querors of  Peru,  and  one  of  the  richest.  He  had  a  house  in  the  great
square  of  Cuzco.  When  the  hospital  was  founded  there,  he,  as  senior
Regular,  placed  a  plaque  of  silver  with  his  arms  engraved  on  it,  under
the  first  stone.  He  was  put  in  prison  by  Almagro,  with  many  others  ;
and  fought  on  the  side  of  Vaca  de  Castro,  at  the  battle  of  Chupas,
when  Almagro  the  lad  was  defeated ;  and  he  fled  from  the  army  of
Gonzalo  Pizarro,  to  keep  himself  and  his  riches  on  the  loyal  side.  But  he
found  it  safer  to  feign  submission  and  follow  Gonzalo's  camp.  Then  news
came  that  his  life  was  forfeited,  so  he  fled  from  his  tent  near  Lima  in  the
dead  of  night ;  though  over  sixty-eight  years  of  age,  ran  all  night  on


140  WAR    WITH    THE    CHANCAS.

cient  force  there  to  protect  it.  Hastu-Huaraca,  and  a  very
brave  brother  of  his  named  Ornoguara,  with  the  forces  ready
for  war,  set  out  proudly  from  their  own  territory  on  the  road
to  Cuzco,  marching  until  they  arrived  at  Curampa,1  where  they
encamped,  doing  much  injury  to  the  people  of  the  district.
But  as  in  those  days  many  of  the  settlements  were  on  the
heights  and  peaks  of  the  mountains,  with  strong  defences
called  pucaras,  they  could  not  kill  any  great  number  or  make
many  prisoners,  but  only  ravage  the  fields.

They  departed  from  Curampa,  and  arrived  at  the  resting
place  of  Cocha-cassa,  and  at  the  river  Abancay,  destroying
everything  they  found.  Thus  they  approached  Cuzco,  where
the  news  of  their  coming  had  preceded  them.  When  it  was
known  to  the  aged  Viracocha,  he  left  the  valley  of  Xaquixa-
guana,  and  went  with  his  women  and  servants  to  the  valley
of  Yucay.  They  also  relate  that  Inca  Urco  merely  laughed,
making  light  of  what  was  really  a  very  serious  matter.  But
the  fate  of  Cuzco  was  guarded  by  Inca  Yupanqui  and  his  sons,
who  were  destined  to  save  the  city  from  all  its  danger  by
their  virtues.  For  not  only  did  he  vanquish  the  Chancas,  but
he  subjugated  the  greater  part  of  the  nations  who  inhabit
those  kingdoms,  as  I  shall  relate  further  on.

foot,  and  hid  himself  in  a  cane  brake.  Next  day  an  Indian  took  pity  on
him,  made  up  a  bundle  of  reeds  and  pushed  out  to  sea,  the  two  sitting
across  the  bundle  as  on  a  horse.  They  were  just  able  to  reach  one  of
the  ships  of  Lorenzo  de  Aldana  in  Callao  bay,  which  were  on  the  loyal
side.  He  eventually  returned  to  Cuzco  and  once  more  became  a
leading  citizen  there,  taking  a  part  in  making  the  peace  between  the
authorities  and  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron.  He  was  with  Alonzo  de
Alvarado  in  his  campaign  against  Giron,  and  strongly  dissuaded  him
from  giving  battle  at  Chuquinga,  where  he  was  defeated.  Maldonado
was  wounded  at  Pucara,  in  the  last  fight  with  Giron,  but  survived  for
twelve  years  afterwards,  living  at  Cuzco  and  on  his  Andahuaylas  estates.
1  On  a  lofty  plateau  between  Andahulayas  and  Abancay.  The
fortress  consists  of  three  wide  terraces,  with  a  sloping  ramp  from  the
ground  to  the  highest  one.  Near  it  are  the  ruins  of  a  town.  The
nearest  modern  town  is  Huancarama,  about  a  league  to  the  east.


APPEAL   TO   INCA   YUPANQUI.  141


CHAPTER    XLV.

How  the  Chancas  arrived  at  the  city  of  Cuzco  and  'pitched  their
camp  there,  and  of  the  terror  of  the  inhabitants,  and  the
great  valour  of  Inca  Ywpanqiii.

Aftee  the  Chancas  had  offered  up  sacrifices  on  the  banks  of
the  Apurimac  and  had  arrived  near  the  city  of  Cuzco,  the
Captain-General  or  lord  who  led  them,  named  Hastu-Huaraca
said  that  they  should  reflect  on  the  great  undertaking  they
had  entered  upon,  that  they  should  show  themselvea  to  be
strong,  and  that  they  should  feel  no  fear  nor  terror  whatever
of  men  who  thought  they  could  frighten  people  by  making
their  ears  such  a  size  as  these  enemies  did.  He  also  told  his
followers  that  they  would  capture  much  spoil,  and  beautiful
women  with  whom  they  could  enjoy  themselves.  They  replied
cheerfully  that  they  would  do  their  duty.

As  it  was  known  in  the  city  of  Cuzco  that  the  enemy  was
marching  against  it,  and  that  neither  Viracocha  Inca  nor  his
son  Inca  Urco  had  made  any  preparation  to  oppose  them,  the
Orejones  and  principal  people  were  much  disturbed,  and  offered
up  great  sacrifices  according  to  their  custom.  They  then
agreed  to  ask  Inca  Yupanqui  to  take  charge  of  the  war,  for
the  common  safety.  One  of  the  most  venerable  took  the
matter  in  hand,  and  spoke  in  the  name  of  the  others.  He
replied  that  when  his  father  wished  to  confer  the  fringe  upon
him,  they  would  not  consent,  but  insisted  that  his  cowardly
brother  should  be  Inca.  He  himself  had  never  pretended  to
the  royal  dignity  through  usurpation  and  contrary  to  the  will
of  the  people ;  and  they  should  now  do  what  was  necessary
for  the  public  good,  as  they  had  seen  that  the  Inca  Urco  was
unfit  for  the  post.  The  Orejones  replied  that,  when  the  war
was  over,  they  would  adopt  such  measures  as  were  best  for
the  government  of  the  kingdom.     It  is  said  that  they  then


142  NEGOTIATIONS   "WITH    THE   CHANCAS.

sent  messengers  through  the  province,  declaring  that  all  who
wished  to  come  and  be  citizens  of  Cuzco,  would  be  given
lands  in  the  valley,  and  would  receive  privileges  ;  and  so  they
came  from  many  parts.  This  being  done,  the  captain,  Inca
Yupanqui,  came  forth  to  the  great  square  where  was  the  stone
of  war,  with  the  skin  of  a  lion  on  his  head,  as  a  sign  that  he
must  be  strong  as  is  that  animal.

At  this  time  the  Chancas  had  reached Vilca-cunga,  and  the
Inca  Yupanqui  ordered  all  the  men  of  war  that  were  in  Cuzco
to  be  assembled,  with  the  determination  of  marching  out  on
the  road.  Those  who  appeared  most  resolute  were  appointed
captains ;  but,  on  further  consideration,  he  determined  to
wait  in  the  city.

The  Chancas  continued  to  advance  until  they  pitched  their
camp  on  the  hill  of  Carmenca,  which  overlooks  the  city,  and
presently  set  up  their  tents.  The  people  of  Cuzco  had  made
deep  holes  full  of  stones  at  the  approaches  to  the  city,  and
subtly  covered  them  over  on  the  top,  so  that  those  who  walked
that  way  might  fall  in.  When  the  women  and  children  of
Cuzco  saw  the  enemy,  they  were  much  afraid,  and  made  a
great  noise.  Inca  Yupanqui  sent  messengers  to  Hastu
Huaraca,  proposing  that  there  should  be  an  agreement  be-
tween them,  to  avoid  the  slaughter  of  the  people.  Hastu
Huaraca  was  proud,  and  thought  little  of  the  embassy.  He
wanted  simply  to  abide  by  the  decision  of  battle ;  but  to  the
importunate  prayers  of  his  relations  and  others,  he  yielded  so
far  as  to  agree  to  a  conference  with  the  Inca,  and  in  that
sense  he  replied.  The  city  is  situated  between  hills,  in  a
naturally  strong  position.  The  slopes  and  ridges  were  scarped,
and  in  many  parts  sharp  stakes  of  palm  were  fixed,  which  are
as  hard  as  iron,  and  more  hurtful.  The  Inca  and  Hastu
Huaraca  had  an  interview,  but,  as  both  were  ready  to  fight,  it
availed  little,  for  being  further  excited  by  the  words  which
they  spoke  to  each  other,  at  last  they  came  to  blows,  at  the
same  time  shouting  and  making  a  great  noise.     For  the  men


DEFEAT  OF   THE   CHANCAS.  143

in  that  country  make  an  exceeding  great  noise  when  they
fight.  They  fought  with  each  other  for  a  long  time  and  the
night  coming  on,  the  Chancas  remained  in  their  tents,  and
those  of  the  city  were  all  round,  watching  in  every  direction,
that  the  enemy  might  not  enter.  For  neither  Cuzco,  nor
the  other  towns  in  those  parts,  are  surrounded  by  walls.

When  the  surprise  was  over,  Hastu  Huaraca  encouraged
his  followers  to  be  valorous  in  the  fight,  and  the  Inca  Yupan-
qui  did  the  same  with  the  Orejones  and  the  people  who  were
in  the  city.  The  Chancas  resolutely  came  forth  from  their
camp  with  the  intention  of  forcing  an  entry,  and  those  of  Cuzco
were  determined  to  defend  the  city.  The  battle  was  renewed,
and  many  fell  on  either  side ;  but  such  was  the  valour  of
Inca  Yupanqui  that  he  gained  the  victory,  and  nearly  all
the  Chancas  were  killed.  They  say  that  very  few  more
than  five  hundred  escaped,  and  among  them  their  captain
Hastu  Huaraca,  who  arrived  with  them  at  their  own  pro-
vince but  not  without  difficulty.1  The  Inca  enjoyed  the  spoil,
and  got  many  captives,  as  well  men  as  women.

1  According  to  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  the  Chancas  encamped  on  the
plain  of  Sacsahuana  (Xaquixaguana),  on  the  spot  where  the  battle  was
afterwards  fought  between  Gonzalo  Pizarro  and  the  President  Gasca.
The  plain  is  described  by  Cieza  de  Leon  in  his  first  Part  (p.  320  of  my
Translation).  It  is  now  called  the  plain  of  Surite.  Here  Garcilasso
says  that  the  great  battle  was  fought  between  the  Ynca  Huira-ccocha
and  the  Chancas  (ii,  p.  34).  The  fight  raged  with  desperate  fury  from
dawn  until  noon;  when  five  thousand  Quichuas,  who  until  then  had  been
in  ambush,  attacked  the  Chancas  on  their  right  flank.  More  reinforce-
ments arrived,  until  the  Chancas  began  to  think  that  the  very  stones
were  turning  into  men.  At  length  they  broke  and  fled.  It  was
called  the  battle  of  Yahuar-pampa  (plain  of  blood).


144  ACCESSION   OF   YNCA  YUPANQUI.


CHAPTER  XLVI.

How  Inca  Yupanqui  was  received  as  King,  the  name  of  Tnca
being  taken  from  Tnca  TJrco,  and  how  the  new  Sovereign
made  a  peace  with  HcCstu  Huaraca.

As  soon  as  the  Chancas  were  defeated,  Inca Yupanqui  entered
Cuzco  in  great  triumph,  and  addressed  the  principal  Orejones
on  their  agreement.  He  said  that  he  had  worked  for  them
in  the  way  they  had  seen,  while  his  brother  and  his  father
had  done  little  in  opposing  the  enemy,  and  that,  therefore}
they  should  give  him  the  sovereignty  and  government  of  the
empire.  The  people  of  Cuzco,  one  with  another,  discussed
the  matter,  comparing  the  merits  of  Inca  Yupanqui  and  Inca
Urco,  and,  by  consent  of  the  city,  they  agreed  that  Inca  Urco
should  not  enter  Cuzco  again,  and  that  the  fringe  should  be
taken  from  him  and  given  to  Inca  Yupanqui.  Although  Inca
Urco,  when  he  knew  what  had  been  done,  wanted  to  come  to
Cuzco  to  justify  himself,  and  was  much  moved,  complaining
of  his  brother  and  of  those  who  had  deprived  him  of  the
government ;  yet  they  did  not  yield,  nor  turn  aside  from  ac-
complishing what  they  had  resolved  to  do.  There  are  some
who  say  that  the  Coya,  wife  of  Inca  Urco,  left  him  without
having  borne  him  any  children,  and  went  to  Cuzco,  where  her
second  brother  Inca  Yupanqui  received  her  as  his  wife.
Having  performed  the  fast  and  the  other  ceremonies,  he  came
forth  with  the  fringe,  and  there  were  great  festivals  at  Cuzco,
people  flocking  thither  from  all  parts.  The  new  Inca  ordered
all  those  who  had  fallen  in  the  battle  on  his  side  to  be  buried
with  the  customary  funeral  rites.  For  the  Chancas  he  caused
a  large  house  to  be  erected  on  the  battle  field,  like  a  tomb,
where  all  the  bodies  of  the  dead  were  put  as  a  memorial,  and
the  skins  were  filled  with  cinders  or  straw,  so  that  the  human
form  was  made  to  appear  in  many  attitudes.     Some  of  them


THE   LORD   OF   ANDAHUAYLAS.  145

appearing  like  men,  had  drums  issuing  from  their  bellies,  on
which  they  appeared  to  be  playing.  Others  were  set  up  with
flutes  in  their  mouths.  After  this  fashion  they  were  left
until  the  Spaniards  entered  Cuzco.  Alonzo  Carrasco1  and
Juan  de  Pancorvo,2  ancient  conquerors,  related  to  me  how
they  had  seen  these  skins  full  of  cinders,  as  did  many  others
of  those  who  came  to  Cuzco  with  Pizarro  and  Almagro.

The  Orejones  say  that  in  those  days  there  was  a  large
population  in  Cuzco,  and  that  it  was  always  increasing.
Messengers  arrived  from  many  parts  to  congratulate  the  new
king,  who  answered  them  all  with  gracious  words.  He
wished  to  set  out  and  make  war  in  the  region  they  call
Condesuyo,  and  as  he  knew  by  experience  how  brave  and
enterprising  was  Hastu  Huaraca,  the  Lord  of  Andahuaylas,  he
thought  of  inducing  him  to  enter  his  service.  They  relate
that  he  sent  messengers,  asking  the  chief  to  come  to  Cuzco
with  his  brothers  and  friends,  and  to  enjoy  the  society  of  the
Inca.  Considering  that  it  would  be  profitable  to  secure  the
friendship  of  Inca  Yupanqui,  the  Lord  of  Andahuaylas  came
to  Cuzco,  and  was.  well  received.3    And  as  the  Inca  had  suni-

1  I  do  not  find  any  other  mention  of  Alonzo  Carrasco.  His  name
does  not  appear  in  the  list  of  conquerors  who  received  shares  of  the
spoils  at  Caxamarca,  nor  in  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega.

2  Juan  de  Pancorvo  was  a  citizen  of  Cuzco,  and  had  a  house  on  the
western  side  of  the  great  square,  which  he  shared  with  Alonso  de
Marchana  ;  for  Juan  de  Pancorvo  did  not  wish  him  to  live  in  another
house,  because  of  the  warm  and  long-continued  friendship  they  always
felt  for  each  other.  So  says  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega.  Pancorvo  had,  in
his  grant,  one  of  the  great  halls  in  which  the  Yncas  held  their  festivals.
This  he  bestowed  upon  the  Franciscan  convent.  He  seems  to  have  been
a  peaceable  man.

3  Hanco-huallu  is  the  name  which  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  gives  to  the
warlike  chief  of  the  Chancas.  He  could  not  endure  dependence,  even
under  the  mild  rule  of  the  Ynca,  and,  ten  years  after  his  defeat,  he
emigrated  with  many  followers  to  the  forests  of  Moyobamba.  In  the
First  Part,  Cieza  de  Leon  says  the  same  thing,  calling  him  Ancoallu
fp.  280).     Also  see  further  on,  at  page  157.

L


146  DEATH   OF  YNCA   UIRA-CCOCHA.

moned    his   army  for  war,   he   determined    to  proceed   to
Condesuy'o.

At  this  time,  they  relate  that  Viracocha  Inca  died,  and  they
gave  him  sepulture  with  less  pomp  and  honor  than  his  ances-
tors, because  he  had  deserted  the  city  in  his  old  age  and  had
no  wish  to  return  when  the  Chancas  made  war.  I  say  no
more  concerning  Inca  Urco,  because  the  Indians  only  refer  to
his  history  as  a  thing  to  laugh  at,  and  putting  him  on  one
side,  I  consider  Inca  Yupanqui  as  the  ninth  king  that  reigned
in  Cuzco.


MARCH  OF  THE  YNCA  YUPANQUI.  147


CHAPTEE  XLVII.

How   Inca    Yupanqui   set    out  from    Cuzco,  leaving   Lloque
Yupanqui  as  Governor,  and  of  what  happened.

As  now,  by  order  of  Inca  Yupanqui,  more  than  40,000  men
had  been  assembled  round  the  stone  of  war,  the  army  was
passed  in  review,  captains  were  appointed,  and  there  were
feasts  and  drinking  bouts.  All  being  ready,  the  Inca  set
out  from  Cuzco  in  a  litter  enriched  with  gold  and  precious
stones,  which  was  surrounded  by  his  guards  with  halberds,
axes,  and  other  arms.  Next  to  him  marched  the  lords,  and
this  king  displayed  more  valour  and  authority  than  any  of
his  ancestors.  He  left  in  Cuzco,  according  to  what  they
relate,  his  brother  Lloque  Yupanqui  as  governor.  The  Coya
and  the  other  women  travelled  in  hammocks,  and  it  is  said
that  they  carried  a  great  quantity  of  jewels  and  of  stores.
In  front,  men  were  sent  forward  to  clear  the  road,  so  that
neither  grass  nor  stone,  large  or  small,  might  remain  on  it.

Arrived  at  the  river  Apurimac,  they  crossed  it  by  the
bridge  that  had  been  made,  and  advanced  as  far  as  the
buildings  of  Cura-huasi.  Many  men  and  women,  and  some
lords  and  principal  men,  came  forth  from  the  neighbouring
places,  and  when  they  saw  the  army  they  were  amazed  and
cried  out,  "  Great  Lord,  Child  of  the  Sun",  "  Monarch  of  all
things",  and  many  other  grand  names.  At  this  place,  they
say  that  a  captain  of  the  Chancas,  named  Tupac  Uasco,-was
given  a  Palla  of  Cuzco  as  his  wife,  and  he  highly  prized  her.

Advancing  by  the  Apurimac  and  Cocha-cassa,  the  Inca
found  that  the  inhabitants  of  those  parts  were  in  strong
pucaras,  and  that  they  did  not  live  together  in  villages.  So
he  ordered  that  they  should  live  in  an  orderly  way,  aban-
doning evil  customs,  and  abstaining  from  killing  each  other.

l2


148  SORAS   AND    KUCANAS.

They  rejoiced  at  these  orders,  and  willingly  obeyed  his  com-
mandment. But  those  of  Curampa  derided  it.  This  being
told  to  Inca  Yupanqui,  he  defeated  them  in  battle,  killing
many,  and  taking  others  prisoners.  As  the  land  was  fertile,
he  ordered  one  of  his  officers  to  remain  and  organise  the
district,  and  to  build  lodgings  and  a  temple  of  the  Sun.

These  arrangements  having  been  made  with  great  care,
the  King  set  out  from  thence,  and  marched  to  the  province  of
Andahuaylas,  where  there  was  a  solemn  reception.  He  re-
mained several  days  to  decide  whether  he  would  go  to
conquer  the  inhabitants  of  Guamanga  or  Xauxa,  or  the  Soras
and  Lucanas.  Having  considered  the  matter  in  council  with
his  officers,  he  decided  upon  going  to  the  Soras.1  Setting
out,  he  marched  over  an  uninhabited  region  which  leads  to
the  Soras,  who  were  apprised  of  his  approach,  and  assembled
to  defend  their  country.

The  Inca  Yupanqui  had  sent  captains  with  parties  in
many  other  directions,  to  induce  men  to  join  his  service  by
kind  treatment ;  and  he  sent  messengers  to  the  Soras,  ad-
monishing them  not  to  take  up  arms  against  him,  and  pro-
mising to  make  much  of  them,  and  to  do  them  no  injury.
But  they  did  not  wish  for  peace  with  servitude ;  but  rather
to  tight  for  their  liberty.  So  when  the  two  armies  came
together,  there  was  a  battle,  concerning  which  those  who  can
preserve  the  memory  of  it,  say  that  it  was  fiercely  contested,
and  that  many  fell  on  both  sides.  But  the  victory  remained
with  those  of  Cuzco.  The  fugitives  who  escaped  death  or
capture,  fled  to  their  town  with  much  lamentation,  where

1  The  Soras  and  Rucanas  were  tribes  of  hardy  mountaineers,  inhabiting
the  wild  region  of  the  maritime  Cordillera,  to  the  south-west  of  the
Chancas.  The  Rucanas  (the  modern  province  of  Lucanas)  were
described  as  a  handsome  and  well-disposed  people,  who  were  expert
bearers  of  burdens,  and  had  the  privilege  of  carrying  the  Yuca's
litter.  The  Soras,  closely  allied  to  the  Rucanas,  lived  on  the  left  bank
of  the  River  Pampas,  near  its  source.


FASTNESS  OF  THE  SORAS.  149

tliey  collected  as  much  of  their  property  as  they  could,  and,
taking  their  women,  they  abandoned  the  place,  and  fled  to  a
strong  rock,  near  the  river  of  Vilcas,  where  there  are  many
caves  and  a  supply  of  water.  In  this  fastness  many  men
assembled  with  their  women,  with  as  much  provisions  as
they  could  get  together,  for  fear  of  the  Inca.  Not  only  the
Soras  took  refuge  on  the  rock,  but  many  from  the  district  of
Guamanga,  and  from  the  banks  of  the  Vilcas,  also  fled  there,
terrified  at  the  news  that  the  Inca  wished  to  be  sole  lord
over  the  people.

The  battle  being  won,  the  conquerors  enjoyed  the  spoils  ;
but  the  Inca  ordered  that  no  harm  should  be  done  to  the
captives.  They  were  all  released.  A  captain  was  ordered
to  march  towards  Condesuyo  by  way  of  Pumatampu ;  and
when  the  Inca  entered  the  country  of  the  Soras,  and  heard
that  the  people  had  gone  to  the  rocky  fastness,  he  was  much
incensed,  and  determined  to  go  and  besiege  the  place.  So  he
commanded  his  captains  to  march  against  it,  with  the  army.


150  SIEGE   OF    THE    SORA   FASTNESS.


CHAPTEE  XLVIII.

How  the  Inca   returned    to    Vilcas,  and    besieged   the  Rocky
Fastness  where  the  Enemy  had  taken  Refuge.

The  Orejones  relate  very  great  things  touching  this  Inca
Yupanqui,  and  Tupac  Inca  his  son,  and  Huayna  Capac  his
grandson,  for  these  were  the  sovereigns  who  displayed  most
valour.  Those  who  may  read  of  their  actions,  should  believe
that  I  rather  detract  from,  than  add  to  what  I  have  been
told ;  and  I  simply  write  what  I  have  received  from  the
Indians.  For  myself,  I  believe  this  and  more,  from  the  testi-
mony borne  by  the  remains  and  signs  that  these  kings  have
left  behind  them,  and  from  their  great  power,  which  shows
that  what  I  write  concerning  them  is  only  a  part  of  what
really  happened.  Their  memory  will  endure  in  Peru  so  long
as  any  men  of  the  native  race  survive.

Eeturning  to  the  narrative,  as  the  Inca  strongly  desired  to
have  those  who  had  taken  refuge  in  the  rocks  in  his  power,
he  marched  with  his  troops  until  he  came  to  the  river  of
Vilcas.1  The  inhabitants,  when  they  knew  that  he  was
there,  came  in  great  numbers  to  see  him  and  to  perform
services,  and  they  established  friendship  with  the  Inca.  By
his  order  they  began  to  build  great  edifices,  in  the  place
which  we  now  call  Vilcas.  Masters  were  sent  from  Cuzco
to  trace  the  plans,  and  teach  the  method  of  laying  the  stones
and  tiles  in  the  edifices.  Arriving  at  the  rocky  fastness,  the
Inca  used  all  reasonable  means  to  induce  those  who  had
taken  refuge  there  to  submit  to  his  alliance,  sending  mes-
sengers to  them.  But  the  enemy  laughed  at  his  words,  and
hurled  many  stones  at  the  camp.  The  Inca,  seeing  their
disposition,  resolved  not  to    depart   until  he  had  punished

1  The  great  River  Pampas.


SUBMISSION    OF   THE    SORAS.  151

them.  He  knew  that  the  captains  whom  he  sent  to  the
province  of  Condesuyo,  had  fought  some  battles  with  the
people  of  that  region,  had  conquered  them  and  brought  most
of  the  province  under  his  sway.  In  order  that  the  people  of
the  Collao  might  not  think  that  they  were  safe,  and  knowing
that  Hastu  Huaraca,  the  Lord  of  Andahuaylas,  and  his
brother,  Tupac  Vasco,  were  valiant  chiefs,  he  sent  them  to
the  Collao  to  keep  the  people  in  obedience.  They  replied
that  they  would  obey  his  order,  and  they  set  out  for  their
own  land,  to  proceed  thence  to  Cuzco,  and  join  the  army
which  was  to  be  assembled  there.

The  garrison  of  the  rocky  fastness  still  had  the  intention
of  defending  it,  and  the  Inca  surrounded  the  place  with  his
troops.  The  siege  was  long,  and  several  great  deeds  were
performed.  At  last  the  provisions  failed,  and  the  besieged
were  obliged  to  submit,  and  to  serve  the  Inca  like  the  rest  of
his  subjects,  paying  tribute  and  furnishing  men  for  the  wars.
With  this  servitude,  they  remained  in  favour  with  the  Inca,
who  was  no  longer  enraged,  but  ordered  provisions  and  other
things  to  be  given  to  them,  and  that  they  should  return  to
their  homes.  But  others  affirm  that  he  killed  them  all,  in-
somuch that  not  one  escaped.  I  believe  the  first  account,
though  as  regards  one  or  the  other,  I  only  know  what  these
Indians  relate.

This  affair  being  ended,  they  say  that  people  came  from
many  parts  to  submit  and  offer  their  services,  and  that  the
Inca  received  them  all  graciously.  He  then  returned  to
Cuzco.  On  the  road,  he  found  that  many  edifices  had  been
built,  and  that,  in  most  parts,  the  forts  of  the  natives  had
been  razed,  and  that  they  had  formed  regular  towns  in  the
lower  country,  as  he  had  commanded  and  ordained.

He  was  received  at  Cuzco  with  the  customary  pomp,  and
there  were  great  festivities.  The  captains  who,  in  obedience
to  his  orders  had  gone  to  the  war  in  the  Collao,  advanced  as


152  KULE   OF   YNCA   YUPANQUI.

far  as  Chucuito,  and  were  victorious  in  several  battles,  bring-
ing all  under  the  dominion  of  the  Inca.  The  same  was  done
in  Condesuyo.  The  Inca  was  very  powerful ;  lords  and  cap-
tains arrived  from  all  parts  with  the  leading  men  of  the
districts,  paying  tribute  with  regularity,  and  performing  per-
sonal services ;  but  all  was  done  with  great  regularity  and
justice.  When  they  came  for  an  audience  with  the  Inca,
they  carried  a  light  burden ;  they  looked  but  little  at  his
face ;  when  he  spoke,  those  who  heard  him  trembled  from
fear  or  some  other  reason.  He  seldom  appeared  in  public,
but  in  war  he  was  always  to  the  front.  He  did  not  allow
any  one,  without  his  permission,  to  possess  jewels,  nor  to  be
seated,  nor  to  be  carried  in  a  litter.  In  short,  this  was  the
sovereign  who  opened  the  way  for  the  excellent  government
which  was  established  by  the  Incas.


PREPARATION    FOR    WAR.  153


CHAPTER  XLIX.

How  Inca  Yupanqui  ordered  Lloque  Yupanqui  to  proceed  to
the  Valley  of  Xauxa,  and  to  bring  under  his  dominion
the  Huancas  and  the  Yauyos  their  neighbours,  with  other
Nations  in  that  direction.

That  which  has  already  been  written  having  taken  place,  the
Orejones  relate  that  the  Inca,  finding  himself  so  powerful,
determined  to  make  another  call  to  war,  because  he  wished
to  achieve  another  conquest  more  important  than  those  that
had  gone  before.  In  compliance  with  his  orders,  many
chiefs  assembled,  with  a  great  number  of  armed  men,  sup-
plied with  the  arms  they  use,  which  are  slings,  axes,  clubs,
bolas,  darts,  and  some  lances.  When  they  assembled,  he
ordered  that  there  should  be  entertainments  and  feasts ;  and
to  delight  them,  he  came  forth  each  clay  in  a  new  dress,  such
as  that  which  was  the  special  costume  of  the  nation  that  he
wished  to  honour  on  that  day.  Next  day  he  put  on  another,
always  wearing  that  of  the  tribe  which  was  invited  to  the
entertainment  and  drinking  bout.  By  this  means  he  pleased
them,  and  as  much  as  it  was  possible,  he  endeared  himself
to  them.  When  the  great  dances  were  performed,  the  square
of  Cuzco  was  encircled  by  a  chain  of  gold,  which  was  ordered
to  be  made  out  of  the  quantity  coming  as  tribute  from  the
districts.  It  was  as  large  as  I  have  before  described,  and
there  was  further  grandeur  in  the  matter  of  images  and
ancient  relics.

When  they  had  enjoyed  themselves  for  as  many  days  as
the  Inca  Yupanqui  thought  proper,  he  spoke  his  wishes  to
them,  that  they  should  go  to  the  country  of  the  Huancas,  and
their  neighbours  the  Yauyos,  and  induce  them  to  embrace  his
friendship  and  service,  without  making  war  ;  but  that  if  they


154  ATTACK   OX    THE   HUANCAS.

refused,  then  they  must  be  conquered  and  forced  to  obey.
They  all  replied  that  they  would  obey  his  orders  with  good
will.  Captains  belonging  to  each  nation  were  appointed,  and
Lloque  Yupanqui  was  general  of  the  whole  army.  With
him,  for  counsel,  was  Capac  Yupanqui.1  Having  received
their  instructions,  they  set  out  from  Cuzco  and  marched  to
the  province  of  Andahuaylas,  where  they  were  well  received
by  the  Chancas.  There  set  out  from  that  province  with
them  a  captain  named  Ancoallo,  with  a  large  force,  to  serve
in  the  war  of  the  Tnca.

From  Andahuaylas  they  went  to  Yilcas,  where  were  the
edifices  and  temple  which  Inca  Yupanqui  had  ordered  to  be
erected,  and  they  spoke  with  all  friendship  to  those  who
were  engaged  on  the  works.  From  Yilcas  they  marched  by
the  towns  of  Guananga,  Camgaron,2  Parcos,  Picoy,  and  Arcos,
which  had  already  submitted  to  the  Inca,  and  supplied  all
the  provisions  they  had,  besides  making  the  royal  road,  large
and  very  wide,  according  to  orders.

The  people  of  the  valley  of  Xauxa,  when  they  knew  that
the  enemy  was  approaching,  showed  great  alarm,  and  sought
help  from  their  relations  and  friends,  and  in  their  own
temple  of  Huarivilca  they  offered  up  great  sacrifices  to  the
demon  wliich  there  gave  replies.  When  the  succours  arrived
there  was  a  great  multitude,  for  they  say  that  more  than
40,000  men  assembled  where  now  I  do  not  know  that  there
are  12,000.  The  Inca  captains  took  up  a  position  overlook-
ing the  valley,  and  wished  to  gain  the  goodwill  of  the
Huancas,  and  to  induce  them  to  come  to  Cuzco  and  recognise
the  king  as  their  lord,  without  fighting.     With  this  purpose

1  The  Spanish  editor  suggests  that  this  should  be  Tupac  Yupanqui
the  Inca's  son.  He  would  be  going  on  his  first  campaign,  to  acquire
experience.  But  Garcilasso  has  Ccapac  Yupanqui,  a  brother  of  the  Inca,
as  the  General  in  this  campaign.    (See  ii,  p.  127.)

2  This  is  wrongly  written  in  the  manuscript.  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega
has  Asancaru  (ii,  p.  76).


SUBMISSION    OF   THE    HUANCAS.  155

they  sent  messengers,  but  without  success.  Then  there  was
a  great  battle,  in  which  they  say  that  many  were  killed  on
both  sides,  those  of  Cuzco  remaining  conquerors.  Lloque
Yupanqui  was  a  very  circumspect  leader.  He  would  allow
no  harm  to  be  done  in  the  valley,  prohibited  all  robbery,  and
he  released  the  captives.  Seeing  the  clemency  with  which  con-
quered people  were  treated,  the  Huancas  came  to  speak  with
the  Incas,  and  promised  to  live  in  accordance  with  the  ordi-
nances of  the  kings  of  Cuzco,  and  to  pay  tribute  of  such
produce  as  they  had  in  the  valley.  Leaving  their  villages
on  the  hill-sides,  they  sowed  the  land  without  dividing  it,
until  the  time  of  the  king  Huayna  Capac,  who  marked  out
the  land  which  was  to  belong  to  each  lineage,1  and  they  sent
messengers.

1  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  (ii,  p.  129)  says  that  the  country  of  the
Huancas  was  divided  into  three  provinces,  called  Sausa,  Marcavilca,  and
Llacsapalauca.


156  CONQUEST   OF   TARMA.


CHAPTER   L.

How  the  Captains  of  the  Inca  left  Xauxa,  and    what   hap-
pened ;  and  how  Ancoallo  departed  from  among  them.

The  inhabitants  of  Bonbon,  according  to  what  they  relate,  had
heard  of  the  events  of  Xauxa,  and  how  the  Huancas  had  been
defeated,  and,  suspecting  that  the  conquerors  intended  to  con-
tinue their  march,  they  determined  to  be  prepared,  so  that
they  might  not  be  taken  unawares.  Putting  their  women  and
children,  with  the  property  they  could  collect,  on  a  lake1
which  is  near  their  abode,  they  waited  for  what  might  hap-
pen. The  Inca  Captains,  when  they  had  arranged  the  affairs  at
Xauxa,  set  out  and  advanced  as  far  as  Bonbon,  but  as  the
people  had  taken  refuge  on  the  lake,  they  were  unable  to  do
other  harm  than  eat  their  provisions.  They  then  passed  onwards
and  came  to  Tarama,  where  they  found  the  people  in  arms.
There  was  a  battle,  in  which  many  of  the  people  of  Tarama
were  killed  and  taken  prisoners,  and  those  of  Cuzco  remained
victors.  As  it  was  the  will  of  the  king  that  those  of  Tarama
should  pay  tribute  and  serve  like  the  people  of  other  provinces,
in  return  for  which  they  would  be  favoured  and  well  treated,
they  agreed  to  all  that  was  demanded  from  them.  An  account
was  then  sent  to  Cuzco  of  all  that  had  been  done  in  this
province  of  Tarama.

The  Chancas  relate  that,  as  the  Indians  who  came  forth
from  the  province  of  Andahuaylas  with  the  chief  Ancoallo
had  performed  great  deeds  in  these  wars  the  Inca  captains
were  jealous.  They  also  bore  a  grudge  against  him  for  what
had  happened  before  during  the  seige  of  Cuzco.  So  they
determined  to  kill  him.  They  ordered  him  to  be  sent  for;  but  as
they  came  in  large  numbers  with  their  captain,  the  Chancas
1  The  lake  called  Pumpu  (Bombon)  or  Chmchay-cocha.


FLIGHT   OF   HAXCO-HUALLU.  157

understood  their  intention  and,  taking  up  arms,  they  defended
themselves  against  those  of  Cuzco.  Although  some  were
killed,  others  were  able,  owing  to  the  stoutness  and  bravery
of  Ancoallo,  to  get  away.  They  complained  to  their  gods
of  the  bad  faith  of  the  Orejones,  and  of  their  ingratitude,
declaring  that,  to  see  them  no  more,  they  would  go  into  volun-
tary exile.  Taking  their  women  with  them,  they  marched
through  the  provinces  of  Huanuco  and  Chachapoyas,  and,
passing  the  forests  of  the  Andes,  they  arrived  at  a  very  large
lake  which,  I  believe,  must  be  that  described  in  the  story  of
El  Dorado.  Here  they  established  their  settlement,  and
multiplied.  The  Indians  relate  great  things  of  that  land  and
of  the  chief  Ancoallo.1

The  Inca  captains,  after  what  has  been  written  had  come
to  pass,  returned  to  the  valley  of  Xauxa,  where  already  great
presents  and  many  women  had  been  got  together  to  be  sent  to
Cuzco,  and  the  people  of  Tarama  did  the  same.  The  news  of
all  this  arrived  at  Cuzco,  and  when  the  Inca  heard  it,  he
rejoiced  at  the  success  of  his  captains,  although  it  showed
that  he  was  displeased  at  what  had  happened  respecting
Ancoallo.  But  this  was,  as  it  is  believed,  a  kind  of  dissimula-
tion, for  some  declared  that  what  was  done  by  the  captains  was
in  accordance  with  his  orders.  As  Tupac  Uasco  and  the  other
Chancas  had  gone  to  make  war  in  the  Collao,  and  had  been
A'ictorious,  the  Inca  reflected  that,  when  they  knew  what  had
happened  to  Ancoallo,  they  would  turn  against  their  sovereign
and  commit  treason.  So  he  sent  messengers  with  orders  to
desire  that  they  would  come  to  him,  and  he  commanded,  on
pain  of  death,  that  no  one  should  tell  the  Chancas  what  had
happened.

The  Chancas,  as  soon  as  they  received  the  command  of  the
Inca,  came  to  Cuzco  ;  and  when  they  arrived  the  Inca  spoke  to

1  Garcillasso  de  la  Vega  calls  hita  Hanco-Huallu,  chief  of  the  Chancas
(see  Book  v,  cap.  xxvi,  ii,  p.  82),  and  describes  his  flight.


158  ADMINISTKATION  OF  YUPANQUI.

them  lovingly  but  with  much  dissimulation,  concealing  his
evil  dealings  with  Ancoallo,  and  making  it  appear,  by  his
words,  that  he  had  been  himself  displeased.  The  Chancas,
when  they  understood,  did  not  fail  to  feel  the  affront,  but
seeing  how  little  satisfaction  could  be  obtained,  they  asked
permission  to  return  to  their  province.  Having  been  granted
leave,  they  set  out,  the  Inca  giving  their  principal  lord  the
privilege  of  sitting  in  a  chair  enriched  with  gold ;  and  other
favours.

The  Inca  took  care  to  adorn  the  temple  of  Curi-cancha
with  great  riches,  as  has  already  been  mentioned.  And  as
Cuzco  possessed  many  provinces  in  all  directions,  he  gave
several  to  the  temple,  and  he  ordered  posts  to  be  stationed,
that  all  his  subjects  should  speak  one  language,  and  that  the
royal  road  should  be  constructed.  Other  tilings  are  related  of
this  king.  It  is  said  that  he  had  great  knowledge  of  the
stars,  and  that  he  had  some  acquaintance  with  the  movements
of  the  sun.  Hence  he  took  the  name  of  Inca  Yupanqui,
which  means  a  name  of  counting1  and  of  much  understanding.
Finding  himself  so  powerful,  and  notwithstanding  that  he  had
great  edifices  and  royal  houses  in  Cuzco,  he  ordered  three
walls  of  most  excellent  masonry  to  be  built,  that  it  might  be
a  memorial  work.  And  so  it  appears  to  this  day,  no  one
seeing  it  without  praising  it,  and  recognizing  the  genius  of
the  masters  who  conceived  it.  Each  wall  has  a  length  of
300  paces.2  They  call  one  Pucamarca,  another  Hatun-cancha,
and  the  third  Cassana.3  The  walls  are  of  excellent  stones,  so
well  adjusted  that  there  is  no  disproportion,  and  so  admirably
laid  and  fitted  that  the  joining  between  them  cannot  be  dis-

1  See  back,  note  at  page  102.

2  By  my  measurement  the  length  is  400  yards.

3  These  three  names,  according  to  Garcillasso  de  la  Vega,  are  not
connected  with  the  fortress,  but  belong  to  different  parts  of  the  city
(ii,  p.  246).


THE  FORTRESS  AT  CUZCO.  159

cerned.  The  great  part  of  these  edifices  is  so  strong  and
solid  that,  if  they  are  not  demolished,  they  will  endure  for
many  ages.

"Within  these  walls  there  were  buildings  like  the  others
they  use,  where  there  were  a  number  of  mamaconas  and
other  women  and  damsels  of  the  king,  who  worked  and  wove
the  fine  cloth,  and  there  were  many  pieces  of  gold  and  silver,
and  vases  of  those  metals.  I  saw  many  of  these  stones  in  the
walls,  and  I  was  amazed  how,  being  so  enormous,  they  could
have  been  so  admirably  set  in  position.

"When  they  had  their  dances  and  great  festivals  in  Cuzco
much  chicha  was  made  by  these  women ;  and  as  people  came
to  Cuzco  from  so  many  parts,  there  was  an  order  that  over-
seers should  be  placed  to  watch  that  none  of  the  gold  and
silver  that  was  brought  in  should  be  taken  out  again.  And
governors  were  placed  over  different  parts  of  the  kingdom,
who  ruled  with  great  justice  and  order.

As  at  this  time  the  Inca  ordered  the  fortress  of  Cuzco  to  be
built,  I  will  say  something  concerning  it,  it  being  so  worthy
of  notice.


160  BUILDINGS   OF   THE   FORTRESS   AT   CUZCO.


CHAPTEE  LI.

How  the  Royal  House  of  the  Sun  toas  founded  on  a  hill  over-
looking Cuzco  towards  the  north,  which  the  Spaniards
usually  call  the  fortress;  and  its  wonderful  Construction,
and  the  size  of  the  stones  that  are  to  be  seen  there.

The  city  of  Cuzco  is  built  in  a  valley,  and  on  the  slopes  of
hills,  as  I  explained  in  the  first  part  of  this  history1  and  from
the  edifices  themselves  run  broad  terraces  on  which  they  sow
their  crops,  and  they  rise  one  above  the  other  like  walls,  so
that  the  whole  slopes  were  formed  in  these  andenes,  which
made  the  city  stronger,  although  its  position  is  naturally
strong.  For  this  reason  the  lords  selected  it,  out  of  so  many
other  sites.  The  dominion  of  the  kings  was  now  become
extensive  and  powerful,  and  Inca  Yupanqui  entertained  far-
reaching  thoughts.  Notwithstanding  that  the  temple  of  the
Sun,  called  Curi-cancha,  had  been  enriched  and  beautified
by  himself,  and  that  he  had  erected  other  great  edifices,  he
resolved  to  build  another  house  of  the  Sun  which  should
surpass  all  existing  temples,  and  to  enrich  it  with  all  the
things  that  could  be  obtained,  as  well  gold  and  silver  as
precious  stones,  fine  cloth,  arms  of  all  the  different  kinds
they  used,  munitions  of  war,  shoes,  plumes  of  feathers,  skins
of  animals  and  birds,  coca,  sacks  of  wool,  and  valuables  of  a
thousand  kinds,  in  short,  all  things  of  which  they  had  any
knowledge.  This  work  was  begun  with  such  lofty  aspirations,
that  if  their  monarchy  had  endured  until  to-day  it  would  not
yet  have  been  completed.

The  Inca  ordered  that  the  provinces  should  provide  20,000
men  and  that  the  villages  should  send  the   necessary  pro-
visions.   If  any  fell  sick,  another  labourer  was  to  supply  his
1  See  chapter  xcii.


THE  FORTRESS  AT  CUZCO.  161

place,  and  he  was  to  return  to  his  home.  But  these  Indians
were  not  kept  constantly  at  a  work  in  progress.  They
laboured  for  a  limited  time,  and  were  then  relieved  by  others,  so
that  they  did  not  feel  the  demand  on  their  services.  There  were
4,000  labourers  whose  duty  it  was  to  quarry  and  get  out  the
stones ;  6,000  conveyed  them  by  means  of  great  cables  of
leather  and  of  cabnya1  to  the  works.  The  rest  opened  the
ground  and  prepared  the  foundations,  some  being  told  off  to  cut
the  posts  and  beams  for  the  wood-work.  For  their  greater
convenience,  these  labourers  made  their  dwelling-huts,  each
lineage  apart,  near  the  place  where  the  works  were  pro-
gressing. To  this  day  most  of  the  walls  of  these  lodgings
may  be  seen.  Overseers  were  stationed  to  superintend,  and
there  were  great  masters  of  the  art  of  building  who  had  been
well  instructed.  Thus  on  the  highest  part  of  a  hill  to
the  north  of  the  city,  and  little  more  than  an  arquebus-
shot  from  it,  this  fortress  was  built  which  the  natives
called  the  House  of  the  Sun,  but  which  we  named  the
Fortress.

The  living  rock  was  excavated  for  the  foundation,  which
was  prepared  with  such  solidity  that  it  will  endure  as  long  as
the  world  itself.  The  work  had,  according  to  my  estimate,  a
length  of  330  paces,2  and  a  width  of  200.  Its  walls  were  so
strong  that  there  is  no  artillery  which  could  breach  them.  The
principal  entrance  was  a  thing  worthy  of  contemplation,  to
see  how  well  it  was  built,  and  how  the  walls  were  arranged  so
that  one  commanded  the  other.  And  in  these  walls  there  were
stones  so  large  and  mighty  that  it  tired  the  judgment  to
conceive  how  they  could  have  been  conveyed  and  placed,  and
who  could  have  had  sufficient  power  to  shape  them,  seeing
that  among  these  people  there  are  so  few  tools.  Some  of  these
stones  are  of  a  width  of  twelve  feet  and  more  than  twenty

1  Fibre  of  Agava  tuberosa.

-  Four  hundred  yards  according  to  the  Editor's  measurement.

M


162  THE  FORTRESS  AT  CUZCO.

long,  others  are  thicker  than  a  bullock.1  All  the  stones  are
laid  and  joined  with  such  delicacy  that  a  rial  could  not  be
put  in  between  two  of  them.

I  went  to  see  this  edifice  twice.  On  one  occasion  I  was
accompanied  by  Tomas  Vasquez,2  a  conqueror,  and  on  the
the  other  I  found  Hernando  de  Guzman  there,  he  who  was
present  at  the  siege,3  and  Juan  de  la  Haya.4  Those  who  read
this  should  believe  that  I  relate  nothing  that  I  did  not  see.  As
I  walked  about,  observing  what  was  to  be  seen,  I  beheld,  near
the  fortress,  a  stone  which  measured  260  of  my  palmos  in
circuit,  and  so  high  that  it  looked  as  if  it  was  in  its  original
position.  All  the  Indians  say  that  the  stone  got  tired  at  this
point,  and  that  they  were  unable  to  move  it  further.5  As-
suredly if  I  had  not  myself  seen  that  the  stone  had  been

1  The  largest  stones  are,  by  my  measurements: — First,  10  feet  high,
by  6  broad ;  second,  16£  feet  high,  by  6  broad ;  third,  14  feet  high,  by
8  broad  ;  fourth,  14  feet  high,  by  12  broad.

2  Tomas  Vasquez,  one  of  the  first  conquerors,  had  a  house  in  Cuzco,
and  an  estate  in  Ayaviri.  (See  chapter  iv.)  He  distinguished  himself
in  the  battle  of  Las  Salinas,  fighting  against  Almagro.  He  joined
Giron  in  his  insurrection,  and  commanded  the  rebel  cavalry.  At
Pucara  he  deserted  Giron,  went  over  to  the  royal  camp,  and  obtained  a
pardon.  He  retired  to  his  estates,  but  was  afterwards  put  to  death  by
order  of  the  Viceroy  Marquis  of  Caiiete  in  1557.

3  The  siege  of  Cuzco  by  Manco  Ynca,  in  1526.

4  This  name  is  not  clear  in  the  manuscript.  It  may  be  La  Rea.
The  Peruvian  editor  has  Juan  de  la  Plaza.

6  There  are  several  versions  of  the  native  tradition  relating  to  this
monolith,  which  is  called  piedra  cansada,  or  the  "tired  stone",  inQuichua,
saycusca  rumi.  The  Spanish  editor  gives  the  least  known  and  most
curious  of  these  versions,  which  he  found  in  the  manuscript  history  of
the  Yncas  by  Padre  Moriia.  He  says  that  an  Ynca  of  the  blood  royal,
named  Urco  or  Urcon,  a  great  engineer  and  architect,  was  the  official
who  directed  the  moving  of  the  tired  stone  from  the  quarry,  and  that  on
reaching  this  spot  where  it  stopped,  the  Indians  who  were  dragging  it,
killed  him.  This  Urcon  designed  and  traced  out  the  fortress  of  Cuzco.
He  also  conceived  and  carried  out  the  idea  of  transporting  from  Quito
the  best  soil  for  potatoes,  with  the  object  of  raising  them  in  it  for
the  sovereign's  table.  With  this  soil  he  made  the  hill  called  Allpa  Sunlv,
to  the  east  of  the  fortress.


THE  FORTRESS  AT  CTZCO.  103

hewn  and  shaped  I  should  not  have  believed,  however  much
it  might  have  been  asserted,  that  the  force  of  man  would
have  sufficed  to  bring  it  to  where  it  now  is.  There  it  remains,
as  a  testimony  of  what  manner  of  men  those  were  who  con-
ceived so  good  a  work.  The  Spaniards  have  so  pillaged  and
ruined  it,  that  I  should  be  sorry  to  have  been  guilty  of  the
fault  of  those  in  power  who  have  permitted  so  magnificent  a
work  to  be  so  ruined.  They  have  not  considered  the  time  to
come,  for  it  would  have  been  better  to  have  preserved  the
edifice  and  to  have  put  a  guard  over  it.1

There  were  many  buildings  within  the  fortress,  some
small,  one  over  the  other,  and  others,  which  were  large,
were  underground.  They  made  two  blocks  of  buildings,  one
larger  than  the  other,  wide  and  so  well-built,  that  I  know
not  how  I  can  exaggerate  the  art  with  which  the  stones  are
laid  and  worked  ;  and  they  say  that  the  subterranean  edi-
fices are  even  better.  Other  things  were  told  me,  which  I  do
not  repeat,  because  I  am  not  certain  of  their  accuracy.  This
fortress  was  commenced  in  the  time  of  Ynca  Yupanqui.
His  son,  Tupac  Inca,  as  well  as  Huayna  Ccapac  and  Huascar,

1  The  Spanish  editor  here  has  the  following  note.  He  says  that  the
fault  did  not  lie  with  the  Spaniards,  but  in  the  very  natural  want  of
archaeological  knowledge  in  Cieza  himself,  and  in  his  extreme  credulity,
believing  all  the  stories  of  the  Orejones  and  descendants  of  the  Yncas,
for  whom  everything  that  was  worthy  of  notice  in  the  country  was  the
exclusive  work  of  those  sovereigns.  It  is  now  a  generally  received
opinion  that  the  very  ancient  cyclopean  work  at  Cuzco  was  due  to  a
people  who  lived  long  before  Ynca  Yupanqui,  and  even  before  Manco
Ccapac,  if  it  be  true  that  the  latter  appeared  in  the  beginning  of  the
eleventh  century.  Moreover,  the  Yncas  themselves  destroyed  some,
and  left  others,  without  completing  what  had  been  begun  by  their  prede-
cessors. Xot  all  the  ruins  in  Peru  were  due  to  Spanish  vandalism.  On  the
contrary,  the  Viceroy  Don  Francisco  de  Toledo  and  others,  far  from  con-
tributing to  the  destruction  of  the  fortress  of  Cuzco,  took  measures  to  pre-
serve it,  and,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  prevented  the  stones  from  being-
used  for  modern  buildings.  This  was  especially  the  case  in  the  year
1577,  when  the  Jesuits  of  Cuzco  applied  for  leave  to  take  stones  from  the
fortress  for  their  monastery  and  church,  and  were  refused.

M  2


164  THE  FORTRESS  AT  CUZCO.

worked  much  at  it,  and  although  it  is  still  worthy  of  ad-
miration, it  was  formerly  without  comparison  grander.
When  the  Spaniards  entered  Cuzco,  the  Indians  of  Quiz-
quiz  had  already  collected  great  treasure  ;  but  some  was  still
found,  and  it  is  believed  that  there  is  a  great  quantity  in  the
vicinity.  It  would  be  well  to  give  orders  for  the  preserva-
tion of  what  is  left  of  this  fortress,  and  of  that  of  Huarcu,1
as  memorials  of  the  grandeur  of  this  people,  and  even  for
utility,  as  they  could  be  made  serviceable  at  so  little  cost.
With  this  I  will  return  to  the  narrative.

1  The  Viceroy  Don  Andres  Hurtado  de  Mendoza,  Marquis  of  Caiiete,
ordered  the  fortress  at  Huarcu  (valley  of  Caiiete  on  the  coast)  to  be
repaired  and  garrisoned,  a  few  years  after  this  was  written  by  Cieza  de
Leon.  It  is  called  the  fortress  of  Hervay,  and  there  are  still  consider-
able remains  of  it  at  the  mouth  of  the  Caiiete  river,  overlooking  the
Pacific.


YNCA   YUPANQUI.  165


CHAPTEE  LII.

How  Inca  Yujpanqui  set  out  from  Cuzco  and  marched  to  the
CoIIao,  and  of  xvhat  hap2)cncd  there,

These  Indians  have  no  letters,  and  can  only  preserve  their
history  by  the  memory  of  events  handed  down  from  genera-
tion to  generation,  and  by  their  songs  and  guvpus.  I  say
this,  because  their  narratives  vary  in  many  particulars,  some
saving  one  thing,  and  others  giving  a  different  version.
Human  judgment  would  not  suffice  to  decide  what  is  truest,
without  taking,  from  these  various  stories,  what  the  people
themselves  consider  to  be  most  accurate,  for  record.  I  write
this  for  the  benefit  of  the  Spaniards  who  are  in  Peru,  and  who
pretend  to  a  knowledge  of  many  native  secrets.  They  are
aware  that  I  knew  and  understood  what  they  think  that
they  know  and  understand,  and  a  good  deal  more ;  and  that
from  all  this,  I  have  decided  upon  writing  what  they  will  see,
having  worked  hard  at  collecting  the  materials,  as  they
themselves  well  know.

The  Orejones  relate  that,  the  affairs  of  Inca  Yupanqui
being  in  this  state,  he  determined  to  set  out  from  Cuzco  with
a  large  force,  to  march  to  the  region  they  call  Collao.
Leaving  a  governor  in  the  city,  he  set  out  and  marched  until
he  arrived  at  the  great  town  of  Ayaviri.  The  people  did  not
wish  to  come  to  him  in  due  form.  The  Inca,  therefore,  took
them  by  surprise,  and  killed  all  the  inhabitants,  both  men
and  women,  doing  the  same  to  the  people  of  Copacopa.
The  destruction  of  Ayaviri  was  such,  that  nearly  all  perished.
There  only  remained  a  few  who  were  horrified  to  see  so  great
a  calamity,  and  wandered,  like  mad  creatures,  in  the  fields,
calling  on  their  ancestors  with  great  moanings  and  words  of
fear.1      The  Inca  hit  upon  the   useful   idea   of  planting  a

1  See  chapter  xlviii  of  the  First  Part.


166  GREAT  SNAKES  IN  THE  FOEESTS.

colony  iu  the  beautiful  meadows  and  fields  of  Ayaviri,  near
which  the  bright  river  flows  ;  and  he  ordered  that  sufficient
mitimaes  should  come,  with  their  women,  to  people  the  dis-
trict. So  it  was  done,  and  large  buildings  with  a  temple  of
the  Sun  were  erected  for  them,  with  a  storehouse  and  pro-
visions. Thus  Ayaviri,  peopled  by  mitimaes,  continued  to
be  more  prosperous  than  it  was  before ;  and  the  Indians  who
survived  from  the  wars  and  the  cruelty  of  the  Spaniards,  are
all  descended  from  mitimaes,  and  not  from  natives,  as  has
been  written.

Besides  this,  they  relate  that  certain  captains  having  gone,
by  order  of  the  Inca,  with  a  sufficient  force  to  make  war  on
those  of  Anti-suyu,  comprising  the  tribes  in  the  forests  to  the
eastward,  they  came  upon  snakes  as  large  as  thick  beams,
which  killed  all  they  could,  insomuch  that,  without  seeing
any  other  enemy,  these  creatures  made  war  on  them  in  such
sort,  that  very  few  returned  out  of  the  great  number  that  set
out.  The  Inca  was  much  incensed  when  he  received  this
news.  Being  with  his  followers,  a  sorceress  said  to  him  that
she  would  go  and  charm  the  snakes,  so  that  they  should  be
gentle  and  foolish,  and  do  no  harm  to  any  one,  even  though
they  themselves  should  feel  the  desire.  Approving  of  the
plan,  if  it  should  be  equal  to  the  promise,  the  Inca  ordered  it
to  be  put  in  execution,  which  was  done  accordingly  in  the
belief  of  the  people,  but  not  of  mine,  because  it  seems  non-
sense. The  snakes  having  been  enchanted,  the  enemies  were
attacked,  many  were  made  to  submit  by  force,  and  others  by
persuasion  and  kind  words.

The  Inca  set  out  from  Ayaviri,  and  they  say  that  he
marched  by  the  road  of  Omasayo,  which  was,  for  the  conve-
nience of  his  royal  person,  made  broad  as  we  now  see  it.
He  went  by  Asillo  and  Azangaro,  where  he  had  some  en-
counters with  the  natives.  But  he  spoke  such  words,  and
gave  them  such  presents,  that  he  brought  them  to  his  friend-
ship and  service.     Thenceforward  they  adopted  the  policy


YXCA    YUPANQUI    IN    THE   COLLAO.  167

which  all  other  tribes  use  who  have  friendship  and  alliance
with  the  Incas,  and  they  arranged  their  habitations  in  towns
on  the  open  plain.

Passing  forward,  they  relate  that  the  Inca  Yupanqui
visited  the  other  tribes  bordering  on  the  great  lake  of
Titicaca  ;  and,  by  his  wise  dealings,  he  brought  them  all  into
his  service.  In  each  town  he  wore  the  dress  used  by  the
natives,  a  thing  which  gave  great  pleasure  to  them.  He
entered  upon  the  lake  of  Titicaca,  and  beheld  the  islands
which  are  surrounded  by  it,  ordering  a  temple  of  the  Sun
and  palaces  to  be  erected  on  the  largest,  for  the  use  of  him-
self and  his  descendants.  Having  brought  the  whole  region
of  the  Collao  under  his  sway,  he  returned  in  great  triumph
to  Cuzco,  where,  as  soon  as  he  entered,  he  ordered  that  there
should  be  the  customary  festivals,  and  people  came  from  the
other  provinces  with  valuable  presents,  and  the  governors
and  delegates  were  very  careful  to  comply  with  all  that  the
Inca  commauded.


168  INVASION    OF   ANTI-SUYU.

CHAPTEE  LIII.

How  Inca  Yupanqui  set  out  from  Cuzco,  and  what  he  did.

The  fame  of  Inca  Yupanqui  flew  over  the  land  in  such  wise
that  his  great  deeds  were  discussed  in  all  parts.  Many,  with-
out seeing  either  banner  or  captain  of  his,  came  to  know  more
and  to  offer  vassalage,  affirming  that  his  ancestors  must  have
fallen  from  heaven,  seeing  that  they  knew  how  to  live  in  such
concert  and  honour.  Inca  Yupanqui,  without  losing  his
gravity,  answered  them  kindly,  that  he  did  not  wish  to  injure
any  nation  whatever,  but  that  they  should  obey  him,  seeing
that  the  Sun  wished  and  commanded  it.  When  he  had  again
assembled  an  army,  he  set  out  towards  the  region  called  Con-
desuyo  (Cunti-suyu),  and  subjugated  the  Yanahuaras  and
Chumbivilicas,  and  with  some  other  tribes  of  Conclesuyo  he
had  sharp  encounters.  Yet,  although  they  offered  much  oppo-
sition, his  power  and  ability  were  such  that,  after  much  loss
to  themselves,  they  accepted  him  as  lord,  as  the  rest  had
done.  Having  arranged  the  affairs  of  these  districts,  and  ap-
pointed rulers  over  the  people,  ordering  that  they  should  do
no  injury  to  his  subjects,  he  returned  to  Cuzco.  First,  how-
ever, he  placed  governors  in  the  principal  places,  whose  duty
it  was  to  regulate  the  affairs  of  the  provinces,  both  as  regards
the  mode  of  living  of  the  people,  including  the  assembling
into  regular  towns,  and  the  prevention  of  any  wrong  being
done,  even  to  the  most  humble.

After  this,  they  further  relate  that  the  Inca  rested  for  some
days  at  Cuzco,  for  he  wished  to  proceed  in  person  to  the
Andes  (Antis),  whither  he  had  sent  his  spies  and  harbingers
to  examine  the  country  and  report  upon  the  condition  of  the
people.  As  the  whole  country  was,  by  his  order,  full  of  de-
posits of  provisions,  he  arranged  that  the  road  he  had  to  take
should  be  well  supplied,  and  it  was  so.     He  then  set  out  from


INVASION    OF   ANTI-SUYU.  169

Cuzco  with  the  captains  and  men  of  war,  leaving  a  governor
for  the  administration  of  justice.  Traversing  the  mountains
and  snowy  passes,  he  received  reports  from  his  scouts,  touch-
ing the  density  of  the  forests,  and  how  that,  although  they
found  the  great  snakes  which  are  engendered  in  these  thickets,
yet  they  did  no  harm ;  yet  the  scouts  were  astounded  to  see
how  fierce  and  monstrous  they  were.

When  the  natives  of  these  parts  knew  that  the  Inca  had
entered  their  country,  as  many  of  them  had  already  been  en-
gaged in  his  service  by  the  captains  who  preceded  him,  they
came  to  do  mucha1,  bringing  presents  of  plumes  of  feathers,
coca,  and  other  products  of  their  land,  and  he  received  them
all  kindly.  As  regards  the  rest  of  the  Indians  in  the  forests,
those  who  wished  to  be  his  vassals  sent  messengers,  and  those
who  did  not,  abandoned  their  habitations  and  retired  with
their  women  into  the  densest  parts  of  the  forests.

Inca  Yupanqui  received  important  information  that,  after
a  few  days' journey  to  the  eastward,  there  was  a  rich  and  well-
peopled  country.  He  became  very  anxious  to  discover  it,  and
would  have  passed  onward.  But  tidings  came  of  some  dis-
turbance at  Cuzco,  when  he  had  arrived  at  a  place  called
Marcapata.  So  he  returned  in  great  haste  to  Cuzco,  where  he
remained  for  some  days.

The  Indians  say  that  the  province  of  the  Collao  was  very
large,  and  in  those  clays  it  contained  a  great  number  of  people
and  of  lordships  among  the  natives,  which  were  very  power-
ful. When  they  knew  that  Inca  Yupanqui  had  entered  the
forests  of  the  Antis,  believing  that  he  would  either  be  killed
there  or  return  defeated,  they  agreed  as  one  man,  from  Vil-
canota  onwards,  but  in  great  secrecy,  to  rebel  and  not  to  con-
tinue under  the  dominion  of  the  Incas.  They  declared  that
united  they  were  great,  that  their  fathers  had  been  free,  and
they  would  not  remain  captive,  with  so  many  lands  subject
to  one  sole  lord.     They  all  detested  the  rule  which  the  Inca

1  Worship.


170  HEBELLION   IN   THE   COLLAO.

had  placed  over  them,  although  they  had  received  no  injury
or  ill  treatment,  nor  had  the  governors  or  delegates  been
tyrannical  or  exacting.  But  they  assembled  in  Hatun-
colla  and  in  Chucuito,  where  there  met  together  Cari,  and
Zapana,  and  Humalla,  and  the  lord  of  Azangaro,  and  many
others.  They  made  their  vow,  in  accordance  with  their  blind-
ness, to  proceed  with  their  design  and  resolve;  and  for
greater  assurance,  they  all  drank  from  one  cup,  and  ordered
that  it  should  be  placed  in  a  temple  amongst  sacred  things,
as  a  testimony  of  what  they  had  done.  Throughout  the  em-
pire this  rebellion  in  the  Collao,  and  the  deaths  that  had  been
inflicted  on  the  Orejones,  became  known.  The  tidings  led  to
other  disturbances  in  several  parts,  and  in  many  places  there
were  insurrections.  This  disturbed  the  arrangements  re-
specting the  mitimaes.  The  governors  were  warned ;  and
above  all,  the  great  valour  of  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui  was  dis-
played, who  reigned  from  that  time,  as  I  shall  explain.


ABDICATION    OF   YNCA   YUPANQUI.  171


CHArTEK    LIV.

How  the  Inca  Yupanqui,  having  grown  very  old,  resigned  the
Government  of  the  Kingdom  to  Tupac  Inca,  his  Son.

Inca  Yupanqui  did  not  betray  any  anxiety  in  public  when  he
received  news  of  the  insurrection  in  the  Collao,  but,  with
great  resolution,  he  ordered  an  army  to  be  assembled  that  he
might  go  in  person  to  punish  the  rebels.  He  sent  his  messen-
gers to  the  Canas  and  Canchis,  exhorting  them  to  remain  firm
in  their  allegiance  without  allowing  the  inconstancy  of  the
Collao  to  affect  them.  When  the  Inca  was  on  the  point  of
setting  out  from  Cuzco,  being  very  old,  he  felt  tired  of  the
wars  he  had  waged,  and  of  the  long  journeys  he  had  made,
and  so  bowed  down  and  broken,  that  he  considered  himself
unfit,  either  for  this  campaign,  or  for  the  continued  govern-
ment of  so  great  an  empire.  So  he  sent  for  the  High  Priest
and  Orejones,  and  the  principal  men  of  the  city,  and  said  that
he  was  now  so  old  that  his  proper  place  was  by  the  fireside,
and  not  conducting  a  campaign.1  He  gave  them  to  under-
stand that  this  was  said  in  all  sincerity,  and  that  they  should
take  his  son  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui  for  their  Inca,  a  resolute

1  The  reign  of  this  Ynca  Yupanqui  appears  to  include  two  reigns
according  to  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega.  Cieza  de  Leon  makes  one  genera-
tion where  Garcilasso  makes  two,  namely  Pachacutec  and  Ynca
Yupanqui.  Pachacutec  means  ''  he  who  changes  the  world",  and  Gar-
cilasso says  that  the  name  should  have  been  given  to  Viracocha,  the  father,
who  changed  the  course  of  events  by  his  victory  over  the  Chancas,  but
that  it  was  given  to  his  son.  Cieza  de  Leon  attributes  the  victory  over
the  Chancas  to  this  very  son,  whom  he  calls  Yupanqui,  and  to  whom
the  surname  Pachacutec  rightly  belongs.  It  seems  likely,  therefore,
that  Cieza's  version  of  the  genealogy  is  the  more  correct  of  the  two.

Garcilasso,  however,  makes  two  long  reigns  where  Cieza  has  only  one.
To  Pachacutec  he  attributes  the  conquest  of  the  Huancas,  Caxamarca,
and  the  coast  valleys,  and  he  records  several  of  his  laws  and  wise  sayings
(ii,  p.  208).  To  Yupanqui  he  assigns  the  expedition  into  the  eastern
forests,  and  the  conquest  of  Chile.


172  ACCESSION    OF   TUPAC   YNCA   YUPANQUI.

youth,  as  they  had  seen  in  the  former  war  in  which  he  had
served.  He  told  them  to  deliver  the  fringe  to  him,  that  he
might  be  venerated  and  acknowledged  by  all  as  their  lord.
He  would  then  take  steps  for  the  punishment  of  the  rebels  in
the  Collao  who  had  risen  and  put  to  death  the  Orejones  and
delegates  who  had  been  left  amongst  them.

Those  for  whom  he  had  sent,  replied  that  all  should  be  done
as  he  desired,  and  that  they  would  obey  in  all  things  as  they
always  had  done.  In  the  provinces  of  the  Canchis  and
Canas  they  made  great  receptions  with  rich  presents,  and
they  had  constructed,  in  the  place  they  called  Cacha,  some
edifices  very  worthy  to  behold,  after  the  fashion  which  is
usual  with  them.

The  Collas,  when  they  knew  that  Tupac  Inca  was  march-
ing against  them  in  great  power,  sought  help  from  their  neigh-
bours, and  assembled  most  of  them  with  the  determination  to
await  his  approach,  and  to  give  him  battle.  They  relate  that
Tupac  Inca  had  news  of  all  this,  and  that,  as  his  disposition
was  merciful,  and  although  he  well  knew  the  advantage  he
had  over  his  enemies,  he  sent  from  among  his  neighbours,
the  Canas,  some  messengers  to  declare  that  his  desire  was  not
to  be  an  enemy,  and  to  punish  in  proportion  to  the  crime
that  had  been  committed,  when  the  governors  and  delegates
of  his  father  were  killed  without  having  done  any  wrong
whatever.  His  wish  was  that  they  should  lay  down  their
arms  and  submit,  that  they  might  be  well  governed,  and  re-
cognise one  sovereign,  rather  than  many  lords.

With  this  message  an  Orejon  was  sent,  carrying  some
presents  for  the  principal  people  among  the  Collas.  But  it
availed  nothing,  nor  did  they  desire  to  swear  allegiance,  but
rather  to  maintain  the  confederation  they  had  formed.  With
the  lords  of  their  villages  as  captains,  they  advanced  towards
the  position  where  Tupac  Inca  was  encamped.  All  accounts
agree  that,  in  the  town  called  Pucara  they  took  up  a  position
in  a  fortress  which  they  had  made  there,  and  when  the  Inca


VICTORY    OVER   THE  COLLAS.  173

arrived  they  prepared  to  fight  with  their  accustomed  shouts.
There  was  a  battle  between  the  opposing  forces,  in  which
many  were  killed  on  both  sides,  but  the  Collas  were  defeated.
Great  numbers  were  taken  prisoners,  both  men  and  women,
and  there  would  have  been  more  if  the  Inca  had  caused  the
pursuit  to  be  more  hotly  continued.  The  Inca  spoke  sharply
to  Cari,  the  lord  of  Chucuito,  asking  him  how  he  had  an-
swered to  the  peace  which  his  grandfather  Viracocha  Inca
had  established  with  him.  He  said  he  would  not  kill  him,
but  would  send  him  to  Cuzco,  where  he  would  be  punished.
Accordingly,  he  and  the  other  prisoners  were  sent  to  Cuzco
under  guard  ;  and,  in  memory  of  the  victory  over  the  Collas
in  that  place,  the  Inca  ordered  great  images  of  stone  to  be  set
up,  and  a  huge  piece  of  the  hill  to  be  broken  up,  as  well  as
other  things,  which  he  will  see  and  note  who  travels  that
way.  I  did  myself,  and  I  remained  there  two  days  to  see
and  understand  everything  thoroughly.1

1  See  chapter  cii  of  the  First  Part.


174  PACIFICATION    OF   THE    COLLAO.


CHAPTER   LV.

How  the  Collas  ashed  for  peace,  and  how  the  Inca  granted  it
and  returned  to  Cuzco.

The  Collas  who  escaped  from  the  battle  were  much  as-
tonished at  the  result,  and  made  haste  to  get  away,  believ-
ing that  those  of  Cuzco  were  closely  following.  So  they  fled
in  terror,  turning  their  heads  from  time  to  time  to  see  what
was  not  there,  for  the  Inca  had  stopped  the  pursuit.  Having
crossed  the  Desaguadero,  all  the  principal  chiefs  assembled
and  took  counsel  together.  They  determined  to  send  to  the
Inca  and  ask  for  peace,  and,  if  he  received  them  into  his  ser-
vice, that  they  would  pay  the  tribute  that  was  due  up  to  the
time  they  rebelled,  and  that  hereafter  they  would  always  be
loyal.  The  most  important  among  them  were  chosen  to  treat
on  this  matter,  and  they  met  Tupac  Inca  advancing  in  pur-
suit. He  listened  to  the  embassy  with  complacency,  and  an-
swered with  the  words  of  a  human  conqueror,  saying  that
he  grieved  for  what  had  happened  owing  to  their  conduct,
and  that  they  might  safely  come  to  Chucuito,  where  he  would
arrange  the  terms  of  peace  in  such  a  way  as  would  be  profit-
able to  them.  When  they  heard  this,  they  put  the  matter  in
train.

The  Inca  ordered  large  supplies  to  be  brought,  and  the  lord
Humalla  came  to  receive  him.  The  Inca  spoke  favourably
both  to  him  and  the  other  lords  and  captains.  Before  the
peace  was  arranged,  they  relate  that  great  dancing  and  drink-
ing festivals  were  celebrated.  When  they  were  concluded,
and  all  the  chiefs  being  assembled,  the  Inca  said  that  he
should  not  require  the  arrears  of  tribute  to  be  paid,  as  they
amounted  to  a  large  quantity.  But  as  they  had  rebelled
without  cause  or  reason,  it  would  be  necessary  to  station  gar-


PACIFICATION    OF   THE   COLLAO.  175

risons  of  men  of  war,  and  that  they  must  supply  the  soldiers
with  provisions  and  women.  They  said  that  they  would  do
this  ;  and  he  also  ordered  that  mitimaes  should  come  from
other  lands,  and  that  a  large  number  of  emigrants  from  the
Collas  should  be  removed  from  their  own  districts  to  others.
Governors  and  delegates  were  left  amongst  them,  to  collect  the
tribute.  This  being  done,  the  Inca  said  that  they  must  abide
by  a  law  which  he  should  ordain,  that  their  conduct  might
always  be  had  in  memory.  The  law  was  that  only  one  thou-
sand natives  of  their  province  should  ever  enter  Cuzco,  includ-
ing women,  on  pain  of  death  if  more  should  enter.  They
were  grieved  at  this  order,  but  they  agreed  to  comply  with  it,
as  with  the  rest  of  his  commands.  It  is  certain  that  if  there
was  the  fixed  number  of  Collas  in  Cuzco,  no  others  could
enter  after  the  number  was  complete,  until  some  went  out,
and,  if  they  wished  to  do  so,  they  could  not,  because  the  gate-
keepers, collectors  of  tolls,  and  guards  who  were  stationed  to
see  who  went  in  and  out,  would  not  permit  or  consent  to  it.
Among  these  people  they  did  not  resort  to  bribery  to  gain
their  ends,  nor  did  they  ever  tell  a  lie  to  their  kings  on  any
account,  nor  betray  a  secret.  This  is  a  thing  worthy  of  all
praise.

Having  settled  the  affairs  of  the  province  of  Collao,  put
things  in  order,  and  given  the  chiefs  their  instructions,  the
Inca  returned  to  Cuzco,  first  sending  his  messengers  to  Con-
desuyos  and  to  the  Antis,  to  report  what  had  taken  place
there,  whether  the  governor  had  committed  any  fault,  or  the
natives  had  made  any  disturbance.  Accompanied  by  a  great
company  and  many  principal  chiefs,  he  entered  Cuzco,  and
was  received  with  much  honor.  They  offered  up  great  sacri-
fices to  the  Sun,  and  there  were  festivities  for  those  who  were
engaged  in  the  work  of  building  the  fortress  by  order  of  Inca
Yupanqui.  The  Coya,  wife  and  sister  of  the  Inca,  named
Mama  Ocllo,  also  made  great  rejoicings  with  festivity  and
dancing.


176  PREPARATIONS   FOR    NEW   CONQUESTS.

Tupac  Inca  now  determined  to  set  out  on  the  road  of
Chincha-suyu,  to  subjugate  the  provinces  beyond  Tarama
and  Bonbon.  He,  therefore,  ordered  a  general  summons
to  be  issued  for  soldiers  to  assemble  throughout  the  pro-
vinces.


MARCH  OF  TUPAC  YNCA  YUPAXQUI.         177


CHAPTER  LVI.

How  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui  set  out  from  Cuzco,  and  Jiovj  he
conquered  all  the  country  from  thence  to  Quito,  and  touch-
ing his  great  deeds.

I  could  well  give  a  longer  account  of  this  conquest  of  Quito
by  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui,  but  I  have  so  much  to  write  touch-
ing other  events  that  I  cannot  spare  the  space,  nor  can  I
relate  what  he  did,  except  summarily.  On  the  departure  of
the  king  from  the  city  of  Cuzco,  it  was  not  known  in  what
direction  he  was  going  to  make  war,  because  he  did  not  make
known  his  intention,  except  to  his  councillors.  More  than
200,000  men  assembled,  with  so  much  baggage  and  stores
that  the  plain  was  covered  with  them.  He  sent  orders,  by
the  posts,  to  the  governors  of  provinces  that  all  should  bring
provisions,  munitions,  and  arms  to  the  royal  road  of  Chincha-
suyu.  This  road  was  made  without  deviating  from  the  line
traced  by  order  of  his  father,  nor  so  near  it  as  that  both  could
be  joined  into  one.  It  was  grand  and  very  handsomely  con-
structed, with  the  order  and  industry  touching  which  I  have
already  written,  and  in  all  parts  there  were  preparations  for
the  great  multitude  that  was  to  pass  along  it,  without  any-
thing being  wanting.  None  of  the  king's  soldiers  were
allowed  to  pick  so  much  as  a  cob  of  maize,  and,  if  any  man
did,  it  did  not  cost  him  less  than  his  life.  The  natives  car-
ried the  loads,  and  performed  the  other  personal  services,  but
it  may  be  held  for  certain  that  they  did  not  go  beyond  the
appointed  places  ;  and  as  they  worked  willingly,  and  faith  and
justice  were  observed  towards  them,  they  did  not  feel  the
work.

A  garrison,  with  mitimaes,  and  a  governor  selected  from
among  the  most  faithful  of  his  friends,  were  left  in  Cuzco.
The  Inca  then  set  out,  taking,  as  his  captain-general  and  chief

N


178  MARCH  OF  TUPAC  YNCA  YUPANQUI.

councillor,  his  uncle,  Ccapac  Yupanqui,  not  lie  who  made  the
war  against  those  of  Xauxa,  for  that  chief  had  been  put  to
death  owing  to  some  offence  he  had  given.  The  Inca  ad-
vanced to  Vilcas,  where  he  stopped  for  some  days,  enjoying
the  sight  of  the  temple  and  other  edifices  that  had  been
built.  He  ordered  that  there  should  always  be  silversmiths
making  vases  and  other  ornaments  for  the  temple  and  palace
of  Vilcas.

The  Inca  arrived  at  Xauxa,  where  the  Huancas  prepared
a  solemn  reception.  Thence  he  sent  messengers  in  all  direc-
tions, announcing  to  the  people  that  he  desired  to  win  their
friendship,  without  giving  them  offence  or  making  war.  He
said  that  they  must  have  heard  how  the  Incas  of  Cuzco  exer-
cised no  tyranny  and  imposed  no  exactions  on  those  who
were  their  allies  and  vassals,  and  that,  in  exchange  for  the
service  and  homage  they  gave,  they  received  much  good  from
their  sovereign.  In  Bonbon  they  knew  the  great  power  with
which  the  Inca  came,  and,  as  they  expected  great  things  from
his  clemency,  they  came  to  do  him  homage.  Those  of  Yauyo
did  the  same,  as  well  as  those  of  Apurima  and  many  others.
He  received  them  all  very  well,  giving  women  to  some,  to
others  coca,  and  to  others  mantles  and  shirts.  He  himself
wore  the  dress  of  the  people  among  whom  he  was,  which
was  the  way  in  which  they  received  most  satisfac-
tion.

In  the  provinces  which  lie  between  Xauxa  and  Caxamalca,
they  relate  that  there  were  some  wars,  and  he  ordered  forts
and  strongholds  to  be  made  for  defence  against  the  natives.
But,  generally,  he  subdued  them  by  his  policy,  and  without
shedding  much  blood,  as  well  the  intermediate  tribes,  as
those  of  Caxamalca.  In  all  parts  he  left  governors  and  dele-
gates, and  established  posts  to  keep  open  his  communications.
He  did  not  leave  any  great  province  without  ordering  houses
and  a  Temple  of  the  Sun  to  be  built,  and  establishing  miti-
maes.    They  also  relate  that  he  entered  Huanuco,  and  ordered


CONQUESTS  OF  TUPAC  YNCA  YUPANQUI.       179

that  fine  palace  to  be  built,  which  we  behold  to  this  day.1
Being  among  those  of  Chachapoyas,  he  waged  such  war  that
they  were  defeated  at  all  points.  In  Caxainalca  the  Inca
left  people  of  Cuzco,  that  they  might  instruct  the  natives
touching  what  they  should  wear,  and  the  tribute  they  should
contribute,  and,  above  all,  how  they  should  worship  and  re-
verence the  Sun  as  their  god.

In  all  parts  they  called  the  Inca  their  father,  and  he  took
care  that  no  one  should  do  any  damage  in  the  fields  by  which
they  passed,  nor  ill-treat  any  man  or  woman.  He  who  com-
mitted any  such  offence  was  presently  punished  with  death.
He  arranged  that  those  who  submitted  should  build  their
towns  in  due  order,  that  they  should  not  wage  war  upon
each  other,  nor  eat  human  flesh,  nor  commit  any  other
crimes  against  the  law  of  nature.

He  entered  the  country  of  the  Bracamoras,  but  returned
flying,  for  it  is  an  evil  region  covered  with  forest.  In  the
country  of  the  Paltas,  in  Huancabamba,  Caxas,  and  Ayavaca,
he  had  great  trouble  in  subjugating  the  people,  who  were
strong  and  warlike.  They  maintained  the  contest  against  him
during  more  than  five  moons.  At  length  they  asked  for
peace,  which  was  granted  with  the  usual  conditions.  On  one
day  the  peace  was  established,  and  on  the  next,  the  country
was  full  of  milimaes  with  governors,  without  depriving  the

1  The  ruins  are  18  leagues  west  of  the  present  town  of  Huanuco,  in
the  province  of  Huamalies,  12,156  feet  above  the  sea.  They  are  of
great  extent,  covering  more  than  half  a  mile  in  length.  They  show  work
of  the  same  character  as  the  palaces  at  Cuzco.  The  work  includes  a  re-
servoir 250  feet  long  by  130,  a  bath  of  cut  stone,  and  a  stone  aqueduct.
A  doorway  of  cut  stone,  with  a  long  rectangular  room  on  each  side,  opens
to  another  at  a  distance  of  240  feet,  and  further  on  there  is  another  door-
way. Squier  says,-  "  The  perspective  through  this  series  of  portals  is
the  finest  to  be  found  in  the  ancient  works  of  Peru."  Above  the
second  portal  are  rudely -cut  animal  figures.  There  are  many  other
ruined  buildings,  and  what  is  called  the  castle,  180  feet  long  by  80,  with
a  fine  cut-stone  wall  13  feet  high.  An  inclined  plane  leads  up  to  the
terre-plein,  which  is  entered  by  two  portals.

n2


180  SUBJUGATION    OF   THE    CANARIS.

native  chiefs.  Store-houses  were  built,  provisions  were  col-
lected in  them,  and  the  royal  road  was  constructed,  with  a
series  of  forts  throughout.

From  these  districts,  Tupac  Tnca  Yupanqui  advanced  until
he  came  to  the  country  of  the  Caiiaris,  with  whom  he  also
had  quarrels  and  disputes  ;  but  the  same  happened  with  them
as  with  others,  they  remained  his  vassals,  and  he  ordered
them  to  proceed  to  Cuzco  and  settle  in  that  city — more  than
1 5,000  men,  with  their  women,  and  the  principal  chief  to
govern  them.  It  was  done  as  he  commanded.  Some  pre-
tend that  the  sending  of  the  Caiiaris  to  Cuzco  happened  in
the  time  of  Huayna  Ccapac.  At  Tumebamba,  the  Inca
ordered  great  edifices  to  be  built,  respecting  which  I  treated
in  -the  First  Part.1  From  this  place  he  sent  embassies  in
various  directions,  inviting  the  people  to  come  and  see  him,
and  many,  without  making  war,  offered  their  services.  Those
who  took  another  course  were  obliged,  by  an  advance  of  cap-
tains and  troops,  to  do  by  force  what  others  did  of  their  own
free  will.

The  affairs  of  the  country  of  the  Canaris  having  been  set-
tled, the  Inca  marched  by  Tiquizambi,  Cayambi,  and  the
Purnaes,  and  many  other  districts,  where  they  recount  great
things  that  he  did ;  and  the  knowledge  he  must  have  pos-
sessed to  make  himself  monarch  of  such  great  kingdoms,
seems  almost  incredible.  In  Tacunga,  he  waged  fierce  war
with  the  natives,  and,  after  they  were  subdued,  he  made
peace.  Here  he  ordered  such  grand  edifices  to  be  erected  as
to  exceed  those  of  Cuzco  in  perfection.  He  rested  at  Tacunga
for  some  days ;  and  nearly  every  day  a  messenger  arrived
from  Cuzco,  reporting  the  state  of  affairs  there,  while,  from
other  parts,  the  runners  constantly  arrived  with  reports  on
the  administration  of  the  different  provinces  by  the  gover-
nors. And  tidings  arrived  of  a  disturbance  at  Cuzco  among
the  Orejones  themselves,  which  caused  some  anxiety.  But
1  Chapter  xliv.


FOUNDATION   OF   QUITO.  181

another  report  quickly  followed  that  all  was  settled  again,
and  that  the  governor  of  the  city  had  severely  punished  the
authors  of  the  uproar.

From  Tacunga  the  Inca  advanced  until  he  came  to  the
place  we  call  Quito,  where  the  city  of  San  Francisco  del
Quito  is  founded.  As  the  country  seemed  inviting,  and  as
good  as  Cuzco,  the  Inca  here  founded  a  place  which  he  called
Quito,  peopling  it  with  mitimaes.  Here  he  made  edifices  and
store-houses,  saying,  "  Cuzco  must  be  the  capital  of  one  part
of  my  great  empire  and  Quito  of  the  other."  He  gave  im-
portant powers  to  the  Governor  of  Quito,  and  placed  his  own
governors  and  delegates  in  all  the  surrounding  districts.  He
ordered  that  there  should  be  a  garrison  of  men,  both  for
peace  and  war,  at  Caranguri ;  and  he  removed  the  inhabitants
from  one  village  to  another,  making  them  exchange  their
abodes.  In  all  parts  they  worshipped  the  Sun,  and  adopted
the  customs  of  the  Incas,  insomuch  that  it  appeared  as  if
they  had  all  been  born  in  Cuzco.  They  loved  the  Inca  so
much  that  they  called  him  Father  of  all,  the  good  Lord,  the
just,  the  judge.  In  the  province  of  the  Canaris,  they  assert
that  Huayna  Ccapac  wTas  born,  and  that  great  festivities  took
place  at  his  birth.  All  the  inhabitants  of  those  provinces
which  had  been  brought  under  the  orderly  rule  of  the  great
Tupac  Inca,  arranged  their  towns  with  regularity,  and  made
rest-houses  on  the  royal  roads.  They  were  diligent  to  learn
the  general  language  of  Cuzco  and  the  laws  which  it  was
their  duty  to  observe.  Masters  who  came  from  Cuzco  super-
intended the  building  of  the  edifices,  and  instructed  others  in
the  art ;  and  in  like  manner  the  rest  of  the  things  which
the  king  ordered  were  completed.


182  PUERTO   VIEJO.


CHAPTEE  LVII.

How  the  Inca  sent  from  Quito  to  know  whether  his  commands
had  been  obeyed,  and  how,  leaving  that  province  in  good
order,  he  set  out  to  go  to  the  valleys  of  the  Yuncas.

When  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui  had  become  lord  of  the  country
as  far  as  Quito,  in  the  manner  already  described,  and  being
himself  still  at  Quito,  he  resolved  to  take  steps  to  ensure
that  his  orders  were  complied  with  and  carried  out.  He,
therefore,  directed  those  who  among  his  followers  were
most  expert  to  be  carried  by  the  natives  in  hammocks,  some
to  one  part,  some  to  another,  overlooking  and  examining  the
condition  of  the  new  provinces,  taking  account  of  the  gover-
nors and  collectors  of  tribute,  and  judging  of  their  dealings
with  the  natives.

The  Inca  sent  his  Orejones  to  the  provinces  which  we  call
Puerto  Viejo,1  to  induce  the  inhabitants  to  submit,  as  the
others  had  done,  and  to  instruct  them  how  they  were  to  sow,
to  work,  to  dress,  and  to  worship  the  Sun,  and  to  make  them
understand  the  orderly  system  of  living,  and  of  policy.  They
relate  that  these  Orejones  were  killed,  as  a  reward  for  the
good  they  came  to  do ;  and  that  Tupac  Inca  sent  certain  cap-
tains, with  troops,  to  punish  the  murderers.  But  when  the
barbarians  knew  of  their  approach,  they  assembled  in  such
numbers  that  they  conquered  and  killed  the  Inca's  troops,  at
which  he  showed  anger.  But  as  he  had  important  affairs  on
his  hands,  and  had  occasion  to  proceed  in  person  to  Cuzco,  he
was  not  in  a  position  to  chastise  them  for  what  they  had
done.

At  Quito,  the  Inca  received  news  that  his  orders  had  been
well  attended  to  in  the  provinces,  and  that  his  delegates  had

1  Puerto  Viejo  was  a  seaport  in  1°  2'  S.  latitude.  It  was  founded
by  Francisco  Pacheco  on  March  12th,  1535,  by  order  of  Almagro.


GOVEBNOR   OF   QUITO.  183

instructed  the  people  over  whom  they  were  placed,  and  had
treated  them  well ;  while  the  people  were  happy,  and  did
what  was  required  of  them.  From  many  lords  there  arrived
ambassadors  every  day,  with  valuable  presents,  and  the  Inca's
court  was  full  of  great  men,  and  his  palaces  of  vases  of  gold
and  silver,  and  other  precious  things.  In  the  morning  the
Inca  had  a  meal,  and  from  noon  until  rather  late  he  gave
public  audiences  to  those  who  desired  to  speak  with  him,  ac-
companied by  his  guard.  From  that  time  until  the  night  he
passed  in  drinking,  and  then  supper  was  served  by  the  light
of  torches.  For  these  people  did  not  use  tallow  or  wax,
although  they  had  plenty  of  both.

The  Inca  left  a  venerable  Orejon  in  Quito,  as  the  captain-
general  and  lieutenant,  who,  according  to  all  accounts,  was
intelligent,  brave,  and  of  noble  presence.  His  name  was
Chalco  Mayta,  and  he  was  given  permission  to  travel  in  a
litter  and  to  be  served  in  gold,  and  other  privileges  which  he
highly  appreciated.  Above  all  things,  he  was  ordered  to
send  a  messenger  to  the  Inca  every  month,  with  a  full  report
of  all  that  had  happened,  of  the  condition  of  the  country,
the  yield  of  the  harvests,  increase  of  flocks,  as  well  as  the
usual  reports  of  the  annual  deaths  and  births,  according  to
the  system  already  described.  The  great  road  from  Quito  to
Cuzco,  which  is  a  greater  distance  than  from  Seville  to  Eonie,
was  as  much  used  as  the  road  from  Seville  to  Triana,  and  I
cannot  say  more.

The  great  Tupac  Inca  had  long  heard  of  the  fertility  of  the
coast  valleys  and  of  their  beauty,  and  of  the  great  esteem  in
which  their  lords  were  held.  He  now  determined  to  send
messengers  with  presents  for  the  principal  men,  and  a  re-
quest that  they  would  receive  him  as  a  friend  and  comrade,
as  he,  in  like  manner,  desired  to  be  with  them.  He  said  that
when  he  passed  through  their  valleys,  he  would  not  make
war  if  they  desired  peace,  that  he  would  give  them  some  of
his  women  and  cloths,  and  would  take  theirs  in  exchange,


184  YUNCAS   OF   THE   COAST.

with  other  things  of  a  like  nature.  Throughout  the  coast
the  tidings  of  the  great  conquests  of  Tupac  Tnca  Yupanqui
had  spread,  and  that  he  was  not  cruel  nor  bloodthirsty,  nor
did  harm  to  any  except  those  who  were  troublesome  and  op-
posed themselves  to  him.  Those  who  brought  the  news  also
praised  the  customs  and  religion  of  the  people  of  Cuzco,  hold-
ing the  Orejones  to  be  sacred  persons,  and  that  the  Incas
were  either  children  of  the  Sun  or  had  some  deity  within
themselves.  Considering  these  and  other  reports,  many  re-
solved to  seek  the  Inca's  friendship  before  they  had  even  seen
his  banners,  and  they  sent  their  ambassadors  with  messages
to  that  effect,  and  bearing  many  presents.  They  requested
him  to  be  pleased  to  come  to  their  valleys  to  enjoy  the
delights  of  them  and  to  be  served  by  the  inhabitants.  Ap-
proving of  their  wish,  and  giving  fresh  instructions  to  the
Governor  of  Quito,  the  Inca  left  that  city  to  assume  dominion
over  the  Yuncas  of  the  coast.


CONQUEST   OF   THE   COAST   VALLEYS.  185


CHAPTEE   LVIII.

How  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui  marched  by  the  coast  valleys,  and
how  all  the  Yuncas  came  under  his  dominion.

As  the  King  Tupac  Inca  had  determined  to  go  to  the  coast
valleys,  to  bring  the  inhabitants  under  his  sway,  he  descended
to  that  of  Tumbez,  and  was  respectfully  received  by  the
people;  to  whom  he  showed  much  kindness,  and  put  on  the
dress  which  they  usually  wore,  to  give  them  more  content-
ment. He  commended  the  principal  men  for  wishing  to
receive  him  as  their  lord  without  going  to  war,  and  promised
to  look  upon  them  as  his  own  children.  They,  being  well
satisfied  to  hear  his  good  words  and  to  see  the  way  in  which
he  treated  them,  gave  their  obedience  in  good  faith,  allowing
governors  to  remain  with  them,  and  buildings  to  be  erected.
But  some  Indians  affirm  that  Tupac  Inca  passed  on  without
making  any  settlement  in  this  district,  and  that  there  was
none  until  the  reign  of  Huayna  Ccapac.  If  we  attend  to
everything  they  say,  we  shall  never  come  to  any  conclu-
sion.

Leaving  this  valley,  the  Inca  visited  the  others  on  the  sea
coast,  making  a  royal  road  as  he  travelled,  very  large  and
grand,  as  may  be  seen  from  what  now  remains  of  it.  In
most  parts  he  was  served,  and  the  people  came  to  him  with
presents,  but  occasionally  there  was  resistance  to  his  advance.
However,  there  was  no  part  where  the  people  did  not  even-
tually submit  and  become  his  vassals.  In  these  valleys  he
rested  for  some  days,  drinking  and  enjoying  his  pleasures,
while  he  rejoiced  to  look  upon  the  beauty  of  the  country.
Great  edifices  and  temples  were  built  by  his  order.  They
say  that  in  the  valley  of  Chimu  there  was  a  fierce  war  with
the  lord,  and  that,  in  one  battle,  the  Incas  were  very  nearly
being  defeated  at  all  points.     But  his  soldiers  were  at  last


186  THE   YUNCAS.

able  to  prevail  and  to  conquer  their  enemies.  Tupac  Inca,
by  his  clemency,  pardoned  them,  ordering  that  those  who
remained  alive  should  continue  the  sowing  of  their  lands,
and  should  not  again  take  up  arms.  The  Inca's  delegate
remained  in  Chiinu,  and  the  rest  of  the  valley  sent  their
tribute  to  Caxamalca.  As  the  natives  were  expert  in  the
working  of  metals,  many  were  sent  to  Cuzco,  and  to  the
capitals  of  provinces,  where  they  worked  gold  and  silver
ornaments  and  vases,  and  any  other  things  that  were
ordered.1  From  Chimu  the  Inca  passed  on  to  Parmunquilla2
where  he  ordered  a  fortress  to  be  built.  It  may  still  be  seen,
though  abandoned  and  in  ruins.

These  Yuncas  were  very  refined,  and  the  lords  were  luxu-
rious and  fond  of  festivities.  They  travelled  on  the  shoulders
of  vassals,  had  many  women,  were  rich  in  gold  and  silver,
cloth,  precious  stones,  and  flocks.  In  those  times  they  were
served  with  much  pomp.  Heralds  and  buffoons  went  before
them,  porters  attended  on  them,  and  they  observed  religious
ceremonies.  Some  voluntarily  submitted  to  the  Inca,  while
others  took  up  arms  against  him ;  but  finally  he  remained
sovereign  and  lord  over  the  whole  of  them.  He  did  not
deprive  them  of  their  liberties,  nor  prohibit  their  ancient
customs,  so  that  they  might  adopt  others.  He  left  expert
men  who  could  instruct  them  in  all  that  the  Inca  desired
they  should  understand ;  and  great  care  was  taken  that  they
should  learn  the  general  language.  He  caused  mitimaes  to
be  established,  and  posts  along  the  roads.  A  moderate  tribute

1  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  gives  a  fuller  account  of  the  war  with
Chimu.     (ii,  pp.  193  to  201.)

2  Parmunca.  Iu  his  First  Part  (p.  247)  Cieza  de  Leon  calls  these
ruins  Pormonga.  They  are  near  the  coast,  south  of  Guarmay.  The
outer  walls  are  300  yards  long  by  200.  The  interior  is  divided  into
small  houses,  separated  by  lanes.  The  walls  are  partly  covered  with  a
kind  of  plaster,  on  which  were  painted  representations  of  birds  and
beasts.  The  ruined  fortress  stands  at  the  extremity  of  a  plain,  close  to
the  foot  of  some  rugged  mountains,  about  a  league  from  the  sea.


TEMPLE   OF   PACHACAMAC.  187

was  imposed,  and  that  which  was  given  as  tribute  was  to  be
the  produce  of  their  own  land,  so  that  the  people  need  not
seek  it  from  afar;  justice  was  maintained,  but  what  was
promised  by  the  people  must  be  fulfilled.  If  not,  the  loss
was  their  own,  and  the  Inca  recovered  his  full  revenue.  No
native  lord  received  a  lordship ;  but  many  men  were  taken
out  of  the  valleys  and  removed  to  others,  or  were  removed  to
other  parts  to  perform  the  duties  they  understood.

The  Inca  marched  through  the  remaining  valleys  in  the
best  order  possible,  not  permitting  any  injury  whatever  to  be
done,  either  in  the  towns  or  in  the  fields  that  he  passed.
The  natives  had  plenty  of  provisions  collected  in  the  store-
houses that  had  been  built  along  the  road.  In  this  way  the
Inca  advanced  until  he  arrived  at  the  valley  of  Pachacamac,
where  was  the  very  ancient  and  sacred  temple  of  the
Yuncas,  which  he  wished  very  much  to  see.  When  he
arrived  at  that  valley,  they  say  that  he  only  wished  that
there  should  be  a  Temple  of  the  Sun ;  but  as  he  found  that
the  existing  temple  was  so  revered  and  esteemed  by  the
natives,  he  did  not  venture  to  alter  anything.  He  contented
himself  with  causing  a  great  house  of  the  Sun  to  be  made,
with  mama-conas  and  priests,  that  sacrifices  might  be  offered
up  in  accordance  with  his  religion.1  Many  Indians  say  that
the  Inca  himself  spoke  with  the  devil  who  was  in  the  idol
of  Pachacamac,  and  that  he  heard  how  the  idol  was  the
creator  of  the  world  and  other  nonsense,  which  I  do  not  put
down,  because  it  is  not  worth  while.  It  is  also  said  that  the
Inca  besought  the  idol  to  tell  him  with  what  service  he
would  be  most  pleased  and   honoured,  and  that  the  devil

1  The  original  Yunca  temple,  called  by  the  Yncas  Pachacamac,  was
on  a  terraced  height  overlooking  the  sea,  and  about  500  feet  above  its
level.  The  Temple  of  the  Sun  was  about  a  mile  and  a  half  distant,  the
ruin  now  being  called  Mamaconas.  This  latter  ruin  is  certainly  of
Ynca  oi'igin.


188  PASS   OF   PAEIACACA.

replied   that   they   should   sacrifice  to  him  much   blood  of
human  beings  and  of  sheep.

After  this  they  say  that  great  sacrifices  were  offered  up  in
Pachacamac  by  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui,  and  great  festivals
were  celebrated.  The  Inca  then  returned  to  Cuzco  by  a
road  which  he  made,  crossing  the  snowy  range  of  Pariacaca,1
and  coming  out  in  the  valley  of  Xauxa.  It  is  no  small
sight  to  behold  the  grandeur  of  that  range,  and  what  great
terraces  it  has,  and  to  this  clay  men  pass  by  that  snow-
covered  region.  Visiting  the  mountainous  provinces,  and
ordering  and  providing  what  was  most  conducive  to  good
government,  the  Inca  arrived  at  Cuzco,  where  he  was  re-
ceived with  great  festivities  and  dances,  while  many  sacri-
fices were  offered  up  in  the  temple,  to  commemorate  his
victories.

1  The  pass  of  Pariacaca  is  in  the  province  of  Huarochiri.  The  ter-
races or  "  stairs"  mentioned  in  the  text  are  near  the  summit.  Acosta
describes  his  great  sufferings  while  crossing  this  formidable  pass  (i,  p.
130).  Father  Avila  has  recorded  the  strange  traditions  of  the  natives
touching  Pariacaca.     (See  my  Translation.)


WAR  IN  THE  COAST  VALLEYS  189


CHAPTER   LIX.

How  Tupac  Inca  again  set  out  from  Cuzco,  and  of  the  fierce
war  he  waged  with  those  of  Huarco;  and  how,  after  lie
had  conquered  them,  he  returned  to  Cuzco.

The  province  of  Chincha  was,  in  former  days,  an  important
part  of  this  kingdom  of  Pern,  and  very  populous,  insomuch
that,  before  the  time  of  Tupac  Inca,  the  Chinchas,  with  their
captains,  had  made  incursions  as  far  as  the  Collao,  whence
they  returned  to  their  province  with  great  spoils.1  Hence
they  had  always  been  respected  and  feared  by  their  neigh-
bours. It  is  said  that  the  Inca,  father  of  Tupac  Inca,  had
sent  from  the  country  of  the  Soras  a  captain  named  Ccapac
Inca,  to  persuade  the  Chinchas  to  come  under  his  dominion.
Although  he  went  and  induced  some  of  them  to  agree,  it  was
but  a  small  part,  for  the  rest  rose  up  in  arms,  and  prepared
to  defend  their  country  in  such  sort  that  the  Orejon  made
the  best  of  his  way  back  again.2  They  had  not  again  seen  a
captain  of  the  Incas,  as  they  themselves  declare,  until  they
were  subjugated  by  Tupac  Inca.  In  this  matter,  I  know  no
more  than  what  the  people  themselves  relate.

Returning  to  the  narrative,  after  the  Inca  had  gone  back
to  Cuzco,  as  has  been  mentioned,  and  had  devoted  as  many
days  as  he  pleased  to  enjoying  himself  and  to  amusements,
he  gave  orders  for  the  assembly  of  another  army,  to  complete
the  conquest  of  the  coast  region.  His  commands  were
obeyed ;  and  soon  the  captains  of  the  provinces  with  their
contingents  of  troops  arrived  at  Cuzco.     After  having  made

1  See  also  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  ou  the  alleged  ancient  conquests  of
the  Yuncas  (ii,  p.  153).  He  declares  that  the  assertions  of  the  coast
people  as  to  their  former  incursions  into  the  Collao  are  false.

2  On  the  other  hand,  Garcilasso  attributes  the  conquest  of  the
Chinchas  to  this  Ccapac  Yupanqui,  in  the  time  of  the  Inca  Pachacutec.


190  SUBMISSION   OF   CHINCHA.

arrangements  for  the  government  of  the  city,  he  set  out  from
Cuzco,  and  came  down  to  the  coast  by  the  road  of  Huatara.1
His  approach  being  known,  many  waited  with  the  intention
of  accepting  him  as  their  lord,  and  many  others  were
resolved  to  make  war,  and,  if  possible,  to  maintain  their
liberties.  In  the  valley  of  Nasca  there  were  many  people
and  preparations  for  war.

Tupac  Inca,  when  he  arrived  at  Nasca,  on  the  coast,
received  and  despatched  embassies,  and  there  were  some
encounters  and  skirmishes ;  but  they  consented  to  what  the
Inca  required  of  them,  that  they  should  build  strong  forts,
receive  mitimaes,  and  pay  the  tribute  imposed  on  them.
From  thence  the  Inca  went  to  the  valley  of  Yea,  where  he
met  with  more  resistance  than  at  Nasca ;  but  his  prudence
enabled  him,  without  fighting,  to  turn  enemies  into  friends,
and  these  were  conciliated  like  the  others.  In  Chincha,  the
people  were  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  the  Inca  in  their
valley,  with  more  than  30,000  armed  men,  and  they  ex-
pected support  from  their  neighbours.  Tupac  Inca,  when  he
knew  it,  sent  messengers,  with  great  presents,  to  the  chiefs
and  principal  captains,  instructing  the  ambassador  to  make
great  offers  in  his  name,  to  assure  them  that  he  did  not
desire  war,  but  rather  peace  and  brotherhood,  and  other
messages  of  that  kind.  The  Chinchas  heard  what  the  Inca
said,  and  received  his  presents.  Some  of  their  principal
men  then  visited  him,  and  treated  of  peace  with  such  suc-
cess, that  it  was  concluded.  The  Chinchas  laid  down  their
arms  and  received  Tupac  Inca,  who  presently  proceeded  to
Chincha.  This  account  is  given  both  by  the  Chinchas
themselves,  and  by  the  Orejones  of  Cuzco.  Other  Indians
of  other  provinces,  whom  I  have  heard,  tell  the  story  in  a

1  This  road  leads  to  the  valley  of  Pisco.  The  subsequent  narrative
seems  to  show  that  the  author  here  makes  a  mistake,  and  that  the  Inca
descended  to  the  coast  at  Nasca,  much  further  south.


WAR   WITH   THE    HUARCOS.  191

different  manner,  for  they  say  that  there  was  a  great  war.
But  I  believe  that  Tupac  Inca  became  Lord  of  Chincha
without  fighting.1

When  the  Inca  arrived  in  that  valley,  he  found  it  to  be  so
beautiful  and  so  extensive,  that  he  rejoiced  greatly.  He
praised  the  customs  of  the  natives,  and  with  loving  words
he  asked  them  to  adopt  such  of  the  customs  of  Cuzco  as
fitted  with  their  own.  They  were  well  content,  and  obeyed
him  in  all  things.  Having  made  all  suitable  arrangements,
he  went  back  to  Yea,  whence  he  marched  to  the  valley
called  Huarco,2  because  he  heard  that  the  people  were  wait-
ing for  liim  in  warlike  guise.  This,  indeed,  was  the  truth,
for  the  natives  of  that  valley,  despising  their  neighbours  for
having  submitted  to  a  strange  king  without  reason,  and
given  up  possession  of  their  lands  to  him,  had  assembled
with  great  resolution,  and  had  erected  strong  forts  or
pucaras  within  their  boundaries,  near  the  sea  shore.  Here
they  put  their  women  and  children.  The  Inca,  marching
with  his  army  in  battle  array,  came  in  sight  of  the  enemy,  and
sent  ambassadors  with  menaces  and  threats.  They,  how-
ever, would  not  adopt  the  rule  of  their  neighbours,  which
was  to  submit  to  strangers,  but  prepared  for  war.  As  the
summer  was  approaching,  and  the  heat  was  great,  the  sol-
diers of  the  Inca  fell  sick,  which  induced  him  to  retire  as
cautiously  as  possible.  The  Huarcos  came  forth  from  their
valley,  collected  their  harvests,  and  sowed  their  fields.
They  also  got  their  arms  ready,  that  they  might  be  ready  to
receive  the  people  of  Cuzco,  if  they  again  came  to  attack
them.

Tupac  Inca  returned  to  Cuzco ;  and  as  men  have  little
constancy,  when  they  saw  that  the  Huarcos  remained  in
possession    of   their   liberties,   there   began   to    be    changes

1  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  says  that  the  Chiuchas  carried  on  a  long  war
before  they  were  subdued  (ii,  p.  150).

2  Xow  called  Cafiete.


192  WAK   WITH   THE   HUARCOS.

among  them,  while  some  rebelled  and  threw  off  the  yoke  of
the  Inca.  These  were  natives  of  the  valleys  on  the  sea
coast.  All  this  came  to  the  knowledge  of  the  king,  and
during  the  remainder  of  that  summer  he  was  engaged  in
assembling  troops,  and  sending  Orejones  to  visit  the  provinces
in  all  parts  of  the  empire.  He  was  resolved  to  gain  the
lordship  of  Huarco,  even  if  it  should  cost  very  dear.  When
autumn  was  come,  and  the  heats  of  summer  were  passed,
he  descended  to  the  coast  with  the  largest  army  that  he
could  collect.  He  sent  ambassadors  into  the  valleys,  up-
braiding the  people  for  their  weakness  of  purpose  in  pre-
suming to  rise  against  him,  urging  them  to  be  firm  in  their
friendship  henceforward,  for  that  if  not,  they  would  be
visited  by  cruel  war.  When  he  reached  the  borders  of  the
valley  of  Huarco,  on  the  skirts  of  a  mountain,  he  ordered  a
city  to  be  founded,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  Cuzco,  in-
tending it  to  be  his  principal  residence.  The  streets,  and
hills,  and  open  square  received  the  same  names  as  those  of
the  real  city.  He  said  that  until  Huarco  was  conquered,
and  the  people  had  become  his  subjects,  he  would  remain  in
that  place,  and  that  a  garrison  should  always  be  maintained
there.  When  his  directions  had  been  carried  out,  he  ad-
vanced with  his  troops  in  the  direction  of  the  enemy,  and
surrounded  their  position.  He  was  so  firm  in  his  purpose,
that  he  never  sent  any  one  to  treat  with  them ;  but  carried
on  the  war,  which  was  so  obstinate,  that,  they  say,  it  lasted
for  three  years.  In  the  summers  the  Inca  went  to  Cuzco,
leaving  a  garrison  in  the  new  Cuzco  that  he  had  built,  so
that  there  might  always  be  troops  opposed  to  the  enemy.

Thus  it  was  that  one  side  maintained  their  resolve  to  be
lords,  and  the  other  side  was  equally  determined  not  to  be
slaves.  But  at  last,  at  the  end  of  three  years,  the  Huarcos
became  weak ;  and  the  Inca,  knowing  their  condition,  sent
new  ambassadors,  proposing  that  they  should  be  his  friends
and  comrades,  and  saving  that  he  had  no  wish  but  that  their


SUBJUGATION   OF   THE   HUAECOS.  193

children  should  intermarry,  and  that  thus  their  alliance
should  be  one  of  perfect  equality.  Other  things  were  said
with  intent  to  deceive,  for  in  reality  Tupac  Inca  considered
that  these  people  deserved  severe  punishment  for  having
caused  so  much  trouble.  The  Huarcos,  feeling  that  they
could  not  hold  out  for  many  clays  longer,  and  that,  with  the
conditions  offered  by  the  Inca,  it  would  be  better  to  enjoy
tranquillity  and  repose,  agreed  to  what  the  Inca  proposed.
Evacuating  the  fortress,  their  principal  men  went  to  make
reverence  to  the  Inca,  who,  without  more  ado,  ordered  his
people  to  kill  them  all.  This  was  done  with  great  cruelty.
All  the  principal  and  most  honoured  chiefs  who  came  were
put  to  death,  and  the  sentence  was  also  executed  on  those
who  had  remained  away.  They  killed  a  great  number,  as
their  descendants  relate  to  this  clay,  and  the  great  heaps  of
bones  testify  to  the  truth  of  what  they  say.  We  believe
that  what  is  related  by  the  people  on  this  subject,  is  what
you  see  written  clown.

This  being  done,  the  Inca  ordered  an  important  fortress
to  be  erected,  in  such  maimer  as  I  have  related  in  my  First
Part.1  The  valley  having  been  subdued,  and  governors
established  in  it,  with  mitimaes,  the  Inca  received  embassies,
who  came  from  the  Yuncas,  as  well  as  from  many  tribes  in
the  mountains.  He  then  ordered  the  new  Cuzco  which  he
had  built  to  be  pulled  down,  and  returned  with  his  army  to
the  city  of  Cuzco,  where  he  was  received  with  great  demon-
stration of  joy.  They  offered  up  sacrifices  in  his  honour,
both  in  the  temple  and  where  the  oracles  spoke,  afterwards
making  the  people  joyful  with  feasts,  drinking-bouts,  and
solemn  recitations.

1  Chapter  lxxiii.  This  is  the  fortress  called  Hervay,  at  the  mouth  of
the  river  of  Caiiete,  the  well-preserved  ruins  of  which  may  still  be
seen.  I  examined  them  carefully  in  1853.  See  an  account  of  them  in
a  note  to  my  translation  of  the  First  Part  of  Cieza  de  Leon,  p.  259.

0


194       MARCH  OF  TUPAC  YNCA  YUPANQUI  TO  THE  COLLAO.


CHAPTEE  LX.

How  Tupac  Inca  once  more  set  out  from  Cuzco,  and  how  he
went  to  the  Collao,  and  from  thence  to  Chile,  subjugating
the  nations  in  that  direction,  and  of  his  death.

Tupac  Inca,  having  returned  to  Cuzco  after  having  gained
the  great  victories  which  have  been  described,  was  enjoying
himself  at  banquets  and  drinking-bouts,  with  his  wives,
damsels,  and  children,  for  several  days.  Among  his  children
was  Huayna  Ccapac,  he  who  was  to  succeed  as  king,  and  who
was  growing  up  very  vigorous  and  brave.  After  the  festivi-
ties, Tupac  Inca  thought  of  visiting  the  Collao  and  subduing
the  region  beyond.  With  this  object,  he  ordered  the  soldiers
to  be  summoned  from  all  parts,  and  many  tents  to  be  pre-
pared for  passing  the  night  in  the  desert  places.  The  troops
began  to  arrive  with  their  captains,  and  were  lodged  round
the  city,  those  whom  the  law  prohibited  not  entering  Cuzco.
Both  one  and  the  other  were  provided  with  all  that  was
necessary,  the  governors  and  purveyors  of  the  city  keeping  a
full  account.  When  all  who  had  .to  go  to  the  war  were
assembled,  sacrifices  were  offered  up  to  their  gods  in  con-
formity with  their  blindness,  making  the  soothsayers  seek  an
answer  touching  the  war  from  the  oracles.  After  a  general
and  very  splendid  feast,  Tupac  Inca  set  out  from  Cuzco,  leav-
ing his  eldest  son  Huayna  Ccapac  as  his  lieutenant;  and  with
great  splendour  and  state,  he  travelled  to  Colla-suyu,  visiting
his  garrisons  and  royal  tamp  us,  and  being  entertained  in  the
villages  of  the  Canas  and  Canchis.

Entering  the  Collao,  he  advanced  as  far  as  Chucuito,  where
the  chiefs  of  the  land  assembled  to  make  a  festival.  Owing
to  the  good  order  that  was  established,  they  had  sufficient
provisions  ready  for  the  300,000   men  who   composed  the


INVASION    OF   CHILE.  195

army.  Some  chiefs  of  the  Collao  offered  to  go  in  person  with
the  Inca.  He  went  on  the  lake  of  Titicaca,  with  some  lords
whom  he  selected,  and  approved  of  the  edifices  which  his
father  had  ordered  to  be  built,  and  of  the  excellence  of  the  work.
He  offered  up  great  sacrifices  in  the  temple,  and  presented
rich  gifts  to  the  priests  and  to  the  idol,  worthy  of  so  great  a
lord  as  he  was.  He  then  returned  to  the  army,  and  marched
through  the  whole  province  of  the  Collao  until  he  came  to
the  end  of  it.  He  sent  his  messengers  to  all  the  nations  of
the  Charcas,  Carangas,  and  other  inhabitants  of  that  region.
Of  these,  some  consented  to  submit,  while  others  resisted ;
but  the  Inca's  power  was  such  that  the  latter  were  easily  sub-
dued. The  conquered  were  treated  with  great  clemency,  and
those  who  submitted  with  much  affection.  In  Paria,  the
Inca  ordered  edifices  to  be  built,  and  also  in  other  parts.
Certainly  great  events  must  have  taken  place  in  connection
with  Tupac  Inca,  many  of  which  have  been  forgotten,  owing
to  the  want  of  letters ;  and  I  set  down  briefly  some  few  out
of  many  that  we  know,  having  been  heard  by  us  who  are  in
those  parts.

Ha  vie  g  been  victorious  in  the  country  beyond  Charcas,  the
Inca  traversed  many  provinces,  and  vast  snow-covered  de-
serts, until  he  arrived  in  the  country  we  call  Chile.  He  con-
quered, and  became  lord  over  all  that  land ;  and  they  say
that  he  advanced  as  far  as  the  river  Maule.  In  Chile  he
built  some  edifices,  and  received,  as  tribute  from  those  parts,
much  gold.  He  left  governors  and  mitimaes,  put  the  con-
quered country  in  good  order,  and  returned  to  Cuzco.

Towards  the  eastern  limits  he  sent  instructed  Orejones,  in
the  dress  of  merchants,  to  see  what  lands  there  were  in  that
direction,  and  what  kind  of  people  dwelt  there.  Having
arranged  these  things,  he  returned  to  Cuzco,  whence  they
affirm  that  he  set  out  again  at  the  end  of  a  few  days.  With
the  troops  he  had  ordered  to  assemble  he  then  entered  the
region  of  the  Antis,  and  suffered  great  hardships  in  forcing

o  2


196  DEATH  OF  TUPAC  YNCA  YUPANQUI.

his  way  through  the  dense  forests.  He  conquered  some  of
the  tribes,  and  ordered  large  plantations  of  coca  to  be  culti-
vated for  the  supply  of  Cuzco,  to  which  place  he  returned.

They  affirm  that  after  a  few  days  the  Inca  was  attacked  by
an  illness,  of  which  he  died,  leaving  to  his  son  the  govern-*"
ment  of  his  kingdom,  his  wives  and  children ;  and,  after  say-
ing a  few  other  things,  he  expired.  There  was  great  lamen-
tation, and  such  strong  feeling,  from  Quito  to  Chile,  that  it  is
wonderful  to  listen  to  the  Indians  who  relate  the  events  of
that  time.

Where  or  in  what  place  he  was  interred  they  do  not  say.
They  relate  that  a  great  number  of  women,  servants,  and
pages  were  killed,  to  be  buried  with  him,  with  so  much  trea-
sure that  it  must  have  amounted  to  more  than  a  million :  for
ordinary  lords  have  been  buried  with  upwards  of  100,000
castellanos.  Besides  the  people  who  were  put  into  his  tomb,
they  put  to  death  and  buried  many  men  and  women  in  divers
parts  of  the  kingdom ;  and  in  all  parts  they  mourned  for  an
entire  year.  Most  of  the  women  shaved  their  heads,  putting
on  ropes  of  grass ;  and  at  the  end  of  the  year  they  came  to
do  him  honour.  The  other  things  which  they  used  to  do,  I
prefer  not  to  repeat,  because  they  savour  of  heathenism.  But
the  Christians  who  were  in  Cuzco  in  1550  will  remember
what  they  saw  of  the  honours  done  at  the  end  of  the  year
of  mourning  for  Paullu  Inca,1  who  had  himself  become  a
Christian.  So  that  they  can  imagine  what  it  must  have
been  in  the  days  when  the  departed  kings  were  reigning,  and
before  they  lost  their  empire.

1  Paullu  was  a  son  of  Huayna  Ccapac,  and  a  younger  brother  of
Huascar  and  of  the  Ynca  Manco.  He  accompanied  Almagro  in  his
expedition  to  Chile,  and  was  with  Almagro  the  lad  at  the  battle  of
Chupas.  In  1543  he  was  baptised  under  the  name  of  Don  Cristobal,
and  he  lived  at  Cuzco,  respected  by  the  Spaniards  and  beloved  by  the
native  population.  He  died  in  May  1549.  His  son  Carlos  Ynca  was  a
schoolfellow  of  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  and  had  a  son  Melchor  Carlos
Ynca,  a  knight  of  Santiago,  who  went  to  Spain  in  1602,  and  died  at
Alcala  de  Henares  in  1610.


ACCESSION    OF   HUAYNA   CCAPAC.  197


CHAPTER  LXI.

Roio  Huayna  Ccapac  reigned  in  Guzco,  who  was  the  twelfth
King  Inca.

"When  the  great  King  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui  died,  they  pre-
pared to  perform  the  obsequies  and  ceremonies  of  his  inter-
ment after  the  manner  of  his  ancestors,  and  with  great  pomp.
The  Orejones  relate  that  some  provinces  conspired  to  recover
their  liberty,  and  shake  off  the  yoke  of  the  Incas,  but  the
good  management  of  the  Inca  governors,  assisted  by  the
captains  and  mitimaes,  kept  order  during  a  trying  time.
Huayna  Capac  was  not  careless,  nor  did  he  fail  to  understand
that  it  would  be  necessary  for  him  to  display  valour  in  order
to  preserve  that  which  his  father  had  gained  with  so  much
labour.  Shortly  he  entered  upon  the  fast,  and  he  who
governed  the  city  proved  loyal  and  faithful.  There  did  not
fail  to  be  some  disturbance  among  the  Incas  themselves,  for
some  sons  of  Tupac  Inca,  begotten  on  other  women  than  the
Coya,  wished  to  set  up  a  claim  to  the  royal  dignity.  The
people,  however,  were  loyal  to  Huayna  Capac,  and  not  only
would  not  consent,  but  applauded  the  punishment  inflicted
on  them.  When  the  fast  was  ended,  Huayna  Capac  came
forth  with  the  fringe,  very  richly  adorned,  and  performed  the
ceremonies  according  to  the  custom  of  his  ancestors,  at  the
end  of  which  his  name  was  declared  with  great  acclama-
tions :  ':  Huayna  Capac,"  "  Inca  zapalla  tucuillacta  uya,"
which  is  as  much  as  to  say — "Huayna  Capac  alone  is  king  ;
let  all  the  city  hear  him."1

Huayna  Capac,  according  to  the  account  of  many  Indians
who  had  seen  and  knew  him,  was  not  of  any  great  stature,
but  well-built,  with  good  features  and  much  gravity.      He

1  Huayna,  youth ;  ccapac,  rich ;  inca,  king ;  zapalla,  sole ;  tucui,
ruler  ;  llacta,  city  ;  uya,  hear.


198  CHARACTER   OF   HUAYNA   CCAPAC.

was  a  man  of  few  words  but  many  deeds,  a  severe  judge,  who
punished  without  mercy.  He  wished  to  be  so  feared  that  the
Indians  should  dream  of  him  at  night.  He  ate  according
to  the  custom  of  his  people.  He  listened  to  those  who  spoke
well  to  him,  and  believed  very  easily.  Parasites  and  flatterers,
who  are  not  wanting  among  those  people,  had  much  influence.
He  gave  ear  to  lies,  which  was  the  reason  that  many  died
without  fault.  The  youths  who,  tempted  by  the  flesh,  slept
with  his  wives  or  damsels,  or  with  those  who  lived  in  the
temple  of  the  Sun,  were  ordered  to  be  put  to  death,  and  the
women  suffered  the  same  punishment.  The  penalties  for  mak-
ing disturbances  and  for  insubordination  were  deprivation  of
property,  and  the  bestowal  on  another.  For  other  offences
there  was  merely  corporal  chastisement.  His  father  looked
over  many  of  these  crimes,  especially  with  regard  to  women ;
for  when  any  one  was  detected  with  them,  he  said  that  he
was  only  a  boy.

The  mother  of  Huayna  Capac,  principal  queen,  wife,  and
sister  of  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui,  was  named  Mama  Ocllo.
They  say  that  she  was  a  very  prudent  lady,  and  that  she
informed  her  son  respecting  many  things  that  she  had  seen
Tupac  Inca  do.  She  was  so  fond  of  her  son  that  she  entreated
him  not  to  go  to  Quito  or  Chile,  until  she  was  dead.  They
relate,  that  to  please  her  and  to  comply  with  her  request,  he
was  in  Cuzco,  without  leaving  it,  until  she  died  and  was
interred  with  great  pomp.  Much  treasure  and  fine  clothes,
with  women  and  servants  were  put  into  her  tomb.  All  the
treasures  of  the  deceased  Incas,  and  the  fields  which  they
call  chacaras,  were  kept  entire  from  the  first,  without  being-
used  or  touched  ;  for  among  these  people  there  were  neither
wars  nor  other  needs  for  which  money  would  be  of  any  use.
For  this  reason  we  believe  that  there  are  vast  treasures  in
the  bowels  of  the  earth  which  are  lost  for  ever,  unless  per-
adventure  some  one  building,  or  doing  some  other  work,
should  hit  upon  some  out  of  the  great  quantity  that  must
exist.


PREPARATIONS   FOR   A    MARCH.  199


CHAPTEE  LXII.

How  Huayna  Capac  departed  from  Cuzco,  and  what
lie  did.

Huayna  Capac  had  ordered  the  principal  lords  of  the  natives
of  the  provinces  to  appear  before  him,  and,  his  court  being
full  of  them,  he  took  for  his  wife  his  sister  Chimbo  Ocllo,  and
on  this  occasion  there  were  great  festivities,  which  ended  the
mourning  for  Tupac  Inca.  These  being  concluded,  he  ordered
that  50,000  soldiers  should  accompany  him  to  visit  the  pro-
vinces of  his  kingdom.  As  he  ordered,  so  it  was  done,  and
he  set  out  from  Cuzco  with  greater  pomp  and  authority  than
his  father.  For  the  litter  was  so  rich,  according  to  the  state-
ment of  those  who  carried  the  king  on  their  shoulders,  that
the  great  and  numerous  ornaments  were  priceless,  besides  the
gold  of  which  they  were  made.  He  travelled  by  the  way
of  Xaquixaguana  and  Andahuaylas,  and  arrived  at  the
country  of  the  Soras  and  Lucanas,  whence  he  sent  embassies
to  many  parts  of  the  coast  region,  and  of  the  mountains,
and  received  replies,  with  great  offerings  and  presents.

From  these  places  he  returned  to  Cuzco,  where  he  ordered
the  offering  up  of  great  sacrifices  to  the  Sun  and  to  the
most  venerated  among  their  gods,  that  they  might  be  favour-
able to  him  in  the  enterprise  he  wished  to  undertake.  He
also  gave  presents  to  the  idols  of  the  Huacas.  He  ascer-
tained from  the  soothsayers,  through  the  utterances  of  the
devils,  or  else  through  their  own  invention,  that  he  would
be  successful  and  prosperous  in  his  undertakings,  and  that
he  would  return  to  Cuzco  with  great  honour  and  profit.
These  ceremonies  being  completed,  the  armed  men  and  their
captains  arrived  from  many  directions  and  were  lodged  out-
side, receiving  provisions  from  the  city.

Those  who  were  employed  on  the  building  of  the  fortress


200  VISIT    OF   HUAYNA   CCAPAC    TO    THE   COLLAO.

continued  to  work  without  the  cessation  of  a  single  day.
The  great  chain  of  gold  was  brought  out  into  the  square  of
Cuzco,  and  there  were  dances  and  drinking-bouts.  The  captains
received  their  appointments  near  the  Stone  of  War,  according
to  their  custom.  Huayna  Capac  then  ordered  that  there
should  be  a  conference,  where  he  addressed  the  people  in
a  vehement  speech,  urging  those  who  accompanied  him  to
be  loyal,  as  well  as  those  who  remained  behind.  They
answered  that  they  would  be  faithful  to  his  service  ;  of  which
speech  he  approved,  and  he  held  out  hopes  of  great  rewards.
All  things  necessary  having  been  prepared,  the  Inca  set  out
from  Cuzco  with  the  whole  army,  and  journeyed  along  a
road  as  grand  and  wide  as  we  now  behold  it ;  for  all  of  us
who  have  been  in  those  parts  have  seen  it,  and  travelled
over  it.  He  inarched  to  the  Collao,  receiving  the  services
proffered  by  the  provinces  through  which  he  passed,  as  a
matter  of  course.  For  they  say  that  the  Inca  considered
that  it  was  merely  their  duty.  He  investigated  what  tribute
they  paid,  and  what  were  the  capabilities  of  each  province.
He  collected  many  women.  The  most  beautiful  he  could
find  were  reserved  for  himself,  and  others  were  given  to  his
captains  and  favourites.  The  others  were  placed  in  the
temple  of  the  Sun  and  there  detained.

On  entering  the  Collao,  he  had  an  account  taken  of  the
great  flocks  and  of  how  many  thousand  loads  of  fine  wool
they  yielded  every  year  to  those  who  made  the  cloth  for  his
house  and  service.  He  went  to  the  island  of  Titicaca  and
ordered  great  sacrifices  to  be  offered  up.  At  Chuqui-apu,1
he  ordered  that  Indians  should  be  collected,  with  overseers,
to  obtain  gold,  in  conformity  with  the  order  and  regulations
that  have  been  explained.  Advancing  onwards,  he  gave  orders
that  the  Charcas  and  other  nations  as  far  as  the  Chichas,
should  get  out  a  great  quantity  of  ingots  of  silver  to  be  sent  to
Cuzco,  without  fail.  He  removed  some  mitimacs  from  one
1  The  modern  La  Paz.


DIFFICULT   MARCH.  201

part  to  another,  although  much  time  had  passed  since  they
were  established.  He  ordered  that  they  should  work  with-
out any  holidays,  because  in  the  land  where  there  were  holi-
days, the  men  thought  of  nothing  but  how  to  create  scandals
and  seduce  women.  Wherever  he  passed,  he  ordered  tampus
and  other  buildings  to  be  erected ;  the  plans  of  which  he
traced  out  himself.  His  soldiers,  although  numerous,  were
so  well  disciplined  that  they  did  not  move  a  step  from  the
camp,  and  the  natives  along  their  line  of  march  supplied
them  with  all  they  required,  so  amply  that  what  remained
over  was  more  than  what  was  used.  In  some  places-  they
built  baths,  at  others  they  raised  land  marks,  and  in  the
deserts  they  made  large  houses.  Along  every  road  that  the
Inca  traversed,  they  left  works  of  this  kind,  insomuch  that
the  account  of  them  excites  admiration.  He  who  did  wrong
was  punished  without  fail,  while  those  who  served  well  were
rewarded.

Having  arranged  these  and  other  matters,  he  advanced  to
the  provinces  now  subject  to  the  town  of  La  Plata,1  and  to
those  of  Tucuman.  He  sent  captains  with  an  army  against
the  Chiriguanos,  but  they  were  not  successful,  returning  after
having  been  put  to  flight.  In  another  direction,  towards  the
South  Sea,  he  sent  more  captains  with  troops,  to  subdue
those  valleys  and  towns  which  had  not  submitted  to  his
father.  He  himself  proceeded,  with  the  rest  of  his  army,
towards  Chile,  completing  the  subjugation  of  the  tribes  along
the  road.  He  traversed  the  uninhabited  region  with  great
difficulty,  and  heavy  were  the  snow  storms  which  broke  over
Ins  people.  They  carried  tents  for  their  protection  at  night,
with  many  yana-conas2  and  female  servants.  Over  all  the
snowy  wilds  they  made  the  royal  road,  with  post  houses
placed  by  the  Inca.

1  Chuquisaca.  Now  called  Sucre,  the  capital  of  the  republic  of
Bolivia.

2  Domestic  servants.


202  HUAYNA   CCAPAC   IN    CHILE.

He  arrived  at  the  province  they  call  Chile,1  where  he  re-
mained for  more  than  a  year,  bringing  the  people  under
subjection,  and  arranging  the  administration.  He  ordered
that  the  quantity  of  ingots  of  gold  which  he  had  indicated
should  be  obtained.  Mitimaes  were  established,  and  many
Chilian  communities  were  removed  from  one  place  to  another.
In  some  places  he  constructed  forts  which  they  call  pucaras,
for  the  wars  that  were  waged  with  some  of  the  tribes.  The
Inca  marched  much  more  over  the  land  than  his  father,
until  he  said  that  he  had  seen  the  end  of  it,  and  he  ordered
memorials  to  be  set  up  in  many  places,  that  in  future  his
greatness  might  be  known.2  The  affairs  of  Chile  having  been
put  in  order,  he  appointed  his  delegates  and  governors,  and
instructed  them  always  to  report  what  happened  in  that  pro-
vince to  the  court  of  Cuzco.     He  charged  them  to  execute


1  The  name  Chile  did  not  belong  to  the  whole  country  included  in
the  present  Republic  of  Chile,  nor  even  to  any  large  part  of  it.  The
north  part  of  modern  Chile  was  known  to  the  Yncas  as  Copayapu
(Copiapo) ;  further  south  was  the  province  of  Coquimpu  (Coquimbo) ;  and
the  central  part  of  modern  Chile  was  called  Canconicagua,  and  also
Chilli,  the  latter  name  being  probably  that  of  a  chief.  Valdivia  adopted
the  name  of  Canconicagua,  while  Almagro  called  it  the  valley  of  Chilli.
The  followers  of  Almagro  and  assassins  of  Pizarro  were  always  known
as  "los  de  Chile".  The  name  of  Chile  was  long  applied  only  to  the  valley
of  Aconcagua,  including  Quillota  ;  and  that  was  no  doubt  the  sense  in
which  it  was  used  by  the  natives  and  by  their  Ynca  conquerors.  After-
wards, the  Spaniards  gave  the  name  of  Chile  to  the  whole  country  on  the
Pacific  coast,  from  Copiapo  to  Valdivia.  The  native  form  of  the  word
was  Chilli,  which  the  Spaniards  softened  into  Chile.  In  the  north  of
Peru,  in  the  provinces  of  Chachapoyas  and  Pataz,  there  are  three  villages
called  Chilia ;  and  the  word  occurs  in  several  names  of  places  in  southern
Peru,  such  as  Pacon-chile,  Chilihua,  and  the  river  Chile  at  Arequipa.
The  word  Chiri  means  cold  in  Quichua.  But  Vicuna  Mackenna  main-
tains (Relaciones  Historicas :  art.  "  Origen  del  Nombre  de  Chile",  p.  92)  that
the  name  is  indigenous  to  the  country,  and  was  used  before  the  Ynca
conquest;  that  originally  it  was  local,  and  was  applied  only  to  the  valley
of  Aconcagua,  but  that  it  had  no  special  meaning.

2  "Yformas  de  hombres  a-ecidos."  The  meaning  is  not  clear.  The
Spanish  editor  suggests  "Yfuera  mas  de  hombres  creida."


BIRTH   OF  ATAHUALPA.  203

justice  and  to  allow  no  disturbance  or  tumult,  but  to  execute
the  promoters,  without  sparing  any.

The  Inca  returned  to  Cuzco,  where  he  was  received  with
great  honour  by  the  city,  and  the  priests  of  the  temple  of
Curi-cancha  gave  him  many  blessings.  He  made  the  people
rejoice  at  the  great  festivals  he  ordered.  Many  children
were  born  to  him,  who  were  brought  up  by  their  mothers.
Among  others  Atahualpa  was  born,  according  to  the  opinion
of  all  the  Indians  of  Cuzco,  who  say  that  it  was  so.  His
mother  was  called  Tuta  Palla,  a  native  of  Quillaco,  although
others  say  that  she  was  of  the  lineage  of  the  Urin-Cuzco.  From
his  childhood  Atahualpa  always  accompanied  his  father,  and
he  was  older  than  Huascar,


204  THE  GREAT  YNCA  KOAD.


CHAPTEE  LXIII.

How  Huayna  Capac  again  ordered  that  an  army  should  be
assembled,  and  how  he  set  out  for  Quito.

Huayna  Capac  enjoyed  a  rest  of  some  months  at  Cuzco,
during  which  he  assembled  the  priests  of  the  temples  and
diviners  of  the  oracles.  He  ordered  sacrifices  to  be  made,
and  the  offering  of  the  capacocha1  was  celebrated  with
grandeur  and  great  outlay,  the  mouth-pieces  of  the  oracles
returning  very  full  of  gold.  Each  one  gave  a  reply  such  as
was  most  likely  to  please  the  king.  This,  with  other  things,
having  been  done,  Huayna  Capac  ordered  that  there  should
be  made  a  road  more  royal,  grander  and  wider  than  that  of
his  father,  to  extend  to  Quito,  whither  he  intended  to  go.
The  ordinary  post  and  store-houses  were  to  be  established
along  it.  That  it  might  be  known  throughout  all  the  land
that  this  was  his  will,  messengers  went  forth  to  announce  it,
and  afterwards  Orejones  went  to  see  that  the  orders  were
complied  with.  Accordingly  the  grandest  road  was  con-
structed that  there  is  in  the  world,  as  well  as  the  longest,
for  it  extended  from  Cuzco  to  Quito,  and  was  connected  with
that  from  Cuzco  to  Chile.  I  believe  that,  since  the  history
of  man  has  been  recorded,  there  has  been  no  account  of  such
grandeur  as  is  to  be  seen  in  this  road,  which  passes  over  deep
valleys  and  lofty  mountains,  by  snowy  heights,  over  falls  of
water,  through  live  rocks,  and  along  the  edges  of  furious
torrents.  In  all  these  places  it  is  level  and  paved,  along-
mountain  slopes  well  excavated,  by  the  mountains  well
terraced,  through  the  living  rock  cut,  along  the  river  banks
supported  by  walls,  in  the  snowy  heights  with  steps  and
resting  places,  in  all  parts  clean  swept,  clear  of  stones,  with

1  See  p.  91.


THE    YNCA    ARMY.  205

post  and  store-houses,  and  temples  of  the  Sun  at  intervals.
Oh !  -what  greater  things  can  be  said  of  Alexander,  or  of  any
of  the  powerful  kings  who  have  ruled  in  the  world,  than  that
they  had  made  such  a  road  as  tins,  and  conceived  the  works
which  were  required  for  it!  The  road  constructed  by  the
Eomans  in  Spain,  and  any  others  of  which  we  read,  are  not
to  be  compared  with  it.  And  it  was  finished  in  less  time
than  it  is  possible  to  imagine,  for  the  Incas  were  no  longer
in  ordering  it  than  were  their  subjects  in  executing  the  work.1

The  king  called  a  general  assembly  of  his  forces  through-
out all  the  provinces  of  his  government,  and  such  numbers
came  from  all  parts  that  they  covered  the  plains.  After
there  had  been  festivities  and  drinking-bouts,  and  the  affairs
of  Cuzco  had  been  regulated,  the  Inca  Huayna  Capac  set
out  with  yscay-pacha-huaranca-ritna  cuna,  which  means
200,000  men  of  war  f  besides  the  yana-conas  and  women,  of
whose  number  no  account  was  taken.  The  Inca  took  with
him  two  thousand  women,  and  left  in  Cuzco  more  than  four
thousand.  The  delegates  and  governors  who  were  in  charge
at  the  capitals  of  the  provinces,  had  arranged  that  stores  and
arms  should  be  collected  from  all  parts,  and  everything  else
that  was  required  for  a  warlike  expedition.  Thus  all  the
great  store-houses  were  filled,  so  that  at  every  four  leagues,
which  was  the  length  of  a  day's  journey,  there  were  provi-
sions for  the  whole  of  this  great  multitude  of  people,  and
not  only  was  there  no  fault,  but  there  was  a  surplus,  after
the  soldiers  and  all  the  women  and  servant  lads,  and  porters,
had  been  satisfied.

When  Huayna  Capac  set  out  along  the  road  which  had

1  Cieza  de  Leon  also  gives  an  account  of  the  roads  of  the  Yncas  in
his  First  Part  (chapter  xlii),  p.  153,  which  is  quoted  in  extenso  by  Gar-
cilasso  de  la  Yega  (i,  lib.  ix,  cap^3).  See  also  Zarate  (Historia  del
Pern,  lib.  i,  cap.  10),  and,  for  a  modern  account,  Yelasco  (Historia  de
Quito,  i,  p.  59).

2  Yscay,  "two";  pacha,  "  hundred"  ;  huaranca,  "  thousand" ;  runa,
"  men";  cuna,  the  plural  particle.


206  HUAYNA   CCAPAC   IX   XAUXA.

been  made  by  his  order,  he  marched  until  he  arrived  at
Vilcas,  where  he  rested  for  a  few  days  in  the  lodgings  which
had  been  made  near  those  of  his  father.  He  rejoiced  to  see
that  the  temple  of  the  Sun  was  finished,  and  he  left  a  quantity
of  gold  and  silver  ingots  to  make  ornaments  and  vases.  He
ordered  that  great  care  should  be  taken  with  regard  to  the
due  maintenance  of  the  priests  and  mamaconas.  He  ascended
to  a  beautiful  terrace  which  had  been  prepared  for  him.
They  then  offered  sacrifice,  in  accordance  with  their  blindness,
and  killed  many  birds  and  animals,  with  some  men  and  child-
ren, to  propitiate  their  gods.

This  being  done,  the  king  set  out  from  this  place  with  his
army,  and  did  not  stop  until  he  arrived  at  the  valley  of
Xauxa,  where  there  was  some  dispute  respecting  the  division
of  land  among  the  local  chiefs.  When  Huayna  Capac  un-
derstood the  controversy,  after  he  had  performed  sacrifices
as  in  Vilcas,  he  ordered  the  chiefs  Alaya,  Cusi-chuca,  and
Huacaropa  to  assemble,  and  equitably  divided  the  land  in
the  way  which  is  adopted  to  this  day.  He  sent  embassies
to  the  Yauyos  and  Yuncas,  and  some  gifts  to  the  chiefs  of
Bonbon,  for,  as  they  had  a  force  in  the  lake,  in  parts  where
they  swam,  they  spoke  loosely,  and  he  did  not  wish  to  con-
verse with  them  until  he  saw  their  intentions.  The  lords  of
Xauxa  did  great  services,  and  some  of  the  captains  and
soldiers  joined  the  army.  Marching  by  Bonbon,  they  only
halted  a  short  time,  because  the  Inca  wished  to  go  on  to
Caxamarca,  a  place  more  suitable  for  resting,  surrounded  by
great  and  very  lofty  districts.  Along  the  road,  people  were
constantly  arriving  with  embassies  and  presents.

The  Inca  arrived  at  Caxamarca  and  rested  there  for  some
days,  ordering  that  his  soldiers  should  be  lodged  in  the
neighbourhood,  and  should  be  fed  with  the  provisions  in  the
store-houses.  With  a  selected  force  he  entered  the  country  of
the  Huancachupachos,  and  waged  a  fierce  war,  for  the  natives
had  not  been   reduced    to  entire  submission  by  the  Inca's


CONQUEST  OF  CHACHAPOYAS.  207

father.  The  Inca  was  able  to  complete  the  work,  appointing
governors  and  captains,  and  selecting  chiefs  from  among  the
natives  to  administer  the  land.  Formerly  these  people  had
not  known  chiefs  other  than  those  who,  being  most  powerful,
led  them  to  war,  and  arranged  peace  when  they  desired  it.
Among  the  Chachapoyas  the  Inca  met  with  great  resistance ;
insomuch  that  he  was  twice  defeated  by  the  defenders  of
their  country  and  put  to  flight.  Eeceiving  some  succour,
the  Inca  again  attacked  the  Chachapoyas,  and  routed  them
so  completely  that  they  sued  for  peace,  desisting,  on  their
parts,  from  all  acts  of  war.  The  Inca  granted  peace  on  con-
ditions very  favourable  to  himself,  and  many  of  the  natives
were  ordered  to  go  and  live  in  Cuzco,  where  their  descen-
dants still  reside.  He  took  many  women,  for  they  are  beauti-
ful and  graceful,  and  very  white.  He  established  garrisons
of  military  mitimaes  to  guard  the  frontier.  A  governor  was
appointed  to  live  at  the  principal  place  in  the  district.  He
made  other  arangements,  punished  several  of  the  principal
chiefs  for  having  made  war,  and  then  returned  to  Caxamarca.
The  Inca  continued  his  journey,  and  put  in  order  the  affairs
of  the  provinces  of  Caxas,  Ayavaca,  Huancabamba,  and  the
others  which  border  on  them.


208  WAR   WITH   THE   BRACAMOROS.


CHAPTEE    LXIV.

How  Huayna  Capac  entered  the  country  of  Bracamoros,  and
returned  flying,  and  of  the  other  events  that  happened
until  he  arrived  at  Quito.

It  is  well  known  to  many  natives  of  these  parts  that  Huayna
Capac  entered  the  country  which  we  call  Bracamoros,  and
that  he  returned  flying  before  the  fury  of  the  men  who  dwell
there.  They  had  chosen  leaders,  and  assembled  to  defend
themselves  against  any  one  who  should  attack  them.  This
is  stated,  not  only  by  the  Orejones,  but  also  by  the  Lord  of
Chincha,  and  some  principal  men  of  the  Collao  and  of  Xauxa.
They  all  say  that,  while  Huayna  Capac  was  engaged  in
settling  the  districts  which  had  been  traversed  and  subju-
gated by  his  father,  it  came  to  his  knowledge  how  that,  in
the  Bracamoros,  there  were  many  men  and  women  who  pos-
sessed fertile  lands  ;  that  far  in  the  interior  of  that  land,  there
were  many  rivers  and  a  lake ;  and  that  this  region  was  well
peopled.  Desirous  of  discovery,  and  anxious  to  extend  his
dominion,  he  ordered  a  chosen  band,  with  little  baggage,  to
march  with  him  into  that  country,  leaving  the  camp  under
command  of  a  Captain-General.  Entering  the  country,  they
advanced,  opening  the  road  with  great  labour,  for,  after  pass-
ing the  snowy  cordillera,  they  found  themselves  in  the  forests
of  the  Andes.  They  came  to  great  rivers  which  they  had  to
cross,  and  heavy  rains  fell  from  the  heavens.  The  Inca  came
to  where  the  natives  were  watching  in  their  strongholds,
whence  they  insolently  defied  him.  The  war  began,  and  so
many  of  the  savages  came  forth,  most  of  them  naked,  that
the  Inca  determined  to  retire,  which  he  did  without  gaining
anything  in  that  land.  The  natives  harassed  his  retreat  in
such  sort  that  his  soldiers,  sometimes  flying,  at  others  facing
their  pursuers,  at  others  sending   them  presents,  returned


RIGOUR    OF   HUAYXA   CCAPAC.  209

flying  to  their  own  territory,  saying  that  they  had  avenged
themselves  on  the  long-tailed  ones.  They  said  this  because
some  of  them  had  brought  away  the  long  strips  of  cloth
which  the  natives  wore  between  their  leers.

From  these  lands  they  also  affirm  that  the  Inca  sent
captains,  with  a  sufficient  force,  to  explore  the  sea-coast  in  a
northerly  direction,  and  to  bring  under  the  Inca's  dominion
the  natives  of  Guayaquil  and  Puerto  Viejo.  The  captains
marched  into  these  districts,  where  they  waged  war  and
fought  some  battles,  sometimes  being  victorious  and  at  others
sustaining  reverses.  Thus,  they  advanced  as  far  as  Collique,
where  they  met  with  people  who  went  about  naked  and  fed
on  human  flesh,  having  the  customs  which  are  now  practised
and  used  by  the  dwellers  on  the  river  of  San  Juan.  From
this  point  they  returned,  not  wishing  to  penetrate  further,
but  to  report  what  they  had  done  to  the  king.  Meanwhile,
he  had  arrived  at  the  country  of  the  Cafiaris,  where  he
enjoyed  himself  exceedingly.  For  they  say  that  this  was  the
place  of  his  birth,  and  that  he  found  that  great  lodgings  and
store-houses  had  been  built,  and  abundant  supplies  collected.
He  sent  embassies  to  inspect  the  districts,  and  ambassadors
came  to  him  from  many  provinces,  with  presents.

I  am  givren  to  understand  that,  owing  to  a  tumult  which
took  place  in  certain  towns  of  the  district  of  Cuzco,  the  Inca
was  so  incensed  that,  after  having  caused  the  leaders  to  be
beheaded,  he  gave  express  orders  that  the  Indians  of  those
places  should  bring  the  quantity  he  should  specify  of  the
stones  of  Cuzco,  to  make  edifices  of  the  first  importance  in
Tumebamba,  and  that  they  should  drag  them  with  cables ;
and  his  orders  were  obeyed.  Huayna  Capac  often  said  that
to  keep  the  people  of  those  kingdoms  well  under  subjection,
it  was  a  good  thing,  when  they  had  no  other  work  to  do,  to
make  them  remove  a  hill  from  one  place  to  another.  He
even  ordered  stones  and  slabs  to  be  brought  from  Cuzco,  for

P


210  HUAYNA  CCAPAC   AT   QUITO.

the  edifices  of  Quito,  and  to  this  day  they  remain  in  the
buildings  where  they  were  placed.

Huayna  Capac  set  out  from  Tumebamba,  and  went  by
Purnaes,  resting  for  some  days  at  Eiobamba,  in  Mocha  and
Tacunga,  and  his  people  were  allowed  to  drink  of  the
beverages  that  had  been  prepared  for  them  in  all  parts.  The
Inca  was  visited  and  saluted  by  many  captains  and  lords  of
those  parts.  He  sent  Orejones  of  his  own  lineage  to  the  pro-
vinces of  the  coast  and  of  the  mountains,  to  inspect  the
accounts  of  the  quvpu-cmnayos,  who  are  their  accountants,  to
see  what  was  stored  in  the  government  houses,  to  ascertain
how  the  governors  treated  the  natives,  and  whether  the
temples  of  the  Sun,  the  oracles,  and  huacas  were  properly
maintained.  He  also  sent  messengers  to  Cuzco  to  see  that
all  his  orders  were  duly  attended  to.  There  was  not  a  day
that  runners  did  not  arrive,  not  a  few  but  many,  from  Cuzco,
the  Collao,  Chile,  and  all  parts  of  the  empire.

From  Tacunga  the  Inca  continued  his  journey  to  Quito,
where  he  was  received,  according  to  the  mode  and  usage,
with  great  festivities.  His  father's  governor  delivered  up  the
treasures  to  him,  which  were  numerous,  with  the  fine  cloth
and  other  things  that  he  had  charge  of.  The  Inca  honoured
him,  praising  his  fidelity,  calling  him  father,  and  assuring
him  that  he  would  always  esteem  him  for  the  great  services
he  performed  for  his  father  and  himself.  The  towns  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Quito  sent  many  presents  and  provisions
for  the  king,  and  he  ordered  that  more  and  stronger  edifices
should  be  built  there  than  there  were  before.  The  works
were  at  once  commenced,  and  those  were  finished  which  we
found  when  our  people  conquered  that  land.


THE    WAR    WITH    PUNA.  211


CHAPTER   LXV.


How  Huayna  Capac  marched  through  the  coast  valleys,
and  what  he  did.

Some  of  the  Orejones  relate  that  Huayna  Capac  returned  to
Cuzco  from  Quito,  by  the  coast  valleys  to  Pachacamac ;
while  others  deny  this  and  maintain  that  he  remained  at
Quito  until  his  death.  In  this  matter,  seeking  out  the  version
which  is  most  accurate,  I  adopt  what  I  heard  from  some
principal  chiefs  who  served  in  that  war,  in  person.  They  say
that,  while  the  Inca  was  at  Quito,  ambassadors  came  from
many  parts  to  congratulate  him  in  the  name  of  their  re-
spective countries.  Peeling  that  all  was  peacefully  settled  in
the  mountainous  provinces,  he  thought  it  would  be  well  to
undertake  a  journey  to  the  province  of  Puerto  Viejo,  to  that
which  we  call  Guayaquil,  and  to  the  valleys  of  the  Yuncas.
The  captains  and  principal  men  of  his  council  approved  the
thought,  and  advised  that  it  should  be  put  into  execution.
Many  troops  remained  in  Quito.  The  Inca  set  forth  with  a
suitable  force,  and  entered  those  lands,  where  he  had  some
skirmishes  with  the  natives.  But,  eventually,  one  after
another  submitted,  and  governors,  with  mitimaes,  were  esta-
blished.

Puna1  waged  a  fierce  war  with  Tumbez,  and  the  Inca
commanded  them  to  desist,  and  that  the  people  of  Puna
should  submit  to  him.  This  was  deeply  felt  by  Tumbala,
because  he  was  Lord  of  Puna.  But  he  did  not  venture  to  re-
sist the  Inca ;  on  the  contrary,  he  submitted,  and  offered  pre-
sents to  secure  a  treacherous  peace.  "When  the  Inca  departed,
he  plotted  with  the  people  of  the  mainland  to  kill  many
Orejones,  with  their  captains,  who  were  to  set  out  from  a
river  to  cross  to  the  opposite  shore.     But  Huayna  Capac  re-

1  The  island  in  the  bay  of  Guayaquil.

p  2


212  ANECDOTE   OF  HUAYNA  CCAPAC.

ceived  the  tidings,  and  did  what  I  have  written  in  chapter
liii  of  my  First  Part.1  He  inflicted  severe  punishment,  and
ordered  the  paved  road  to  be  made  which  is  called  the  Pass
of  Huayna  Capac.2  He  then  returned  to  Tumhez,  where
edifices  and  a  temple  of  the  Sun  had  been  erected.  People
came  from  the  surrounding  districts  to  do  him  reverence  with
much  humility.  The  Inca  proceeded  to  visit  the  coast  valleys,
ordering  the  government,  fixing  the  limits  of  land,  and  rules
for  distributing  water,  commanding  that  the  people  should  not
go  to  war,  and  doing  what  has  been  described  in  other  places.
They  say  of  him  that,  being  in  the  beautiful  valley  of  Chay-
anta,  near  Chimu,  which  is  where  the  city  of  Truxillo  now
stands,  there  was  an  old  man  working  in  a  field.  "When  he
heard  that  the  king  was  passing  near,  he  gathered  two  or
three  "pepinos"?  which,  with  the  earth  attached,  he  brought
with  him,  and  said :  "Hucha  Hatun  apu  micucampa",  which
means,  "  Very  great  Lord,  eat  thou."4  Before  the  lords  and
other  people,  the  Inca  took  the  "pepinos",  and,  eating  one  of
them,  he  said  before  all  present,  to  please  the  old  man,
"  Suylluy  ancha  niizqui  cay",  or,  in  our  language,  "  Of  a  truth
this  is  very  sweet"  From  this  incident  every  one  derived  much
gratification.

1  This  is  chapter  liv  of  the  edition  of  1554.  See  my  Translation,
p.  192.  In  this  chapter  Cieza  de  Leon  gives  a  full  account  of  the
treacherous  murder  of  the  Orejones  hy  the  people  of  Puna.  Garcilasso
de  la  Vega,  in  his  version  of  the  affair,  copies  largely  from  Cieza  de
Leon  (i,  lib.  ix,  caps.  1,  2,  3).

2  Where  now  stands  the  city  of  Guayaquil.  In  Ihe  17th  century  the
place  still  retained  the  name  of  the  "Pass  of  Huayna  Capac".

3  Pepino  is  a  cucurbitaceous  plant,  and  grown  in  great  abundance  on
the  coast  of  Peru.  The  plant  is  only  a  foot  and  a  half  high,  and  creeps
along  the  ground.  The  fruit  is  from  four  to  five  inches  long,  cylin-
drical, and  somewhat  pointed  at  both  ends.  The  husk  is  of  a  yellowish-
green  colour,  with  long  rose-coloured  stripes.  The  edible  part  is  solid,
juicy,  and  well  flavoured,  but  very  indigestible.

4  Ancha,  "very";  hatun,  "great";  Apu,  "Lord";  micu,  "eat";
campa,  "thou".


HUAYNA   CCAPAC   AT   PACHACAMAC.  213

Passing  onwards,  he  did  in  Chimu,  in  Guanapa,  Guarmay,
Huaura,  Eimac,  and  the  other  valleys,  what  appeared  good
for  his  service ;  and  when  he  arrived  at  Pachacamac  there
were  great  festivals,  and  many  dances  and  drinking-bouts.
The  priests,  with  their  lies,  said  the  evil  things  that  were
invented  by  their  cunning,  according  to  custom,  and  some
even  spake  by  the  mouth  of  the  same  demon,  for  in  those
times  it  is  publicly  known  that  he  spoke  to  certain  persons.
Huayna  Capac,  it  is  said,  give  this  demon  over  100  arrobas  of
gold  and  1000  of  silver,  besides  other  treasure,  stones  and
emeralds,  so  that  he  adorned  the  new  temple  more  than
the  temple  of  the  Sun  and  the  ancient  shrine  at  Pacha-
camac.

Some  Indians  say  that  the  Inca  ascended  thence  to  Cuzco,
others  that  he  retired  to  Quito.  He  certainly  visited  all
the  coast  valleys,  and  made  the  great  road  through  them
which  we  now  see,  and  we  know  that  he  built  great  store-
houses and  temples  of  the  Sun  in  other  parts  of  the  valleys.
Having  seen  that  all  things  were  arranged,  as  well  in  the
mountains  as  on  the  coast,  and  the  whole  empire  being  at
peace,  he  returned  to  Quito.  He  made  war  on  the  fathers  of
those  whom  they  now  call  Huambracunas,  and  discovered  as
far  as  the  river  of  Ancasmayu.


214  DEFEAT  OF  THE  YNCAS.


CHAPTER  LXVI.

How,  when  Huayna  Capac  was  about  to  march  from  Quito,  he
sent  forward  certain  of  his  captains,  who  returned  flying
before  the  enemy,  and  what  he  did  in  consequence.

Huayna  Capac  being  in  Quito,  with  all  his  captains  and
veteran  soldiers,  they  relate  as  certainly  true  that  he  ordered
certain  of  them  to  go  forth  and  conquer  some  countries  whose
inhabitants  had  never  desired  to  obtain  his  friendship.  These
people,  when  they  knew  what  was  intended  at  Cuzco,  sought
aid  from  their  neighbours  to  resist  any  invaders  that  might
come  against  them,  and  they  had  prepared  forts  and  strong
places,  with  plenty  of  arms  of  the  kind  used  by  them.
Huayna  Capac  marched  past  their  county  to  reach  another
land  which  bordered  upon  it,  all  being  within  the  district
we  now  call  Quito.  As  the  captains  and  troops  were  march-
ing along,  despising  those  of  whom  they  were  in  search,
and  thinking  they  could  easily  possess  themselves  of  their
lands  and  farms,  they  found  that  things  were  different  from
what  they  supposed.  For  suddenly  the  natives  came  out
with  great  clamour,  and  attacked  the  invaders  with  such
resolution,  that  they  killed  and  made  captive  a  great  num-
ber, entirely  defeating  the  rest,  who  turned  their  backs  and
fled  precipitately,  the  natives  pursuing  and  killing  the  fugi-
tives, and  taking  many  prisoners.

Some  of  the  fleetest  of  foot  ran  until  they  came  to  the
Inca,  to  whom  alone  they  reported  the  disaster,  which
annoyed  him  not  a  little.  Considering  the  matter  prudently,
he  came  to  a  decision  becoming  a  great  man.  This  was  to
order  those  who  had  brought  the  news  to  keep  silence,  and
to  tell  no  one  what  they  knew.  They  were  directed  to  return
along  the  road,  and  tell  the  fugitives  to  stop  at  the  first  hill
they  came  to,  without  fear,  for  that  the  Inca  would  attack


VICTORY   OF   HUAYNA   CCAPAC.  215

the  enemy  with  fresh  troops,  and  avenge  the  affront.  With
this  message  they  returned.  The  Inca  felt  anxiety,  because
he  reflected  that  if  his  soldiers  heard  the  news  in  the  place
where  they  were  encamped,  all  would  be  in  confusion  and  he
would  be  in  greater  straits.  But  he  dissimulated,  and  told
them  to  prepare,  as  he  wished  to  march  against  a  certain
tribe  whom  they  would  see  when  they  reached  their  country.
Getting  out  of  his  litter,  he  inarched  in  front  of  his  army  for
a  day  and  a  half,  and  those  who  were  flying  in  great  num-
bers, when  they  saw  that  the  approaching  army  consisted  of
their  own  people,  stopped  on  one  side,  while  the  pursuers
began  to  attack  them,  and  killed  many.  But  Huayna  Capac
surrounded  them  on  three  sides,  which  amazed  them  not  a
little,  and  even  those  who  had  been  conquered,  rallied  and
fought  in  such  sort  that  the  ground  was  covered  with  dead.
When  the  pursuers  wished  to  retreat,  they  foimd  the  pass
occupied,  and  so  many  were  slain  that  very  few  remained
alive  except  the  prisoners,  who  were  numerous.  So  that  all
was  altered,  the  Inca  himself  having  defeated  and  killed
those  who  came  to  defeat  him.  When  the  result  was  known
the  conquerors  were  very  well  satisfied.

Huayna  Capac  recovered  those  of  his  people  who  were
still  alive,  and  ordered  tombs  to  be  made  over  those  who
were  dead,  and  honours  to  be  paid  them  according  to  their
heathen  practices.  For  they  all  know  that  the  soul  is  im-
mortal. They  also  set  up  figures  and  heaps  of  stones  on  the
battle-field,  as  a  memorial  of  what  had  been  done.  Huayna
Capac  then  sent  the  news  to  Cuzco,  re-organised  his  army,
and  advanced  to  Caranque.

The  people  of  Otavalo,  Cayambi,  Cochasqui,  Pifo,  and  other
districts  had  made  a  league  with  many  other  tribes,  to  resist
subjugation  by  the  Inca,  preferring  death  to  the  loss  of  their
liberty.  They  made  strong  forts  in  their  country,  and  re-
sisted the  payment  of  tribute,  or  the  sending  of  presents  to
so  distant  a  place  as  Cuzco.     Having  agreed  on  this  between


216  THE   YNCA   DEFIED.

themselves,  they  awaited  the  approach  of  the  Inca,  who  came
to  make  war  upon  them.  The  army  advanced  to  their
frontier,  where  the  Inca  caused  forts  (called  pucaras)  to  be
constructed,  and  sent  messages  to  the  people  with  presents,
asking  them  not  to  make  war,  as  he  only  desired  peace  with
fair  conditions ;  that  they  would  always  find  favour  from
him,  as  from  his  father ;  that  he  desired  to  take  nothing
from  them,  but  rather  to  confer  benefits.  These  kind  words
availed  nothing,  for  their  reply  was  that  he  should  leave
their  country  at  once,  and  if  not,  they  would  drive  him  out
by  force.  They  then  advanced  against  the  Inca,  who  was
much  incensed,  and  put  his  army  in  battle  array.  They  at-
tacked him  with  such  fury,  that  if  it  had  not  been  for  the
fortress  he  had  caused  to  be  built,  his  troops  would  have
been  defeated  at  all  points.  But,  knowing  the  danger,  they
retired  into  the  pucara,  where  all  who  had  not  been  killed  or
captured  were  assembled.


THE  YNCA  ON  THE  DEFENSIVE.  217


CHAPTER  LXVII.

How  Hiiayna  Capac  assembled  all  Ms  power,  gave  battle  to  his
enemies,  and  defeated  them;  and  of  the  great  cruelty
with  which  he  treated  them.

When  the  natives  saw  how  they  had  shut  up  the  Inca  in  his
fortress,  and  had  killed  many  of  the  Orejones,  they  were
very  joyful,  and  they  made  so  great  a  noise  that  they  could
not  hear  themselves.  They  brought  drums,  and  drank  and
sang,  sending  messengers  over  all  the  country,  with  the  news
that  they  had  the  Inca  shut  up  with  all  his  people.  Many
believed  it  and  rejoiced,  and  some  even  came  to  help  their
friends.

Huayna  Capac  had  provisions  in  the  fort,  and  he  had  sent
to  summon  the  governors  of  Quito  to  come  with  reinforce-
ments, for  the  enemy  would  not  desist  from  their  attacks.
He  tried,  many  times,  to  pacify  them,  sending  embassies  with
presents ;  but  it  was  all  of  no  avail.  The  Inca  increased  his
army,  and  the  enemy  did  the  same,  resolutely  determined  to
attack  and  defeat  him,  or  die  in  the  attempt.  They  as-
saulted the  fortress,  and  broke  through  two  lines  of  defence.
If  there  had  not  been  others  round  the  bill,  without  doubt
the  enemy  woidd  have  been  victorious.  But  it  was  the
custom  of  the  Incas,  in  their  defensive  works,  to  make  a
circle  with  two  doorways,  and  further  up  another,  and  so  on
until  there  were  seven  or  eight,  so  that  if  one  was  lost,  the
defenders  could  retire  to  the  next.  Thus  the  Inca  and  his
army  retreated  to  the  strongest  part  of  the  hill,  whence,  at
the  end  of  some  days,  he  came  forth  and  attacked  the  enemy
with  great_courage.

They  relate  that,  when  his  captains  arrived  with  reinforce-
ments, he  took  the  field,  but  the  battle  was  long  doubtful.
At  length,  those  of  Cuzco,  by  a  stratagem,  killed  a  great


218  VENGEANCE   OF   HUAYNA   CCAPAC.

number  of  the  enemy,  and  those  who  remained  turned  and
fled.  The  tyrannical  king  was  so  enraged  against  them  for
having  taken  up  arms  to  defend  their  country  from  conquest,
that  he  ordered  his  soldiers  to  seek  them  all  out,  and  with
great  diligence  they  searched  for  and  captured  them  all.
Very  few  were  able  to  hide  themselves.  Near  the  banks  of
a  lake,  he  ordered  them  all  to  be  beheaded  in  his  presence,
and  their  bodies  to  be  thrown  into  the  water.  The  blood  of
those  who  were  killed  was  in  such  quantity  that  the  water
lost  its  colour,  and  nothing  could  be  seen  but  a  thick  mass
of  blood.  Having  perpetrated  this  cruelty,  and  most  evil
deed,  Huayna  Capac  ordered  the  sons  of  the  dead  men  to
be  brought  before  him,  and,  looking  at  them,  he  said,
"  Campa  manan  pucula  tucuy  huambracuna",  which  means,
"  You  will  not  make  war  upon  me,  for  you  are  all  boys  now."1
From  that  time  the  conquered  people  were  called  "  Huambra-
cuna (Huayna-cuna)  to  this  day,  and  they  were  very  valiant.
The  lake  received  the  name  it  still  bears,  which  is  YaJiuar-
cocha,  or  "  the  lake  of  blood".  In  this  country  governors  and
mitimaes  were  stationed,  as  in  all  other  parts.2

After  he  had  re -organised  the  country,  the  Inca  passed


1  Campa,  "  you"  (dative)  ;  manan,  "  not" ;  pucula  must  be  a  clerical
error,  it  may  be  pucuna  (correctly  poccuna),  from  poccuni,  "  to  ripen,  to
become  mature";  tucuy,  "all";  huambracuna  is  a  mistake,  it  should  be
huayna-cuna,  "boys".  Cieza  de  Leon  translates  erroneously.  It  should
be,  "  You  are  not  grown  up,"  "  You  are  all  boys."

2  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  also  tells  the  story  of  this  war  of  the  Caran-
ques  and  of  their  punishment  (n,  p.  447).  This  country  is  on  the
northern  frontier  of  the  empire  of  the  Yncas,  and  of  the  province  of
Quito.  Garcilasso  gives  a  violently  prejudiced  account  of  the  war,  and
endeavours  to  blacken  the  character  of  the  Caranques,  by  way  of  ex-
cusing the  Ynca's  cruelty.  Cieza  de  Leon  alludes  to  the  affair  in  the
First  Part  (p.  133  of  my  Translation).  Versions  of  it  are  also  given
by  Balboa  (p.  149),  Montesinos  (p.  221),  and  Velasco  in  his  History  of
Quito  (i,  p.  18).  Balboa  describes  the  Caranque  war  as  having  con-
tinued through  three  bloody  campaigns,  and  says  that  a  number  of
Collas,  with  their  chiefs,  whom  he  names,  were  serving  in  the  Ynca  army.


NORTHERN  FKONTIER  OF  THE  EMPIRE.        219

onwards  with  great  renown  from  his  past  victory,  and  pro-
ceeded with  his  discoveries  until  he  reached  the  river
Ancasmayu,  which  was  the  northern  limit  of  the  empire.
He  learnt  from  the  natives  that  further  on  there  were  many
tribes  who  went  naked  without  any  shame,  and  that  all  fed
on  human  flesh.  He  made  some  defensive  works  in  the  dis-
trict of  Pasto,  and  ordered  the  principal  men  to  pay  tribute.
They  replied  that  they  had  nothing  to  give ;  so  he  issued  his
command  that  each  house  should  be  obliged  to  give,  every
month,  a  rather  large  basket  full  of  lice,  as  tribute.  At  first
they  laughed  at  this  order ;  but  afterwards,  notwithstanding
the  quantity  of  lice  they  had,  they  could  not  fill  so  many
baskets.  They  bred  from  the  sheep  which  the  Inca  ordered
to  be  given  to  them,  and  paid  tribute  from  the  increase,  as
well  as  of  the  food  and  roots  of  that  country.  For  certain
reasons  which  influenced  him,  Huayna  Capac  returned  to
Quito,  ordering  that  there  should  be  a  temple  of  the  Sun
and  a  garrison,  with  a  captain-general  and  governor  in
Caranque,  to  guard  the  frontier.


220  FIRST   NEWS   OF   THE   SPANIARDS.


CHAPTER  LXVIII.

How  the  King  Huayna  Capac  returned  to  Quito,  and  how  he
kneiv  of  the  arrival  of  Spaniards  on  the  coast,  and  of  his
death.

In  this  same  year1  Francisco  Pizarro  was  on  this  coast  with
thirteen  Christians,2  and  the  tidings  of  them  was  brought  to
Huayna  Capac  at  Quito.  Particulars  were  reported  of  the
dress  they  wore,  of  their  ship,  and  how  they  were  white  and
bearded,  how  that  they  spoke  little,  were  not  so  fond  of
drinking  as  the  natives,  and  other  things  which  the  people
had  observed.  Anxious  to  see  such  men,  they  say  that  the
Inca  ordered  that  one  of  two  of  these  men  who  had  been  left
behind,  should  be  brought  to  him,  the  rest  having  gone  back
with  their  leader  to  the  Isle  of  Gorgona,  where  he  had  left
certain  Spaniards  with  their  Indians,  as  we  shall  explain  in
its  place.3  Some  Indians  say  that  after  the  others  had  gone,
they  killed  the  two  that  were  left  behind,  at  which  Huayna
Capac  was  much  displeased.     Others  relate  that  they  were

i  1526.

2  The  names  of  the  thirteen  companions  of  Pizarro,  as  enumerated  in
the  Capitulation  for  the  conquest  of  Peru,  made  by  Francisco  Pizarro
with  Queen  Juana  on  July  26th,  1529,  were : —


Bartolome  Kuiz  (Pilot).
Cristobal  de  Peralta.
Pedro  de  Candia.
Domingo  de  Soraluce.
Nicolas  de  Ribera.
Francisco  de  Cuellar.


Alonzo  de  Molina.
Pedro  Alcon.
Garcia  de  Jaren.
Anton  de  Carrion.
Alonso  BricefLo.
Martin  de  Paz.


Juan  de  la  Torre.

Xeres,  Pizarro's  secretary,  says  that  the  number  was  16.    See  the  whole
subject  discussed  in  a  note  at  page  8  of  my  translation  of  the  narrative
of  Francisco  Xeres  (Hakluyt  Society,  1872).
3  In  the  Third  Part,  still  inedited.


DEATH   OF   HUAYNA   CCAPAC.  221

sent  to  the  Inca ;  but  that  they  were  put  to  death  on  the
road  when  the  news  came  that  the  Inca  was  no  more.
Others,  again,  declare  that  the  two  men  died.  "What  we
believe  to  be  most  probable  is,  that  the  Indians  killed  them
shortly  after  they  had  been  left  behind.

Huayna  Capac-  was  in  Quito  with  a  great  company  of
people.  He  was  very  powerful,  his  dominion  extending  from
the  river  of  Ancasmayu  to  the  river  of  Maule,  a  distance  of
more  than  1,200  leagues.  He  was  so  rich,  that  they  relate
that  he  had  caused  to  be  brought  to  Quito  over  500  loads  of
gold,  more  than  1,000  of  silver,  many  precious  stones,  and
much  fine  cloth.  He  was  feared  by  all  his  subjects,  because
he  was  a  stern  dispenser  of  justice.  In  the  midst  of  his
power,  they  say  that  a  great  pestilence  broke  out,  which  was
so  contagious,  that  over  200,000  souls  died  throughout  the
provinces,  for  it  prevailed  in  all  parts.  The  Inca  caught  the
disease,  and  all  that  was  said  to  free  him  from  death  was  of
no  avail,  because  the  great  God  was  not  served  by  his  reco-
very. When  he  felt  that  the  pestilence  had  touched  him,  he
ordered  great  sacrifices  to  be  offered  up  for  his  health
throughout  the  land,  and  at  all  the  huacas  and  temples  of
the  Sun.  And  as  he  became  worse,  he  called  his  captains
and  relations,  and  addressed  them  on  several  subjects.
Among  other  things,  they  relate  that  he  foretold  that  the
people  who  had  been  seen  in  the  ship,  would  return  with
great  power,  and  would  conquer  the  country.  This  was
probably  a  fable,  and  if  he  said  so,  it  must  have  been  through
the  mouth  of  a  devil,  for  who  could  know  that  the  Spaniards
went  to  arrange  their  return  as  conquerors  ?  Others  say  that,
considering  the  extensive  territory  of  the  Quillacingas  and
Popayan,  and  that  the  empire  was  very  extensive  for  one
person  to  rule,  he  ordained  that  from  Quito  to  the  north,  the
dominion  should  be  under  his  son  Atahualpa,  whom  he  loved
dearly,  because  he  had  always  accompanied  him  in  his  wars.
He  desired  that  the  rest  of  the  empire  should  be  ruled  by


222  MOURNING   FOR   HUAYNA   CCAPAC.

Huascar,  the  sole  heir  of  the  whole.  Other  Indians  say  that
he  did  not  divide  the  kingdom ;  but  that  he  said  to  those
who  were  present,  that  they  well  knew  how  he  had  wished
that  his  son  Huascar,  by  his  sister  Chimpu  Ocllo,1  should  be
lord  after  his  own  time,  at  which  all  the  people  of  Cuzco
were  well  contented.  He  had  other  sons  of  great  valour,
among  whom  were  Nanque  Yupanqui,  Tupac  Inca,  Huanca
Auqui,  Tupac  Hualpa,  Titu,  Huaman  Hualpa,  Manco  Inca,
Huascar,  Cusi  Hualpa,  Paullu  Tupac  Yupanqui,  Conono,
Atahualpa.  He  did  not  desire  to  give  them  anything  of  the
great  possessions  he  left,  but  that  they  should  receive  all
from  their  brother,  as  he  had  inherited  all  from  his  father.
For  he  trusted  much  that  his  son  would  keep  his  promise,
and  that  he  would  fulfil  all  that  his  heart  desired,  although
he  was  still  a  boy.  He  ordered  his  chiefs  to  love  him  and
treat  him  as  their  sovereign,  and  that,  until  he  was  of  full
age  to  govern,  Colla  Tupac,  his  uncle,  should  be  his  guardian.
When  he  had  said  this,  he  died.

As  soon  as  Huayna  Capac  was  dead,  the  lamentations  were
so  great  that  the  shouting  rose  up  to  the  clouds,  and  the
noise  so  stupefied  the  birds  that  they  fell  from  a  great  height
to  the  ground.  The  news  was  carried  to  all  parts,  and  every-
where the  sorrow  was  deep.  In  Quito,  as  they  relate,  the
people  mourned  for  ten  days,  while  the  lamentations  of  the
Cafiaris  continued  for  a  whole  month.  Many  principal  lords
accompanied  the  body  to  Cuzco,  all  the  men  and  women
along  the  road  coming  out  to  weep  and  groan.  In  Cuzco
there  was  more  lamentation.  Sacrifices  were  offered  up  in
the  temples,  and  preparations  were  made  for  the  interment  in
accordance  with  custom,  the  soul  being  supposed  to  be  in
heaven.  They  killed,  to  be  buried  in  the  same  tomb,  more
than  4,000  souls,  women,  pages,  and  other  servants;  as  well  as

1  Ciui  Chimpu  Runtu,  the  second  legitimate  wife  of  Huayna  Ccapac.
According  to  most  authors,  the  name  of  the  mother  of  Huascar  was
Raima  Ocllo.


INTERMENT   OF   HUAYNA   CCAPAC.  223

treasure,  precious  stones,  and  fine  cloth.  It  was  truly  a  very-
great  sum  that  was  buried  with  him.  They  do  not  say  where,
nor  in  what  manner  he  was  interred ;  but  they  concur  in
stating  that  his  sepulchre  was  in  Cuzco.  Some  Indians  told
me  that  they  buried  him  in  the  river  Ancasmayu,  diverting  it
from  its  course  to  make  the  tomb.  But  I  do  not  believe  it.
My  impression  is  that  those  are  right  who  say  that  he  was
buried  in  Cuzco.1

The  Indians  relate  many  things  relating  to  this  king,  inso-
much that  what  I  have  written  and  narrated  is  nothing.
Assuredly,  I  believe  that  there  are  so  many  things  left  to
write  touching  this  king,  his  fathers  and  grandfathers,  that
it  would  form  another  history  larger  than  what  has  already
been  recorded.

1  He  was  quite  right.  In  1571  the  Viceroy,  Don  Francisco  de  Toledo,
received  information  that  Huayna  Ccapac  was  buried  in  Cuzco,  where
Polo  de  Ondegardo  afterwards  found  his  muniniy,  with  others.  (See
G.  de  la  Vega,  I,  p.  273  ;  and  n,  p.  91.)


224  HUASCAR  AND  ATAHUALPA.


CHAPTER  LXIX.

Of  the  lineage,  and  character  of  Huascar  and  Atahualpa.

The  empire  of  the  Incas  was  in  a  state  of  such  profound
peace  when  Huayna  Capac  died,  that  there  was  not  to  be
found  a  man,  throughout  its  vast  extent,  who  would  dare
to  raise  his  head  to  foment  disturbance,  or  to  refuse  obe-
dience, as  well  from  fear  of  the  Inca,  as  on  account  of  the
mitimaes  who  were  stationed  in  all  parts,  and  maintained
order.  As  when  Alexander  died  in  Babylon,  many  of  his
servants  and  captains  became  kings  and  ruled  over  extensive
dominions;  so  on  the  death  of  Huayna  Capac  there  were  wars
and  differences  between  his  two  sons ;  and  in  the  meantime
the  Spaniards  arrived.  Many  of  the  mitimaes  became  lords,
because  the  natural  chiefs  having  been  killed  in  the  wars,
the  colonists  had  an  opportunity  of  gaining  the  goodwill  of
the  people.

There  would  be  much  to  say  in  relating  the  history  of
these  powerful  lords  in  detail,  but  I  will  not  deviate  from  my
plan  of  telling  the  story  briefly,  for  the  good  reasons  which  I
have  already  explained.  Huascar  was  the  son  of  Huayna
Capac ;  and  Atahualpa  also.  Huascar  was  the  younger,  and
Atahualpa  the  elder  brother.  Huascar  was  the  son  of  the
Coya,  his  father's  sister  and  principal  wife.  Atahualpa  was
the  son  of  a  woman  of  Quilaco,  named  Tupac  Palla.  Both
were  born  in  Cuzco,  and  not  in  Quito,  as  some  have  said  and
even  written,  but  they  have  done  so  without  understanding
the  facts.  For  Huayna  Capac  was  in  the  conquest  of  Quito,
and  in  those  parts  for  about  twelve  years,  and  when  he  died
his  son  Atahualpa  was  already  thirty  years  of  age.  They  say
that  his  mother  was  the  lady  of  Quito,  but  there  never  was
any  lady  of  that  country,  for  the  Incas  themselves  were  kings


HUASCAR   AND   ATAHUALPA.  225

and  lords  of  Quito.1  Huascar  was  born  in  Cuzco,  and  Ata-
hualpa  was  older  by  four  or  five  years.  This  is  certain,  and
is  what  I  believe.  Huascar  was  popular  in  Cuzco  and
throughout  the  kingdom,  owing  to  his  being  the  rightful  heir.
Atahualpa  was  a  favourite  with  his  father's  old  captains  and
with  the  soldiers,  because  he  accompanied  them  to  the  wars
in  his  boyhood,  and  because  his  father,  when  he  was  alive,
loved  him  so  well  that  he  would  not  let  the  boy  eat  anything
except  what  he  himself  put  on  his  plate.  Huascar  was
merciful  and  pious.  Atahualpa  was  cruel  and  vindictive.
Both  were  generous,  but  the  latter  was  a  man  of  greater
spirit  and  force  of  character,  the  former  of  more  valour.  The
one  claimed  to  be  sole  lord  and  to  rule  without  an  equal;  the
other  was  resolved  to  reign  by  breaking  the  established  laws
and  usages  of  the  Incas.  The  law  was  that  no  one  could
be  king  except  the  eldest  son  of  the  sovereign  and  of  his
sister,  although  there  might  be  other  older  sons  by  other
women.  Huascar  wished  his  father's  army  to  be  with  him.
Atahualpa  was  dismayed  because  he  was  not  near  Cuzco,
where  he  could  perform  the  fast  in  that  city  and  come  forth
with  the  fringe,  to  be  received  by  all  as  king.

1  The  author  alludes  to  Lopez  de  Goinara  in  his  chapter  entitled
"  Linaje  de  Atabaliba".  Velasco,  who  follows  Gomara,  says  that  the
name  of  the  Queen  of  Quito  was  Scyri  Paccha.


226  ACCESSION   OF   HUASCAE.


CHAPTER  LXX.

How  Huascar  was  acknowledged  as  King  in  Cnzco,  after
the  death  of  his  father.

Huayna  Capac  being  dead,  and  the  mourning  and  lamenta-
tion  having  been  performed,  although  he  left  more  than  forty
sons,  none  attempted  to  deviate  from  their  allegiance  to
Huascar,  to  whom,  as  they  well  knew,  the  kingdom  belonged.
Although  it  was  known  that  the  order  of  Huayna  Capac  was
that  the  uncle  of  Huascar  should  govern,  there  were  not
wanting  those  who  advised  the  young  Inca  to  assume  the
fringe  at  once,  and  with  it  the  government  of  the  whole
country  as  king.  As  most  of  the  native  lords  of  provinces
had  come  to  Cuzco  for  the  obsequies  of  Huayna  Capac,  it
was  represented  that  the  feast  of  the  coronation  might  be
very  grand,  and  thus  he  resolved  to  act.  Leaving  the  govern-
ment of  the  city  in  the  hands  of  the  officer  to  whom  it  had
been  entrusted  by  his  father,  he  entered  upon  the  fast  with
the  accustomed  observances.  He  came  forth  with  the  fringe,
and  there  were  great  festivities.  The  cable  of  gold  was
brought  out  into  the  square,  with  the  images  of  the  Incas,
and,  in  accordance  with  their  usage,  they  spent  some  days
in  drinking-bouts.  At  the  end  of  these  days  of  feasting,  the
news  was  sent  to  all  parts  of  the  kingdom,  with  the  orders  of
the  new  king,  and  certain  Orejones  were  sent  to  Quito  to
bring  back  his  father's  women  and  household.

Atahualpa  received  the  news  that  Huascar  had  assumed
the  fringe,  and  that  he  desired  that  all  should  yield  him  obe-
dience. The  captains  of  Huayna  Capac  had  not  yet  departed
from  Quito  and  its  neighbourhood,  and  there  were  secret
communications  between  them  as  to  the  possibility  of  re-
maining in  those  lands  of  Quito,  without  going  to  Cuzco  at
the  call  of  Huascar,  for  they  had  found  the  land  of  Quito  to


REBELLION    OF   ATAHUALPA.  227

be  as  good  as  that  of  Cuzco.  Some  among  them  hesitated,
saying  that  it  was  not  lawful  to  refrain  from  recognising  the
great  Inca,  who  was  lord  of  all.  But  Ilia  Tupac1  was  not
loyal  to  Huascar,  as  Huayna  Capac  had  requested,  and  he  had
promised  ;  for  they  say  that  he  engaged  in  secret  negotiations
and  discussions  with  Atahualpa,  He  said  that,  among  the
sons  of  Huayna  Capac,  this  one  showed  the  most  spirit  and
valour,  and  that  his  father  ordered  that  he  should  govern
Quito  and  its  territory.  He  spoke  in  this  way  to  the  cap-
tains Chalcuchima,  Acla-hualpa,  Eumi-iiaui,2  Quizquiz,  Peco-
pagua,3  and  many  others,  urging  them  to  assist  in  making
Atahualpa  the  Inca  of  those  parts,  as  his  brother  was  of
Cuzco.  These,  with  Ilia  Tupac  who  was  a  traitor  to  his
natural  lord  Huascar,  having  been  left  as  governor  until  the
Inca  should  be  of  full  age,  agreed  to  recognise  Atahualpa,
who  was  then  declared  to  be  lord.  The  women  of  his  father
were  delivered  to  him,  whom  he  received  as  his  own,  and  his
father's  household  and  house  service  were  handed  over  to
him,  to  do  with  them  according  to  his  will.

Some  say,  that  some  of  the  sons  of  Huayna  Capac,  brothers
of  Huascar  and  Atahualpa,  with  other  Orejones,  fled  to  Cuzco,
and  reported  what  had  happened  to  the  Inca,  Huascar,  and
the  other  Orejones  of  Cuzco,  felt  what  had  been  done  by
Atahualpa  to  be  an  evil  act  worthy  of  reprobation,  contrary
to  the  will  of  their  gods,  and  to  the  laws  and  ordinances  of
the  departed  kings.  They  said  that  they  would  not  consent
or  endure  that  the  bastard  should  take  the  name  of  Inca,
and  that  he  must  be  punished  for  the  favour  he  had  obtained
from  the  captains  and  soldiers  of  his  father's  army.  Huascar,
therefore,  ordered  that  a  summons  should  be  sent  to  all  the
provinces,  that  arms  should  be  made,  and  the  store-houses

1  Before  he  is  called  Colla  Tupac.

2  Ritmi,  "a  stone";  naui,  "eye".     "Stone-eyed."

3  This  is  the  reading  of  the  Peruvian  editor.  The  Spanish  editor
has  Sepocopagua.

n  9


228  PREPARATIONS   OF   HUASCAR.

provided  with  all  tilings  necessary,  because  lie  had  to  make
war  on  the  traitors,  if  they  would  not  recognise  him  as  their
lord.  He  sent  ambassadors  to  the  Canaris,  inviting  their
friendship.  It  is  also  said  that  he  despatched  an  Orejon  to
Atahualpa  himself,  to  persuade  him  not  to  persist  in  his  in-
tentions, being  so  evil.  The  envoy  was  also  to  speak  with
Colla  Tupac,  the  Inca's  uncle,  to  advise  him  that  he  should
become  loyal.  These  things  being  done,  Huascar  named  one
of  the  principal  lords  of  Cuzco,  named  Atoc,1  as  his  Captain-
General.

1  Atoc  means  "  a  fox"  in  Quichua.


PROCEEDINGS    OF   ATAHUALPA.  229

<

t

CHAPTER   LXXI.

How  the  differences  between  Huascar  and  Atahucdpa  began,
and  how  great  battles  were  fought  between  them.

It  was  understood  throughout  the  realm  of  Peru  that
Huascar  was  Inca,  and  as  such  that  lie  gave  orders,  and  sent
Orejones  to  the  chief  places  in  all  the  provinces  to  provide
what  he  required.  He  was  so  intelligent,  and  was  so  popular,
that  he  was  much  beloved  by  his  people.  When  he  began
to  reign,  his  age  was  about  twenty-five,  a  little  more  or  less.
Having  appointed  Atoc  to  be  his  Captain-General,  he  ordered
him,  after  having  taken  the  people  he  would  require  from
places  along  the  road,  as  well  mitimaes  as  natives,  to  march
to  Quito  and  put  down  the  rebellion  of  the  Inca's  brother.

The  Indians   recount    the    subsequent  events  in  several
ways.     I  always  follow  the  best  version,  which  is  held  by
the  oldest  and  best  informed  among  them,  who  are  lords.
For  the  common  people,  in  all  they  say,  cannot  be  relied
upon  as  affirming  the  truth.     Some  relate  that  Atahualpa,
not  only  resolved  to  refuse  obedience  to  his  brother,  who  was
king,  but  even  pretended  to  the  sovereignty,  seeing  that  the
captains  and  soldiers  of  his  father  were  on  his  side.     He
went  to  the  country  of  the  Canaris,  where  he  spoke  with  the
native  chiefs  and  with  the  mitimaes,  telling  them  a  plausible
story.     He  said  that  his  desire  was  not  to  injure  his  brother,
as  he  wished  for  his  welfare ;  but  to  keep  friends  with  all,
and  to  make  another  Cuzco  at  Quito,  where  all  could  enjoy
themselves.     He  said  that  he  had  such  good  affection  for
them,  that  he  would  cause  edifices  and  lodgings  to  be  made
for  himself  in  Tumebamba.      There,  as  Inca  and  lord,  he
would  be  able  to  amuse  himself  with  his  women,  as  did  his
father  and  grandfather.      He  made  other  speeches  on  this
subject,  which  were  not  listened  to  with  such  pleasure  as  he


230  ATAHUALPA  AND  THE  CAN  APIS.

supposed.  For  the  messenger  from  Huascar  had  arrived,  and
spoken  to  the  Canaris  and  mitimaes,  saying  that  the  Inca
sought  their  friendship,  and  that  he  implored  the  favour  of
the  Sun  and  of  his  gods  for  them.  He  told  the  Canaris  that
they  should  not  consent  to  such  an  evil  deed  as  the  Inca's
brother  meditated.  They  replied  by  declaring  their  desire
to  see  Huascar,  and  raising  up  their  hands,  they  promised  to
remain  loyal.

This  being  their  wish,  Atahualpa  was  unable  to  obtain  his
object,  and  they  say  that  the  Canaris,  with  the  captain  and
mitimaes,  seized  him,  with  the  intention  of  delivering  him  up
to  Huascar.     But  having  placed  him  in  a  room  of  the  tampu,
he  escaped,  and  went  to  Quito,  where  he  gave  out  that  it  had
been  the  will   of  his   God  to  turn  him  into  a  serpent,  to
enable  him  to  escape  from  his  enemies.     He  told  his  adhe-
rents that  all  should  be  got  ready  to  begin  a  war.     Other
Indians  affirm  as  a  certain  fact  that  the  captain  Atoc,  with
his  troops,  arrived  at  the  country  of  the  Canaris,  where  Ata-
hualpa  was,    and    that    it   was    he   who    took    the    Inca's
brother  prisoner,   before  he  escaped   in   the   way  that   has
already  been  mentioned.     For  my  part,  I  believe,  although  I
may  be  wrong,  that  Atoc  found  that  Atahualpa  had  escaped
from  his  prison,  and,  much  disturbed  at  this,  he  collected  all
the  men  he  could  from  the  Canaris,  and  marched  towards
Quito,  sending  to  all  parts  to  strengthen  the  governors  and
mitimaes  in  their  loyalty  to  Huascar.     It  is  related,  as  a
fact,  that  Atahualpa  escaped  by  means  of  a  coa  or  tool  which
a  Quella  woman  gave  him.     He  made  a  hole  with  it  at  a
time  when  those  who  were  in  the  tampu  were  heated  with
what  they  had  drunk.     By  using  great  haste;  he  reached
Quito  before  he  could  be  overtaken  by  his   enemies,  who
wanted  very  much  to  get  him  again  into  their  power.


ADVANCE   OF   ATOC.  231


CHAPTER  LXXII.

How  Atahualpa  set  out  from  Quito  with  his  army  and
captains,  and  how  he  gave  battle  to  Atoc  in  the  villages
of  Anibato.

As  the  posts  on  the  royal  roads  were  so  numerous,  nothing
happened  in  any  part  of  the  empire  that  was  unknown,  and
when  it  was  understood  that  Atahualpa  had  escaped  by  such
good  luck,  and  was  in  Quito  assembling  his  troops,  it  was
known  that  a  war  was  certain.  Hence  there  were  divisions
into  parties;  great  disturbances;  and  thoughts  directed  to  evil
ends.  Huascar  had  no  one  who  would  not  obey  him,  and
did  not  desire  that  he  should  come  out  of  the  affair  with
honour  and  power.  Atahualpa  had,  on  his  side,  the  captains
and  men  of  the  army,  and  many  native  lords  and  mitimaes
of  the  Quito  provinces.  They  relate  that,  being  in  Quito,  he
made  haste  to  prepare  his  army  to  march,  swearing,  in  their
manner,  that  he  would  inflict  great  punishment  on  the
Canaris  for  the  affront  he  had  received  from  them.  He
knew  that  Atoc  was  approaching  with  his  army,  which  ex-
ceeded, according  to  what  they  say,  forty  huarancas  or
thousands  of  men,  and  he  made  haste  to  come  forth  and
meet  him.

Atoc  advanced  because  Atahualpa  had  not  been  able  to
assemble  the  men  in  the  provinces.  He  addressed  his  men,
exhorting  them  to  do  honour  to  the  Inca  Huascar,  and  to
exert  themselves  to  chastise  the  shameless  conduct  of  Ata-
hualpa. To  justify  his  cause,  Atoc  sent  certain  Indians  as
messengers  to  Atahualpa,  urging  him  to  rest  satisfied  with
what  he  had  already  done,  and  not  to  plunge  the  empire
into  civil  war;  but  to  submit  to  the  Inca,  as  the  wisest
course  for  him.  Although  these  messengers  were  principal
Orejones,  they  relate  that  Atahualpa  laughed  at  what  they


232  DEFEAT   OF   ATOC.

had  to  say,  and  that,  after  many  threats,  he  ordered  them  to
be  killed.  He  then  pursued  his  road  in  a  rich  litter,  carried
on  the  shoulders  of  his  principal  and  favourite  followers.

They  say  that  Atahualpa  entrusted  the  conduct  of  the  war
to  his  Captain-General  Chalcuchima,  and  to  two  other  chiefs,
named  Quizquiz  and  Ucumari.1  As  Atoc  did  not  halt  with
his  army,  they  encountered  him  near  the  town  called
Ambato,  where  the  battle  began,  and  was  hotly  contested.
Chalcuchima,  having  occupied  a  hill,  came  down  with  5,000
chosen  men,  at  an  opportune  moment,  and  attacked  the  tired
enemy,  killing  a  great  number,  while  the  rest  fled  in  confu-
sion. They  were  pursued,  and  many  were  captured,  includ-
ing Atoc  himself.  Those  who  gave  me  this  information  say
that  he  was  fastened  to  a  post,  where  they  killed  him  with
great  cruelty.  Chalcuchima  made  a  drinking-cup  out  of  his
skull,  adorned  with  gold.  The  most  correct  estimate,  in  my
judgment,  is  that  15,000  or  16,000  men  were  killed  in  this
battle,  on  both  sides.  Those  who  were  taken  prisoners  were
killed  without  mercy,  by  order  of  Atahualpa.  I  have  passed
by  this  town  of  Ambato,  where  they  say  that  the  battle  was
fought,  and,  judging  from  the  number  of  bones,  it  would
appear  that  even  more  people  were  killed  than  they  state.

With  this  victory  Atahualpa  remained  in  great  renown.
The  news  was  divulged  in  all  parts  of  the  kingdom.  His
adherents  were  called  together,  and  hailed  him  as  Inca.  He
said  that  he  would  assume  the  fringe  at  Tumebamba,
though,  if  this  ceremony  was  not  performed  at  Cuzco,  it
was  considered  absurd  and  invalid.  He  ordered  his  wounded
to  be  cured,  he  was  served  as  a  king,  and  he  marched  to
Tumebamba.

1   Ucumari  means  "  a  bear"  in  Quichua.


DEFENSIVE   MEASURES    OF   HUASCAR.  233


CHAPTEE   LXXIII.

How  Huascar  sent  new  captains  and  troops  against  his
enemy,  and  how  Atahiialpa  arrived  at  Tumebamba,  where
lie  perpetrated  great  cruelties;  also  what  happened  between
him  and  the  captains  of  Huascar.

Few  clays  elapsed  after  the  Captain  Atoc  was  defeated  at
Ambato,  before  the  disaster  was  known,  not  only  in  Cuzco,
but  throughout  the  empire.     Huascar  was   much  alarmed)
and  from  that  time  he  feared  that  the  end  of  the  trouble
might  be  fatal.     His  councillors  decided  that  Cuzco  should
not  be  abandoned,  but  that  a  fresh  army  with  new  captains
should  take  the  field.      But  there  were  great  lamentations
for  the  dead,  and  sacrifices  were  offered  up  in  the  temples
and  to  the  oracles,  according  to  custom.     Huascar  summoned
many  native  chiefs   of  the   Collao,  of  the   Canchis,   Canas,
Charcas,  Cavangas,  those  of  Condesuyo,  and  many  of  those  of
Chincha-suyo.     When  they  had  assembled,  he  spoke  to  them
of  what  his  brother  had  done,  and  appealed  to  them  to  be
good  friends  and  companions.     They  answered  as  he  desired,
because  they  venerated  the  religious  custom  not  to  receive
any  one  as  Inca,  except  him  who  had  assumed  the  fringe  at
Cuzco,  which  Huascar  had  done   some  days  before.     As  it
was  necessary  to  arrange  for  the  continuance  of  the  war,  the
Inca  appointed  his  brother,  Huanca  Auqui,  to  be  his  Captain-
General.     Some  Orejones  say  that  he  was  not  a  brother  of
the  Inca,  but  a  son  of  Ilacprito.1     With  him  other  principal
chiefs    were    sent    as    captains,   named    Ahuapanti,2   Urco
Huaranca,.  and  Inca  Eocca.      These  captains   set  out  from

1  Ylaquita,  according  to  the  Peruvian  editor.

2  Abante  in   the  manuscript,  for  which  the  Spanish  editor  suggests
Ahuapanti.


234  MASSACRE   OF  THE   CANARIS.

Cuzco  with  all  the  soldiers  they  could  collect,  and  accom-
panied by  many  native  lords  and  mitimaes,  and  Huanca
An  qui  reinforced  his  army  on  the  road,  as  he  advanced.  He
marched  in  search  of  Atahualpa,  who  was  at  Tumebamba,
with  his  captains  and  many  principal  men  who  had  come  to
gain  his  favour,  seeing  that  he  was  a  conqueror.  The
Canaris  were  afraid  of  Atahualpa,  because  they  had  impri-
soned him  and  despised  his  commands,  and  they  knew  him
to  be  vindictive  and  very  blood-thirsty.  When  he  came  near
the  principal  edifices,  I  heard  from  many  Indians  that,  to
appease  his  anger,  they  sent  a  great  company  of  children,  and
another  of  men  of  all  ages,  to  go  forth  to  his  richly-adorned
litter,  in  which  he  travelled  with  great  pomp,  bearing  green
branches  and  palm  leaves  in  their  hands,  and  praying  for
grace  and  friendship,  and  that  past  injuries  might  be  for-
given. They  besought  him  with  such  clamour  and  with
such  humility,  that  it  would  have  broken  a  heart  of  stone.
But  it  made  little  impression  on  the  cruel  Atahualpa,  for
they  say  that  he  ordered  his  captains  and  soldiers  to  kill  all
who  had  come  out  to  him,  which  was  done,  only  sparing  a
few  children  and  the  women  dedicated  to  the  service  of  the
temple,  who  were  kept  without  shedding  any  of  their  blood,
to  preserve  the  honour  of  their  deity  the  Sun.

This  being  done,  he  ordered  some  particular  chiefs  in  the
province  to  be  killed,  and  placed  a  captain  of  his  own  to
govern  it.  Assembling  his  principal  adherents,  he  then
assumed  the  fringe  and  took  the  title  of  Inca  in  Tumebamba,
although  the  act  was  invalid,  as  has  been  explained,  because
it  was  not  performed  in  Cuzco.  However,  he  had  the  right
of  his  arms,  which  he  held  to  be  good  law.  I  have  also
heard  from  some  Indians  of  position  that  Atahualpa  assumed
the  fringe  in  Tumebamba  before  Atoc  was  defeated  or  even
set  out  from  Cuzco,  and  that  Huascar  knew  it  and  provided
accordingly.  But  on  the  whole  it  seems  to  me  that  the
version  I  first  wrote  is  the  most  probable.


VICTORY   OF    ATAHUALPA.  235

Huanca  Auqui  made  rapid  marches,  wishing  to  arrive  at
the  country  of  the  Caiiaris  before  Atahualpa  could  do  the
harm  which  he  actually  did.  Some  of  those  who  escaped
from  the  battle  of  Ambato  had  joined  him.  All  authorities
affirm  that  he  had  with  him  more  than  80,000  soldiers,  and
Atahualpa  assembled  little  less  at  Tumebamba,  whence  he
set  out,  declaring  that  he  would  not  stop  until  he  reached
Cuzco.  The  two  armies  encountered  each  other  in  the  pro-
vince of  the  Paltas,  near  Caxabamba,  and  after  the  captains
had  addressed  their  troops,  the  battle  began.  They  say  that
Atahualpa  was  not  present ;  but  that  he  witnessed  the  con-
flict from  an  adjacent  hill.  God  was  served  in  that,  not-
withstanding that  there  were  many  Orejones  and  captains
well  instructed  in  the  art  of  war  in  the  army  of  Huascar,
and  that  Huanca  Auqui  did  his  duty  like  a  loyal  and  good
servant  of  the  king,  Atahualpa  should  be  victorious,  with  the
death  of  many  of  his  adversaries.  They  declare  that  in  both
armies  more  than  35,000  were  killed,  besides  many  wounded.

The  victors  followed  up  the  fugitives,  killing  and  taking
prisoners,  and  plundering  the  camp.  Atahualpa  was  so  joyful
that  he  declared  the  gods  were  fighting  for  him.  The  reason
he  did  not  advance  to  Cuzco  in  person  was  that  the  Spaniards
had  entered  the  country  a  few  days  before,  and  that  he  had
received  the  news  of  their  arrival.1

We  will  not  give  the  conclusion  of  this  war  between  the
Indians,  because  it  would  not  be  according  to  the  order  of
events,  and  the  narrative  can  wait  for  insertion  in  its  proper
place.

1  The  fullest  account  of  the  war  between  the  two  brothers  is  to  be
found  in  the  narrative  of  Balboa.  It  is  made  interesting  by  a  romantic
love  story,  which  is  developed  as  the  military  record  unfolds  itself.  There
is  auother  detailed  account  of  the  war  given  by  Santa  Cruz  Pachacuti
(see  my  Translation,  pp.  111-119).  The  chapters  devoted  to  it  by  Garci-
lasso  tie  la  Vega  give  less  detail  and  are  very  prejudiced.  On  his  own
showing,  he  exaggerates  the  extent  of  the  massacres  at  Cuzco  (t,  lib.  ix,
chapters  32  to  39).


236  CONCLUSION.

Down  to  this  point  is  what  it  has  seemed  well  for  me  to
write  concerning  the  Incas,  which  is  all  derived  from  the
account  which  I  took  down  in  Cuzco.  If  another  should
undertake  to  tell  it  more  in  detail  and  with  greater  accuracy
the  road  is  open  to  him.  For  I  have  not  attempted  what  I
was  unable  to  perform ;  although  for  what  I  have  done,  I
have  worked  in  a  way  known  to  God,  who  lives  and  reigns
for  ever.  Most  of  what  I  have  written  was  seen  by  the
Doctor  Bravo  de  Saravia,1  and  the  Licentiate  Hernando  de
Santillan,2  Judges  of  the  Eoyal  Audience  of  the  city  of
the  Kings.


1  Mel  eh  or  Bravo  de  Saravia  was  one  of  the  judges  who  came  out
with  the  President  Gasca.  He  was  afterwards  President  of  the  Audience
of  Chile.  After  the  departure  of  Gasca,  he  was,  as  President  of  the
Audience,  practically  Governor  of  Peru  from  1552,  when  the  Viceroy
Mendoza  died,  until  1556,  when  his  successor,  the  Marquis  of  Cafiete,
arrived.

2  Hernando  de  Santillan  was  a  colleague  of  Bravo  de  Saravia.  He
wrote  an  account  of  the  origin,  lineage,  and  government  of  the  Yncas,
which  was  first  printed  at  Madrid  in  1879,  edited  by  Don  Marcos
Xhnenes  de  Espada.


INDEX.


NAMES   OF   PLACES   AND   TRIBES.


Abancay,  i,  318

Acari,  i,  28,  265

Acos,  i,  301,  373

Aguja  Point,  i,  25

Alcaviquiza  tribe,  Dear  Cuzco,  ii,  105,

106
Ambato,  i,  154  ;    defeat  of  Atoc  at,

ii,  232,  233,  235
Anan  Cuzco.     Sec  Cuzco.
Anaquer  Hill,  ii,  18
Ancaa-mayu  river,  i,  122  ;  ii,   44,  04.

213  ;  northern  limit  of  the  empire,

21 S,  221,  223
Ancocagua  temple,  i,  357  ;  ii,  88,  89
Andahuaylas,  i,  315,  317  ;  ii,  83,  109,

118,  139,  145,  154
Andesuyo  (Anti-suyu),  i,  323,  337  ;  ii,

51,  70  ;  invasion  of,  ii,  166, 168, 169;

war  with  snakes,  166
Angoyaeo  pass,  i,  302
Antis,  ii,  175,  195
Apurimac  river,  i,  319  ;  ii,  8,  43,  141,

147
Apurima,  ii,  178
Arcos,  ii,  154
Arequipa,  i,  287,  392
Arica,  i,  29
Asillo,  i,  369  ;  ii,  166
Atacama,  i,  267
Ausancata  temple,  i,  354
Ayamaiva.  ii,  114,  115
Ayancas,  road  by,  ii,  43
Ayavaca,  ii.  179,  207
Ayaviri,  i,  358,  359  ;  ii,  135,  165,  166
Aymaraes,  ii,  119
Ayangaro,  i,  369  ;  ii,  166,  170


Bahaire,  Cieza  de  Leon  at,  ii,  131

Barranca,  La,  i,  2  48  n.

Bio-bio  river,  i,  31

Bombon,  i,  286,  lake  of,  294;  ii,  156,

175,  178,  206
Bracamoros,  i,  201,  209  ;  ii,  70,  179,

2


Cacha,  i,  356  ;  ii,  6

Caitomarca,  ii,  123,  124

Calca,  conquest  byT  Uira-ccocha  Ynca,
ii,  121

Callao,  i,  27

Camana,  i,  29,  265

Canards,  i,  162,  167, 169  ;  ii,  71  ;  head-
dress, 72 ;  subjugation,  180,  181,
209,  229  ;  massacre  of,  234

Canaribamba,  i,  204

Canas,  i,  356,  358  ;  ii,  3,  6  ;  head-
dress, 72;  tribe  of,  134,  171,  172,
233

Caiiete  valley  (see  Huarco),  i,  257  >?.,
259

Canches,  i,  355,  358  ;  ii,  3  ;  head-dress,
72  ;  tribe  of,  133,  171,  172,  233

Cangalla,  ii,  133

Caracollo,  i,  381

Caraugas,  ii,  195,  233

Caranqui,  i,  133,  13S  ;  ii,  59,  65,  70,
181,  215,  219

Caranques,  i,  133,  138

Caraques,  i,  185

Carex  Isle,  ii,  132

Caravaya,  i,  369

Carmanca  Hill,  at  Cuzco,  i,  325 ;  ii,
142

Cartagena  [see  Bahaire),  ii,  131

Casma,  i,  26

ma,  at  Cuzce,  ii,  158

Cavinas,  i,  354

Caxabamba,  ii,  235

Caxamarca,  i,  271  ;  ii,  8,  59,  83,  86,
17S,  179,  ISO,  206
.  ii.  »::.  17:'.  '2o7

Chacama  valley,  i,  241

Chachapoyas,  i,  277.  278,  207  ;  ii,  70,
91,  157;  17'.'

Chaneas,  i,  2S0,  315,  316  ;  ii,  83,  199  ;
conquests  of,  119,  139  ;  advance  to
Cuzco,  ii,  140,  154,  157  ;  defeated,
14:!  ;  trophy  of  their  bodies,  ii,  144

Chaqui,  i.  383


238


INDEX.


Charcas,  i,  381  ;  mines,  385  ;  ii,  195,
200,  233

Chayanta,  i,  383  ;  ii,  212

Chicama.     (See  Chacama.)

Chichas,  i,  383

Chilana,  village  in  the  Collao,  i,  373

Chilca  i  255

Chile,  'i,  30,  384  ;  ii,  44,  51,  59,  64,  65,
70  ;  conquest  by  Tupac  Ynca  Yupan-
qui,  195  ;  Huayna  Ccapac  in,  201,
203  ;  name  of,  202  n.

Chimu,  i,  242  ;  ii,  185,  212

Chincha-suyu,  51,  175,  176, 177  ;  road
of,  177

Chinchas,  i,  228,  260;  ii,  189,  190,
191

Chinchay-cocha  lake,  i,  294,  296.  (See
Bombon.)

Chiquana,  i,  356

Chiriguanas,  ii,  69,  201

Choclo-cocha  Lake,  ii,  118

Chucuito,  i,  373  ;  ii,  4,  59,  130,  135,
152,  170,  173,  174,  194

Chumbivilicas,  i,  335  ;  ii,  168

Chunchos,  ii,  69

Chungara  village,  near  Vilcanota,  ii,  88

Chuqui-apu  (La  Paz),  i,  380  ;  ii,  59,
200

Cochabamba,  i,  383

Cocha-casa,  ii,  140,  147

Cochasqui,  ii,  215

Collas,  i,  359,  363,  367  ;  their  head-
dress, 72.     (See  Collao.)

Collao— Colla-suyu,  i,  304,  359,  360,
363,  370  ;  ii,  2,  51,  75  ;  invaded  by
Inca  Uira-ccocha,  130,  167  ;  incur-
sions of  Chinchas  into,  189  ;  Chanca
chief  sent  to,  151  ;  invasion,  165  ;
rebellion,  169,  172;  subjugation,
173  ;  pacification,  174,  175  ;  Tupac
Ynca  Yupanqui  in,  194,  195  ;
Huayna  Ccapac  in,  200

Compata,  ii,  133

Conchucos,  i,  286,  291

Condesuyo  (Cunti-suyu),  ii,  51,  106,
107,  112  ;  treason  of  chiefs,  117  ;
invasion  of,  146,  168  ;  summoned
to  join  the  army  of  Huascar,  233

Copacopa,  ii,  165

Copayapu,  i,  30

Coquimbo,  i,  30  ;  ii,  4

Coropuna  temple,  ii,  89

Cotobambas,  ii,  8

Curahuasi,  ii,  147

Curampa,  ii,  140,  148

Curicancha.  Temple  of  the  Sun  at
Cuzco,  i,  328,  385  ;  ii,  9,  22,  23,  71,
83  ;  description  of,  84,  85,  101, 103,
158,  203


Cuzco,  i,  146  ;  situation,  i,  322  ;  divi-
sions, i,  325  ;  description,  i,  330 ;
full  of  strangers,  i,  71 ;  foundation,  i,
329  ;  ii,  21 ;  first  arrival  of  Spaniards
at,  ii,  9  ;  Anan  Cuzco,  ii,  97,  102,
122  ;  Orin  (Hurin)  Cuzco,  ii,  127 ;
drainage  of  swamps,  ii,  99,  100  ;
rivers  of,  ii,  111,  112  ;  in  danger
from  the  Chancas,  ii,  140,  141  ;  for-
tress, 160-164;  Bishop  of,  i,  424.
(See  Curicancha.)

Desaguadero,  i,  373  ;  ii,  174

Ferrol,  port  of,  i,  26

Gorgona  Isle,  i,  21,  420  ;  ii,  220

Guamanga  founded,  i,  307,  308  ;  In-
dians, 310

Guanacauri,  ii,  148,  154.  (See  Huana-
cauri. )

Guafiape,  i,  26,  245  ;  ii,    213

Guarmay,  i,  26,  247  ;  ii,  213

Guayaguil,  i,  197,  201,  203  ;  ii,  209,
211


Hanan  Cuzco,  ii,  97,  102,  122

Hatun  Colla,  ii,  3,  14,  16,  17,  33,  59,

117,  130,  135,  170
Hatun-cana,  i,  356
Hatun  canche,  ii,  158
Hayo-hayo,  i,  381
Hervay,  fortress  of,  ii,  193  n.
Horuro,  i,  356
Huallabamba,  i,  139
Huamachuco,  i,  287,  289
Huambacho,  i,  247
Huanacauri  temple,  ii,  17,  18,  19,  22,

89,  101,  107,  111
Huancas,  i,   279,   298  ;  legends  of,  i,

299  ;  head-dress,  ii,  72  ;   conquest,

ii,    153,    154;    submission,    ii,    155,

173
Huancabamba,  i,  210,  269  ;  ii,  59, 179,

207
Huancachupachos,  ii,  206
Huancavilcas,  i,  168, 181,  192
Huanuco,  i,  282,  283,  285 ;  ii,  157
Huara,  ii,  26,  248
Huaray,  ii,  293
Huarco  valley,  i,  257,  258  ;  fortress,

ii,  164  ;  war,  191-195
Huarina,  i,  9,  380
Huarochiri,  ii,  43
Huaqui,  i,  274
Huaura,  ii,  213
Huaylos,  i,  286
Hurin  Cuzco,  i,  67  ;  ii,  97,  102


IXDFA'.


239


Juli,  i,  373  ;  ii,  130
Juliaca,  i,  369

Larupa,  harvest  ceremony  at,  i,  412
La  Paz,   i,  380,    381.      {See   Chuqui-

apu. )
La  Plata,  ii,  201
Latacunga,  ii,  59
Lima,  i,  248
Liniatambo,  i,  320
Llacta-cunga,  i,  143,  150
Lobos  Island,  i,  25
Lucanas,  ii,  148,  199
Lunahuana,  i,  228,  260
Luracachi,  ii,  134

Mala,  i,  256

Manta,  i,  182,  1S4

Marca,  in  Condesuyo,  ii,  107

Marcapata,  ii,  169

Mareavillca,  ii,  34

Maule  river,  i,  31  ;  ii,  64,  195,  221

Mohina,   treasure  found  at,    i,    353 ;

road  from  Cuzco  to,  ii,  44
Motupe  valley,  i,  239
Moxos,  ii,  69
Moyobamba,  i,  280
Muhina.     {See  Mohina.)
Mulahalo,  i,  147,  148
Muli-ambato,  i,  153

Nasca  Point,  i,  28

valley,  i,  264  ;  ii,  190

Nicasio  village,  i,  365,  369

Ocona  valley,  i,  29,  265
Ollantay-tambo.     (See  Tambo.)
Oma,  near  Cuzco,  ii,  105
Omasayu,  i,  369  ;  ii,  90,  166
Orin  Cuzcos.     {See  Hurin  Cuzco.)
Otavalo,  ii,  215

Pacarec-tanipu,  i,  335  ;  ii,  11,  13,  87

Pacasmayu,  i,  240

Pachacamac,  i,  251,  252,  253,  254  :    ii.

90  ;   temple  of,  ii,  187,  211  ;    Hu-

ayna  Capac  at,  213
Paltas,  i,  205  ;   ii,  43,  235
Paria,  i,  381 ;   ii,  59
Pariacaca  Pass,  ii,  43,  188
Parina  Point,  i,  25
Passaos,  i,  22,  172
Parcos,  i,  302  ;    ii,  154
Parmonga  (Parmunquilla),  i,  247  ;   ii,

186
Pasto,   i,    54,  55,   120,   121,   123  ;   ii,

219
Patia,  i,  118
Payta,  i,  25
Picoy  valley,  i,  302  ;  ii,  154


Pifo,  ii,  215
Pincos,  i,  294
Pisagua,  i,  30
Piscobamba,  i,  293
Piura,  i,  213
Pocheos  river,  i,  213

city,  i,  32,  381,  382,  384


Pocona  village,  i,  384

Pomata,  i,  473  ;  ii,  130

Pomatambo    (Piunatanipu),    ii,    113,

149
Popavan,  i,  32,  54,  55,  109,  115,  124  ;

ii,  70,  221
Porco,  i,  285
Potosi,  i,  384,  390,  391
Pucamarca,  ii,  158
Puerto  Yiejo,  i,  22,  174,  180,  187  ;    ii,

78,  211
Pumatampu,  ii,  113  n.,  149
Puna,i,  24,  198  ;  ii,  211
Purnaes    (Purnaes),   i,    154,    161  ;    ii,

180,  210

Quichuas,  tribe  of,  ii,  109  ;  defeated
by  Chancas  ;  ii,  118,  119

Quilca,  i,  29,  265

Quillacingas,  ii,  221

Quillaco,  mother  of  Atahualpa  a  na-
tive of  ;  ii,  203,  224

Quiquijana,  i,  354  ;    ii,  133

Quito,  i,  131,  140,  142,  144,  145;
founded  by  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui,
ii,  181  ;  government  of,  ii,  183  ;
arrival  of  Huayna  Ccapac  at,  ii,  210,
211,  213,  214,  217  ;  news  of  arrival
of  Spaniards  reaches,  220;  riches  at,
221  ;  mourning  for  Huayna  Ccapac
at,  222  ;  Atahualpa  at,  224,  225  ;
rebellion  of  Atahualpa  at,  227,  229,
230,  231

Riniac,  i,  250  ;  ii,  213
Riobamba,  i,  155,  160,  210
Rumichaca,  near  Quito,  i,  132
Runchuanac.     {See  Lunahuana.)

Sana  valley,  i,  240

San  Gallan,  i,  27

San  Lorenzo  Cape,  i,  23

San   Miguel   (Puira)   founded,  i,  213,

214
San  Nicolas  Point,  i,  28
Santa,  i,  245,  246
Santa  Clara  Island,  i.  24
Sauta  Elena  Point,  i,  23,  189
Santa  Maria  Cape,  i,  31
Saqui,  palace  at,  ii,  122
Sica  sica,  i,  381
Sipe  sipe,  i,  383
Soras,  ii,  148,  149,  199


240


INDEX.


Tacunga,  iii,  180,  181,  210

Tambo    (or  Ollantay-tainpu),  i,    332,

333
Tampu-quiru,  ii,  14,  16,  101,  103
Tangarara,   original  site  of   Piura,   i,

214
Tapacari,  i,  383
Tarama  (Tarma),  i,  286  ;   ii,  156,  175,

176
Tarapaca,  i,  30,  138,  265,  266
Tarma.     (See  Tarama.)
Tiquizambi,  ii,  180
Titicaca  Lake,  i,  370,  371,  167,  195  ;

ii,  167
Island,  i,  372  ;   the  sun  came

forth  from,  ii,  5  ;  Yncas  at,  167,  200
Tomebamba.     (-See  Tumipampa.)
Totora,  i,  383

Truxillo,  i,  26,  186,  242,  244 ;  ii,  212
Tucuman,  ii,  201
Tumbez,  i,  23,  128,  193,  213 ;   ii,  185,

212
Tumipampa,  i,  165  ;  ii,  180,  209,  229,

232,  235
Tuqueme,  coast  valley  of,  i,  239
Tuquma,  i,  383
Tusa,  last  village  of  the  Pastos,  i,  132

Urcos,  i,  354  ;  ii,  133

Valparaiso,  i,  31
Viacha,  i,  380
Vicos,  ii,  115


Vilcas,  i,  312,  313  ;  roads  from,  ii,  44,
59  ;  edifices,  ii,  150,  154,  206  ;
river,  149,  150

Vilcacunga,  ii,  142

Vilcanota  temple,  ii,  88,  134,  169

Vifiaque,  i,  309,  379

Viticos,-  i,  305  ;  ii,  11

Xaquixaguana,  i,  9,  32,  150,  320;  ii,
44,  129,  131,  137,  138,  140,  199

Xauxa,  i,  296,  297 ;  ii,  34  ;  road  to
Lima,  43,  59,  75  ;  partition  of  land,
148,  154,  156,  178,  188  ;  tenure  of
land  arranged  by  Huayna  Ccapac,
206,  208

Xayanca  valley,  i,  239

Yahuar-cocha,  i,  133  ;  ii,  218

Yahuira  Hill,  ii,  19

Yanahuaras,  ii,  168

Yauyos,  ii,  153,  178,  206

Yea,  i,  263  ;  ii,  190

Ylave,  ii,  134

Ylo,  i,  265

Yuli  (see  Juli),  ii,  130

Yucay,  i,  354  ;  river  of,  ii,  124  ;  val-
ley, i,  137,  140

Yuncas  of  the  coast,  i,  162,  209,  218,
219,  223,  232,  237  ;  ii,  72,  90,  183 ;
conquest  of,  185-193  ;  sacred  temple
of,  ii,  187

Zepita,  i,  37  ;  ii,  130


QUTCHUA   WORDS.


Anacona.     (See  Yana  cuna.)
Ancha,  very,  ii,  14,  63,  212
Apu,  chief,  ii,  14,  62,  97,  212
Atoc,  fox,  ii,  228
Ayllos,  slings,  i,  355  ;  ii,  46,  54-73

Camac,  creator,  i,  253

Camayus,  officials,  ii,  27,  90

Cancha,  'place,  ii,  83

Canqui,  thou  art,  ii,  62

Capacocha,   ceremony  of    offerings,    ii,

88,  89,  91-93
Cay,  this,  ii,  212
Ccapac,  rich,  i,  136;  ii,  12,  17,  21,  22,

105
Ccampa,  thou  (dative),  ii,  62,  212,  218
Ccepi,  burden,  ii,  88


Ccocha.     (See  Cocha.)

Ccuri,  golcl,  ii,  83

Chaca,  bridge,  i,  132

Chacara,  farm,  ii,  27,  30,  60

Chacu,  hunt,  i,  288  n.

Chaqui,  foot,  ii,  76

Chaquira,  beads,  i,   176,  405 ;    ii,    40,

86,  90
Chumpi,  belt,  i,  146
Chuiiu,  preserved  potatoe,  i,  361  ;   ii,  54
Churi.  son,  ii,  14,  62
Coca,  'i,  352  ;  ii,  196
Cocha,  lahe,  ii,  8
Cuna   (plural  particle),   ii,    205,   213,

218  '
Curaca,  nobleman,  ii,  41,  58
Curi  (correctly  Ccuri),  gold,  ii,  S3


INDEX.


241


Hatun,  great,  ii,  14,  62,  212
Hatuii  cancha,  ii,  158
Hatun-rayrni,  ii,  93,  96
Huaca,  sacred,  i,  77,  228;   ii,  87,  88,

90,  91
Huaca-caruayoc,  i,  413
Huaranca,  thousand,  ii,  135
Huarmi,  woman,  ii,  76
Huasi,  house,  ii,  83
Huata,  year,  ii,  55,  76,  82
Huauque,  brother,  ii,  76
Huayna,  youth,  ii,  197,  213,  218
Huayna-cuna,  youths,  i,  138;    ii,  213,

218
Huayras,  used  in  the  mines,  i,  389
Huillac.     (See  Uillac.)
Huis-cacha.     (See  Uis  cacha.)

Inca.     (See  Ynca.)
Inti.     (See  Ynti.)

Llacta,  city,  ii,  197
Llama,  i,  393  ;  ii,  45

Llautu,  fringe  :  emblem  of  sovereignty,

ii,  2,  19
Lliclla,  mantle,  i,  146
Lloque,  left-handed,  ii,  100,  102,  103

Macana,  club,  i,  49,  203
Mama,  mother,  ii,  12,  105,  114
Mama-cuna,  women  of  the  temples,  i,  25,

149,  164,  369,  405  ;    ii,  10,  46  85,

92,  95,  138,  206
Marian,  not,  ii,  218
Maqui,  hand,  ii,  76
Micuni,  to  eat,  ii,  212
Mitimaes,   colonists,  i,    149,   150,   209,

271,  328,  362;    ii,  24,  36,  39,  50;

67-71,  166,  177,  179
Mizqui,  sweet,  ii,  212
Mucha,  worship,  ii,  17,  38,  96,  210
Molle  trees.     (-S'ee  Mulli.)
Mulli,  Schinus  Molle,  i,  299

Nana,  sister,  ii,  76
Naui,  eye,  ii,  76

Oca,  Oxalis  tuberosa,  i,  361 ;  ii,  94
Oxota.     (See  Usuta.)

Paccari  (Pacarec),  dawn,  ii,  11,  13,  87
Pacha,  earth,  ii,  62

world,  i,  253  ;  ii,  82

hundred,  ii,  205

Palla,  married'  princess,  ii,  147,  277

Pillaca,  kind  of  fringe,  ii,  19

Pucara,  fortress,  i,  302,  368  ;   ii,  2,  69.

75,  121,1-17,  216
Punchau,  day,  ii,  76
Purachuco,  tuft  of  feathers,  ii,  19


Quilla,  moon,  ii,  76

Quinua,  Chenopodium  Quinua,  i,  361 ;

ii,  54,  94
Quipus,  system  of  record,  i,  290  ;  ii,  33,

34,  53,  57,  61,  165
Quiru,  tooth,  ii,  14,  76

Raymi,  festival,  ii,  93,  96
Rincri,  ear,  ii,  76
Rumi,  stone,  i,  132  ;  ii,  227
Runa,  man,  ii,  76,  205
Runtu,  egg,  ii,  121

Sapa,  only,  ii,  62
Sasi,  fast,  ii,  18,  20
Senca,  nose,  ii,  76
Sullull,  truth,  ii,  62
Sulluy,  of  a  truth,  ii,  212
Supay,  devil,  i,  224 ;  ii,  10

Tampu,  inn,  i,  161,  290  ;  ii,  14, 16,  73,

101,  103,  131,  201,  230
Taqui,  music,  ii,  29,  40,  91,  92,  137
Ticiviracocha,    God,  i,  299  ;    ii,  1,  6,

7,  8,  9,  22,  94  ;  image  lost,  97
Topu.     (See  Tupu.)
Tucuy,  aU,  ii,  62,  197,  218
Tupu,  measure,  i,  146  ;   ii,  43,  66,  88,

112
Tuta,  night,  ii,  76

Ucumari,  bear,  ii,  232

Uillac  Umu,  High  Priest,  i,  329,  414;

ii,  86,  97
TJira,  grease,  ii,  8
Uiscacha,  retbbit,  i,  402  ;  ii,  46
Uma,  heeid,  ii,  76
Uncha,  fillet  for  the  head,  i,  146
Usuta,  shoe,  i,  146  ;  ii,  38
Uyay,  hear,  ii,  62,  197

Vira,  grease.     (See  Uira.)

Yahuar,  blood,  i,  133;  ii,  218
Yaua-cuna,  servant,  i,  391  ;  ii,  55,  67  n.,

88,  89,  201,  205
Yaya,  father
Ylla  (name   given   to   bodies    of    the

venerated  dead) ;  ii,  96
Yllapa,  lightning,  ii,  96
Ynca,  sovereign  :  of  the  blood  royal
Ynti,  the  sun,  ii,  14,  62
Ynti  huasi,  Temple  of  the  Sun,  ii,  83
Yscay,  two,  ii,  205
Ynca,  i,  233

Yunea.  warm  valley,  i,  162
Yupauqui.  you  may  count,  ii,  102  ».,

158

Zazi.     (See  Sasi.)


242


INDEX.


NAMES   OF   INDIANS   AND    GODS.


Ahuapanti,  a  general  of  Huascar,  ii,
233

Alaya,  chief  of  Xauxa,  i,  224,  301,  ii,
206

Alcariza,  a  lord  of  Cuzco,  ii,  15, 16,  17

Anco  alio,  chief  of  the  Chancas,  i,  280  ;
ii,  154,  156  ;  his  flight,  157

Aperahua  Oracle,  ii,  90

Arnauan,  a  name  of  Ticiviracocha,  ii,  6

Atahualpa,  ii,  8,  9,  10  ;  ransom,  ii,  83,
8'i  ;  at  Caxaniarca,  i,  271 ;  meaning
of  word,  i,  231  ;  birth,  ii,  203  ;  to
ride  at  Quito,  ii.  221,  222  ;  account
of,  ii,  224,  225';  rebellion,  ii,  227  ;
cruelty  to  Caharis,  i,  167  ;  ii,  230,
235  ;  war  with  Huascar,  i,  273  275,
409,  421 ;  ii,  235

Atoc,  general  of  Huascar,  i,  167,  273  ;
ii,  228,  230,  231,  232,  233

Ayar  Cachi  (Asaucal,  ii,  12,  13,  14,  16,
17,  20

Ayar  Manco,  ii,  12,  21

Ayar  Uchu,  ii,  12,  13


Capac.     (See  Ccapac.)

Cari,  a  great  lord  in  the  Collao,  i,  363  ;

ii,  5,  130,  135  ;   rebellion,  170,  173
Cariapasa,  chief  of  Cbucuito,  i,  373
Cayu  Tupac,  the  Ynca  who  supplied

Cieza  de  Leon  with  information,  ii,

11,121
Ccapac,  a   rebel    against   Ynca    Uira-

ccocha,  ii,  127
Ccapac  Yupanqui,   his  reign,  ii,  106,

107,  108  ;   embassy  from  the  Quich-

uas  to,  109  ;  death,  ii,  110
general  in  the   Hu-

anca  campaign,  ii,  154

—  governor  of   Cuzco,


ii,  178
Chalco  Mayta,  governor  of  Quito,  ii,

183
Chalicuchima,  a  general  of  Atahualpa,

i,  320  ;  ii,  9,  227,  232
Chimbo  Ocllo,  wife  of  Huayna  Ccapac,

ii,  199
Chirihuana,    governor    of     Chucuito,

ii,  4
Colla  Tupac,  guardian  of  Huascar,  ii,

222,  237  n.,  228
Cusi-chuca,  chief  at  Xauxa^  ii,  206
Cusi-hualpa,  son  of  Huayna  Ccapac,  ii,

222


Guacarapora,  lord  of  Xauxa  ;    use  of

quipus,  ii,  34
Guamaraconas.     (See  Huayna-cuna.)
Guanacauri.     (See  Huanacauri.)
Guasco,  chief  of  Andahuaylas,  i,  315,

318

Hastu  Huaraca,  chief  of  the  Chancas  ;
ii,  140,  141  ;  interview  with  the
Ynca,  ii,  142  ;  defeated,  ii,  143  ;
enters  service  of  the  Ynca,  ii,  145  ;
sent  to  the  Collao,  ii,  151

Huaman  Hualpa,  a  son  of  Huayna
Ccapac,  ii,  222

Huanacauri,  the  hero  god,  ii,  14,  18,
20,  22,  87,  101,  103, 107

Huanca  Auqui,  a  son  of  Huayna
Ccapac,  general,  for  Huascar,  ii,
233  ;  defeated,  235

Huaraca,  chief  of  the  Chancas,  ii,  118

Huarivilca,  god  of  the  Huancas,  i,  300  ;
ii,  154

Huascar,  i,  272,  421 ;  ii,  8,  9,  99,  163,
203,  222  ;  his  character,  ii,  224,  225  ;
accession,  226  ;  war  with  Atahualpa,
ii,  228,  229  ;  his  alarm,  233  ;  army
defeated,  235

Huayna  Ccapac,  i,  140,  169,  179,  193  ;
ii,  11,  25,  44,  67,  99,  155,  163,  180  ;
birth,  181  ;  accession,  197  ;  cha-
racter, 198  ;  march  of,  199,  200  ;  to
Chile,  201,  202  ;  invasion  of  Braca-
moros,  208  ;  severity,  209  ;  at
Quito,  210:  on  the  coast,  212;
anecdote,  212  ;  war  north  of  Quito,
215  ;  besieged,  217  ;  his  vengeance,
218  ;  hears  of  Spaniards,  220  ;
death,  221  ;  obsequies,  222,  223

Huayna-cuna  (Guamaraconas),  i,  138  ;
ii,  213,  218

Humalla,  a  chief  in  the  Collao  ;  re-
bels, ii,  170

Ilia  Tupac,  ii,  227  n.

Lloque  Yupanqui,  marriage,  ii,  100  5

reign,  102  ;   death,  103
brother    of    Ynca


Yupanqui ;  governor  of  Cuzco,  ii,
147  ;  commands  the  army  in  the
Huanca  campaign,  ii,  154,  155

Macay    Cuca,   Queen  of  Ynca  Rocca,
ii,  111


INDEX.


243


Mama  Cahua  Pata,  daughter  of  the

lord     of     Oma,    Queen    of    Mayta

Ccapac,  ii.  105
Mama  Chiquia,  of  Ayamarca  ;    Queen

of  Ynca  Yupanqui,  ii,  114
Mama  Cora,  out-  of  the  women  who

tame    forth  from    Pacarec   Tampu,

ii.  12
Mama  Huaco,  one  of  the  women  who

came   forth  from   Pacarec  Tampu,

ii,  12
Mama   Ocllo,  Queen   of  Tupac  Ynca

Yupanqui,  ii,  175
Mama  Rahua,  one  of  the  women  who

came   forth   from    Pacarec  Tampu,

ii,  12
Manco  Ccapac,  i,  136,  194,  329,  354,

409  ;  ii,  12,  17,  22,  23,  99
Manco  Ynca,  i,  304,  305;   ii,  11,  30,

222  ;    assumption  of  the  sovereign

fringe  by,  17
Mayta  Ccapac,  fourth  Ynca,  ii,  103  ;

death,  107

Xanque  Yupanqui,  son  of  Huayna
Ccapac,  ii,  222

Paullu  Ynca,  i.  77  :  funeral  obsequies,
ii,  104,  196  //.,  222

Quizquiz,  general  of  Atahualpa,  ii,  8,
164,  227

Rahua  Ocllo.     (See  Mama  Rahua.)
Rocca  Ynca,  ii,  111  ;    reign,  ii,  113  ;

obsequies,  115
a    general  of    Huascar,   ii,

233
Rumi-naui,  a  general  of  Atahualpa,  ii,

227
Runta-Ccoya,    Queen     of     the    Ynca

Uira-ccocha,  ii,  12  L

Sapana.     (See  Zapana.)

Sayri  Tupac,  ii,  11

Sinchi  Rocca,  ii,  23,  24  ;  reign,  ii,  99

Tici -uira-ccocha,  god,  i,  299  ;  ii,  1,  6,
7  ;  name,  8,  9,  22,  24  ;  image,  97

Titu,  a  son  of  Huayna  Ccapac,  ii,  222

Tuapaca,  name  of  Tiei- uira-ccocha  in
Collao,  ii,  6

Tumbala,  lord  of  Puna,  i,  195 ;  ii,
211

Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui,  i,   147,    149,


165,  169,  178,  192,  217,  261,  269,
313, 337,357;  ii, 25,44, 64, 86,99,150,
163,  170;  accession,  171,  172;  sub-
jugated the  Collas,  173,  174.  175;
march  to  Chinchasuyu,  ii,  177;  at
Caxamarca,  178  ;  at  Bracam
17'.i  ;  conquest  of  coast  valleys,  185-
193  ;  conquest  of  Chile,  195  ;  death,
196

a  son  of  Huavna  Ccapac,  ii,

222

Tupac  Hualpa,  a  son  of  Huayna  Ccapac,
ii,  222

Tupac  Uasco,  chief  of  the  Chaucas,
ii,  118,  147,  151,  157

Tuta  Palla,  mother  of  Atahualpa,  ii,
203

Uasco.     (See  Tupac  Uasco.)

Ucumari,  general  of  Atahualpa,  ii,  232

Uillac  Umu,  High  Priest,  i,  329  ;  ii,
86,97

Uira-ccocha  Ynca,  i,  332,  338,  355,
36!  ;  ii,  64,  71;  accession,  120;
reign,  121  to  136  ;  abdication,  137,
140

(God),  i,  162,  357,  367.     (See

Tici-uira-ccocha. )

Urco  Ynca,  ii,  129  ;  objections  to  his
accession,  137  ;  accession,  138  :
vicious  conduct,  139,  140,  141  ;  de-
position, 144,  146

Urco  Huaranca,  governor  of  Ata-
hualpa, ii,  233'

Viracocha.     (See  Uira-ccocha.)

Ynca  Yupanqui  ;  accession,  ii,  116  ;
murder,  ii,  117

ii,  129,   139  ;    defence

of  Cuzco  by,  140  ;  defeats  the
Chaucas,  143  ;  accession,  144  ;
march  of  his  army.  147  ;  rule,  152  ;
meaning  of  name,  158  ;  builds
fortress  of  Cuzco,  158-164  ;  pro-
ceedings, 165  ;  conquest  of  the
Collao,  167  ;  of  Condesuyos,  168  ;
invades  Anti-suyu,  168,  169  ;  abdi-
cates, 171

Yumalla,  chief  of  the  Collao,  i,  373

Zanu,  chief  of,  ii,  100

Zapana,  lord  in  the  Collao,  i,  363,  369 ;

ii,  2,  3, 14,  117, 130  ;  embassy  from,

132;  death,  135,  170


244


INDEX.


NAMES   OF   SPANIARDS.


Aldana,   Lorenzo  de,  founded  Pasto,

i,   123  ;  his  kind   treatment  of  the

natives,  and  bequest  in  their  favour,

i,  124  n.
Almagro,   Diego    de,   i,    7,    159,    186,

256,  318,  419
Almagro,  Diego  de  (the  lad),  i,   306,

312,  335  ;  ii,  13
Alvarado,  Alonzo  de,  i,  159,  279,  282
Alvarado,  Pedro  de,  i,  148,  155,   156,

157,  185,  186,  248
Alvarado,  Gomez  de,  i,  157,  281,  283
Aranda,  a  Spaniard.     Evidence  as  to

converse  with  devils,  ii,  132

Bachicao,  Hernando,  hanged  at  Juli  by
Francisco  de  Carbajal,  i,  373

Belalcazar,  Sebastian  de,  i,  79,  93,  105,
110,  113,  145,  201,  423  ;  marches  to
assist  Gasca,  i,  151,  186

Blasco  Nunez  Vela,  i,  187,  139

Bobadilla,  Fray  Francisco  de,  the  um-
pire between  Pizarro  and  Almagro,
i,  256

Bueno,  Martin,  one  of  the  first  sol-
diers who  went  to  Cuzco,  ii,  9

Carbajal,  Francisco  de,  i,  362,  373,
422

Carrasco,  Alonzo,  bad  seen  the  trophy
of  bodies  of  the  Chancas,  ii,  145

Castro,  Vaca  de,  i,  283,  312

Centeno,  Diego  de,  i,  380,  384

Chaves,  Francisco  de,  i,  292

Cieza  de  Leon,  Pedro  de  (the  author)
dedication  of  his  work,  i,  1 ;  his  habit
of  writing  on  the  march,  i,  3  ;  plan
of  his  work,  i,  6 ,  collecting  infor-
mation concerning  the  coast,  i,  27  ;
loses  his  journal  after  the  battle  of
Xaquixaguana,  i,  32  ;  joins  Vadillo,
i,  41  ;  method  of  collecting  infor-
mation, i,  177  ;  marching  to  join
the  royal  army,  i,  151,  167,  241  ;
crosses  bridge  over  the  Apurimac,  i,
319  ;  goes  to  Charcas,  i,  339  ;  at
Pucara,  i,  368  ;  takes  notes  in  the
Collao,  364;  at  Tiahuanaco,  i,  376  ;
ii,  173  ;  proposes  to  form  planta-
tions of  trees,  i,  401  ;  sees  God's
hand  in  the  conquest  of  the  Indies,
i,  418  ;  finishes  the  first  part  of  his
work,  i,  427  ;  record  of  retribution,
i,    423  ;    inquires  of  the  natives  as


to  their  condition  before  the  time
of  the  Yncas,  ii,  2  ;  visits  the  temple
of  Cacha,  ii,  7  ;  information  from
citizens  of  Cuzco,  ii,  3  ;  Ynca
■  sources  of  information,  ii,  11,  121  ;
plan  of  his  second  part,  ii,  24 ;
learns  the  practical  use  of  the
qtii/MS  at  Xauxa,  ii,  34  ;  praises
Ynca  rule,  ii,  47  ;  heard  oracles
speak  at  Bahaire,  ii,  131  ;  visits  the
fortress  of  Cuzco,  ii,  162  ;  conclu-
sion of  his  work,  ii,  236

Elemosin,  Diego  Eodriguez,  great
wealth  discovered  by,  ii,  89

Escobar,  Maria  de,  introduced  wheat
into  Peru,  i,  400

Gasca,  Pedro  de  la,  i,  208,  241,  318,

320,  339
Gomara,  Francisco  Lopez  de,  criticism

on,  ii,  67
Guevara,  Juan  Perez  de,  conquests  in

the  eastern  forests,  i,  280
Gutierrez  Felipe,  his  discoveries  south

of  Peru,  i,  383
Guzman,  Hernando  de,  present  at  the

siege  of  Cuzco  ;    visits  the  fortress

of  Cuzco  with  the  author,  ii,  162

Heredia,  Nicolas  de,  discoveries  south

of  Peru,  i,  383
Hihojosa,  Ruy  Sanchez  de,  discoveries

in  the  direction  of  Rio  de  la  Plata  ;

killed  by  Heredia,  i,  384

Ladrillero,  Juan,  navigates  Lake  Titi-

caca,  i,  370
Ledesma,  Baltasar  de,  retribution  on,

i,  423
Loaysa,  Geronimo  de,  Archbishop  of

Lima,  i,  227,  424

Maldonado,  Diego  de,  his  estates,  i,
317  n.  •  ii,  139  n.

Moguer,  name  of  one  of  the  first  sol-
diers who  went  to  Cuzco,  ii,  9

Ondegardo,    Polo    de,    corregidor    of

Charcas,  i,  387
Orellana,    Francisco    de,    i,    112,    202,

406
Orgonez,  Rodrigo,  i,  254,  304


INDEX.


245


Otaso,  Marcos,  a  priest,  who  gave  the
author  an  account  of  the  harvest
ceremony  at  Lauipa,  i,  412

Pacheco,  Juan,  his  experience  of  the

conduct  of  devils  in  obstructing  the

conversion  of  heathens,  i,  416,  417
Pancorvo,    Juan   de,    estate   at    Aya-

viri,  i,  359  ;   had  seen  the  trophy  of

Chanca  bodies,  ii,  145
Pinto,  Simon,  corregidor  of  Chucuito,

i,  373
Pizarro,    Francisco,    i,    21,    156,    214,

244,  250,  256,  268,   272,  310,  329,

353  ;  ii,  9,  34,  220
Pizarro,  Gonzalo,  i,  32,  137,  303,  311,

320,  3S0
Pizarro,  Hernando,  i,  253,  254,  335  ;

ii,  13
Puelles,  Pedro  de,  i,  187,  283

Rios,  Pedro  de  los,  i,  419

Saavedra,  Juan  de,  arrived  in  Peru
with  Pedro  de  Alvarado,  i,  157,
165  ;  as  governor  of  Cuzco,  as-
sisted the  author  in  his  researches,
ii,  11

Santa  Maria,  Fray  Juan  de,  trouble
with  the  devil  when  baptizing  a
chief,  i,  417

Santo  Tomas,  Fray  Domingo  de,  his
labours  in  the  study  of  Quichua,  i,
163  ;  gives  information  to  the
author,  i,  219 ;  his  evidence  re-
specting the  wiles  of  the  devil,  i,
225  ;  founds  a  monastery  in  the
coast  valley  of  Chacama,  i,  242,
427


Santillan,  Hernando  de,  judge  of  the
Audiencia,  i,  425  ;  ii,  236  ;  had
seen  the  author's  work,  ii,  236

Sara  via,  Dr.  Bravo  de,  judge  of  the
Audiencia,  i,  2u5,  425  ;  had  seen
the  author's  work,  ii,  236

Solano,  Juan  de,  Bishop  of  Cuzco,  i,
424

Sosa,  Hernan  Rodriquez  de,  retribu-
tion on,  for  cruelty  to  Indians,  i,
423

Terrazas,  Bartolonie'  de,  his  estate  at

Cacha,  ii,  6  n.
Tobar,  Francisco   de,  retribution  on,

for  cruelty  to  Indians,  i,  422

Uzeda,  Diego  de,  goes  with  the  author
to  Charcas,  i,  365

Valverde,  Vicente  de,  Bishop  of  Cuzco,

i,  424
Varagas,  Juan  de,  held  the  Indians  of

Tiahuanaco  in  encomienda,  i,  379
Vasquez,  Tomas,  his  estate  in  Ayaviri;

give s  information  to  the  author,  ii,

3  ;  the  author  visits  the  fortress  of

Cuzco  with,  ii,  162
Yergara,  Pedro  de,  i,  205
Villadiego,   Captain,  sent  against  the

Ynea  Manco,  i,  305
Yillacastin,  Francisco  de,   at  Ayaviri

with  the  author,  ii,  3  n.
Yillaroel,  discovered  mines  of  Potosi,

i,  3S6

Zarate,  name  of  one  of  the  first  three
soldiers  who  went  to  Cuzco,  ii,  9


GENERAL  INDEX.


Accounts,    method    of     keeping     by

means  of  quipus,i,  290  ;  ii,  33;  use

at  Xauxa,  34,  35,  53,  57,  61,  165  ;

audit  of,  ii,  61

Administrative  system  of  the  Yncas,

ii,  36,  37,  209
Adubes,  sun-dried  bricks,  i,  129,  219,

251
Aguacate,  a  fruit.     (See  Palta. )
Aji  pej .per,  i,  42,  232  ;    ii,  94
Algoroba  trees,  i,  129,  235,  239  *'.


Alpacas,  i,  394  ;  ii,  45

Amazons,  a  race  of,  ii,  3

Andenes,  i,  321  ;   ii,  160

Andes,  description,  i,  129 ;  forests,
323,  337  ;  animals  and  snakes,  338  ;
riches  of,  406

Army:  military  colonies,  ii.  69  ;  order
of  marching,  73,  199  ;  assembly  of,
133,  147,  153,  165,  177,  205  ;  disci-
pline of,  177,  205  ;  difficult  march,
200,  201  ;  method  of  defending  for-


246


ENDEX.


tified   places,    217,    218  ;     Huascar

calls  for  an  assembly  of  the  army,

233
Art.  Peruvian  works  of,  i,  403,  404
Assessment  of  tribute,  ii,  51,  52

nomical  knowledge,  ii.  :  _
Authority  for  the  history,  ii,  11,  24,

25,  121

Balsas,  used  at    sea,  i,  265  ;    on  the

rivers,  ii,  125
Barley,  i,  144.  400
Baths*  of  the  Tncas,  i,  271,  285     .
Building,  skill  of  the  Tncas  in,  i,  405  ;

ii,  166;  161-164

Cannibalism,  absence  of,  ii.  79
Ceremonies  of  the  Tncas,  previous  to

accession,  ii,  15.  19.     [See  Festival,

Funeral.  Harvest,  H  mage
Chain,  golden,  at  Cuzco.  ii,  19,  2 '       I

67.  153.  226  ;  lost.  ii.  W
Chicha.  fermented  liquor,  i  152,  220  ;

ii,  15    :r    N    .,.  ,\  ii
Children,  naming,  i,  231 ;  of  the  Tnca,

ii  26    27
Chirimoyas.     {See  Guanavan?  a
Climate  of  Peru,  i.  130  ;   of  Quito,   i,

140  ;    of  Peruvian  coast,  i  214  :    of

the  Collao,  i.  1 1
C3  th-weaving,  i  405

-      214-216  to   1

fertility  of.  i,"  231  Tuncas.)

Colonists*  i,  149,  150,  209.  271.  328,
_:     account    of     system,   67-71,

passim
Conquests,  system  of,  i:

rttao,  i,  i  43,  393
u   -.       --:-  Pasta
Crime,  punishment  of,  ii,  81

7       rfa     :  the  :      :   i   128    21 :.  240  ;

peopling  of,  ii.  7
DeviL     [See  Supav.)

:   j  -

Doorways,  monohthic.  at  Tiahuanaco.  i,

276
Drainage  of  swamp  at  Cuzco,  ii,  99
Dyes  used  by  Indians,  i,  405

Ears,  ceremony  of  piercing,  ii,  19
Earthquakes  at  Arequipa,  i.  2
Emigrants,     {See  Colon:  - 1  - .

Festival  of  Hatun  Baymi,  ii,  94,  95
Fish  used  as  manure,  i.  2  5 "
Fishing  on  the  coast,  i.  267
Flowers  used  at  sacrifices,  i,  71
Fortress  (see  Pucara)  ;  buildings  of  the
fortress  at  C  z;o.  ii.  160-164
i.  227.  4<">2


Fringe.     (See  Head-dress.)
Fruits,  i,  234,  235,  283  ;  pepino,  ii,  212
Funeral  obsequies  of  an  Tnca,  ii.  104,
115

Gold,  i  57,  70,  77,  79,  86,  336  ;    of
Caravaya,    369,    381  ;    ii,  40.
-:  easare.]

Golden  maize    and    animals    at    the

temple  of  the  Sv..
Guanavanas  (or  Chirimoyas;,  i,  234

Harvest  festivities,!  412  :  iL  97

Head-dresses,  i,  lfl!  172,  330  ;  ii.  72  ;
of  the  Canaris,  i  167  :  ii.  72  ;  of
chiefs  on  the  coast,  i,  225  :  Carinas,  i,
330  ;  of  the  Collao,  i,  363  ;  ii
of  the  Huancas.  ii,  72  ;  of  the  Canas,
ii,  72  ;  of  the  Tuncas.  ii,  72  ;  of  the
Canchis,  ii.  72  ;  fringe  or  Uautu  of
the  sovereign,  ii,  2,  19

High  priest  of  the  Sun.  or  I'illac  I'm  a,
.'  $29,  414;   ii  :         1

Homage,  ceremony  of.  in  the  Collao,
ii  136

Honey,  eaten  by  old  Carbajal,  i,  362

Hunt,  royal  ii,  45

Irrigation  works,  i,  236,  263 ;  near
Cuzco,  i  354

Journeys  of  the  Tncas,  ii  62.  63
3  istiee,  administration  of,  i.  :  1

Knighthood,  ceremony  of  investiture,
ii  19,  101

Labour,  organisation  of,  ii,  58

Land,  partition  of,  ii,  75

Language  general,  or  Quiehua,  i,  163.

\'':  ii,  76,  77
Llamas,  i,  393  ;  ii  45

Memorials.     (See  Records.)

Mines  in  Canaris.  i,  169  :  of  emeralds
at  Manta.  i  1S2  ;  in  Tarapaca,  266,
267;   Conchucos.  293 ;   Poi  -

391;  Charcas,  385;  Porco,
385

Mining  industry,  ii,  53

Morality  of  the  Tncas,  ii,  80

Mummies  of  the  Tncas,  ii  30,  31

Obeisance,  mark  of.  ii,  38

Oracles,  consultation  of,  n,  103,  131

Palta,  a  fruit,  i  16,  73,  99,  234

Pepinos,  i  234;  ii,  212

Posts   and  runners,  system  of.  ii.   61.

j   66
Pota-


INDEX.


247


Priest.     (See  High  Priest.)

Queen  of  the  Ynca,  selection,  ii,  24
Quichua.     (See  Language.)
Quipus.     (See  Accounts,  Records.)

Rain,  absence  of  on  the  coast,  i,  214

Recitations  of  wise  men,  ii,  32

Records  and  memorials  of  the  Yncas,
ii,  28  ;  system  of  recording  events,
ii,  29

Religion  (See  Yncas) :  of  the  Canaris,
i,  162  ;  of  the  Huancavilcas,  i,  181  ;
of  the  Mantos,  i,  183  ;  of  the  Huani-
anchucos,  i,  289  ;  of  the  Canas,  i,
357  ;  of  the  Collas,  i,  366  ;  of  the
Huanucas,  i,  2S5  ;  of  the  Huancas,
i,  299  ;  of  the  coast  people,  i,  221.

Retribution  on  Spaniards  for  cruelty
to  the  Indians,  i,  422,  423

Riches  of  the  Yncas,  ii,  39.  (See
Treasure.)

Roads,  Ynca,  i,  153,  217,  253,  287,
290,  293,  302,  320,  326  ;  ii,  42-44  ;
posts,  ii,  64,  65,  66  ;  road  of
Chincha  sayu,  ii,  177,  204  ;  road
from  Cuzco  to  Quito,  ii,  183

Runners,  system  of,  ii,  64,  65

Sacrifices,  human,  practice  much  ex-
aggerated by  Spaniards ;  but  the
author  does  not  deny  its  existence,
ii,  79,  SO  ;  account  of,  ii,  87,  89, 103

Sarsaparilla,  i,  200,  395

Silver  at  Potosi,  i,  3SS  ;  at  Chareas,  i,
385

Skulls,  custom  of  flattening,  i,  96,  363

Snakes,  war  with,  ii,  166

Statistics,  Ynca  system  of,  i,  57

Sun,  temple  of,  at  Cuzco,  ii,  83-85  ;
figure  of,  lost,  ii,  97,  98


Temples.  Ccuri-cancha  at  Cuzco,  i,
328 ;  385  ;  ii,  9,  22,  23,  71,  83,  85,
101,  103,  158,  203  ;  of  Huanacauri,
ii,  14,  18,  20,  22,  87,  101,  103,  107  ;
of  Ancocagua,  i,  357  ;  ii,  88,  89  ;  of
Coropuna,  ii,  89  ;  of  VilcaSLota,  ii,  88,
134,  169  ;  of  Pachacamac,  i,  251,
253,  254  ;  ii,  90,  187,  211,  213

Traditions  of  bearded  men  at  Titicaca,
ii,  4  ;  of  a  strange  man  of  great
stature,  ii,  5  ;  of  the  brethren  of
Paccari-tampu,  ii,  12,  13

Treasure,  ii,  39  ;  lost,  ii,  42,  97,  98
(see  Gold  i ;  treasure  of  the  Yncas,  ii,
39,  40

Trees  of  Peru,  i,  129,  142,  235,  239,
397,  401  ;  fruit  trees,  i,  234

Tribute,  ii,  51  56

Vice,  absence  of,  ii,  78

Yarns:  ceremonies,  ii,  18,  19,  20;
wife,  children,  ii,  26,  27  ;  memorials
of,  28,  32  ;  mummies  of  deceased,  i,
226  ;  ii,  30,  31  ;  forethought  of,  37  ;
mark  of  obeisance  to,  ii,  38  ;  riches
of,  ii,  39,  40 ;  attendance  on,  ii,  41  ;
roads  of,  ii,  42-44  ;  hunts,  45,  46  ;
method  of  contpiest,  ii,  47-49  ;
system  of  colonising,  ii,  50,  67  ;
tribute,  ii,  51-56  ;  statistics,  ii,  57  ;
audit  of  accounts,  ii,  61  ;  organi-
sation of  labour,  ii,  58  ;  governors
appointed  by,  ii,  59  ;  order  of
marching,  ii,  73  ;  punishment  of
offences,  ii,  74,  81  ;  partition  of
land,  ii,  75  ;  journeys,  ii,  76  ;  ab-
sence of  vicious  practices,  ii,  78  ;
morality,  ii,  80  ;  councillors,  ii,  81  ;
astronomical  knowledge,  ii,  82


LONDON:
WHITING    AND    CO.,    LIMITED,   SARDINIA.    STREET.    LINCOLn's-INN-FIELDS.


,S7CENTERLIBRARY

3  lllllll

3  3125  00107  5593


■■' v .-'.■'.■'.■*■  .  .  ,-.•.■  ■',

v  ','&
