=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
The admonition of jealousy1קנא usually has the connotation of jealousy. There are, however, instances where it has the meaning "warning," as in Joel 2:18. stated in the Torah [Numbers 5:14], "And he will adjure his wife," means the following. He tells her in the presence of witnesses: "Do not enter into privacy with this and this man."This applies even if the man [under suspicion] is her father, her brother, a gentile, a servant or a man who is impotent and incapable of having an erection or fathering a child.2The intent in all these examples is that it is unlikely that the woman would engage in adultery with such a man: the father and the brother because of the family connection, the gentile or the servant because we assume that a modest Jewish woman would not associate with such people, and the impotent man because of his physical condition. By citing such examples, the Rambam implies that surely such a warning can be given with regard to any ordinary man.
The term "enter into privacy" mentioned in the Torah [Ibid.:13] refers to entering into privacy with the man concerning whom she was warned, in the presence of two witnesses, not to enter into privacy.3These can be the same two witnesses in whose presence the warning was administered (Hilchot Edut 21:5).If she remains with him long enough to engage in relations - i.e., the amount of time necessary to roast an egg and swallow it,4We suspect that she committed adultery. she is forbidden to her husband5As stated in Hilchot Gerushin 11:14, a woman who commits adultery is forbidden to her husband. Since we suspect that this woman committed adultery, she is forbidden until her faithfulness is proven. until she drinks the bitter water, and [her faithfulness] is checked. In an era when [the probe of] the waters of the sotah is unavailable, she is forbidden to her husband forever and is divorced without receiving the [money due her by virtue of] her ketubah.6For it is her immodest behavior that caused her to become forbidden (Hilchot Ishut 24:24).
If [a husband] warns his wife with regard to two men at the same time, telling her: "Do not enter into privacy with so and so, and so and so," she is forbidden [to her husband] until she drinks [the waters] if she enters into privacy with the two men at the same time,7Even though in general a woman is allowed to enter into privacy with two men of established moral standing, in this instance, since the husband expressed his disapproval, such an act warrants drinking the bitter water. and remains there long enough to engage in relations. [This applies] even if [the two men] are her two brothers or her father and her brother.
If he told her in the presence of two [men]: "Do not speak to so and so," this is not considered to be a warning. Even if she enters into privacy with him in the presence of witnesses and remains there long enough to engage in relations, she is not forbidden to [her husband], nor can she be required to drink [the bitter water] because of such a warning.
Similarly, if he told her, "Do not enter into privacy with him," and witnesses saw her speaking with him, she is not considered to be having entered into privacy. She is not forbidden to [her husband], nor can she be required to drink [the bitter water].Similarly, if she was not warned at all, and two witnesses came and testified that she entered into privacy with a man and remained long enough to engage in relations, she is not forbidden to [her husband],8Entering into privacy (yichud) with another man is forbidden (Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah, ch. 22). Nevertheless, Kiddushin 81a states that as long as a warning was not given, such an act is not sufficient cause for a woman to be forbidden to her husband. nor can she be required to drink [the bitter water].
If he told her: "Do not enter into privacy with so and so," and named a boy below the age of nine,"9Implied is that the warning is effective after a boy reaches the age of nine, for from the age of nine a boy is fit to engage in sexual relations, as explained in Hilchot Ishut 11:3. Rav Ovadiah of Bertinoro (Sotah 4:4) differs and maintains that a youth must attain majority before a warning is effective. There are several Midrashic sources for the Rambam's ruling. or he told her: "Do not enter into privacy with this animal," this is not a [binding] warning.[These laws are derived as follows:] The Torah [ibid.] states: "And a man had relations with her." This excludes a minor and an animal. She is not forbidden to her husband because of them.
When a husband forgoes a warning before his wife enters into privacy with [the man in question], the warning is nullified, and it is as if he had never issued a warning to her [regarding him]. If, however, he forgoes the warning after she enters into privacy with him, the warning cannot be nullified.10And she must drink the bitter water.The rationale for this ruling is that as long as the woman has not entered into privacy with the other man, the husband's warning has not been reinforced by her conduct. Accordingly, since he has authority over his warning, he can withdraw it. When, however, she has already entered into privacy with the other man, she is already required by the Torah to drink the bitter water. Her husband has no authority over the Torah's requirement, and thus, he can no longer withdraw his warning (Likkutei Sichos, Vol. IV). See also the gloss of the Tzafnat Paneach to this halachah.If he divorces his wife, it is as if he has nullified the warning. If he remarries her, he must issue a second warning [for her to be bound by it].
If [the husband] issued a warning to [his wife] in the presence of two [witnesses] and then saw her enter into privacy with the man concerning whom she was warned, and she remained long enough to engage in relations, she becomes forbidden to him. He must divorce her and pay her [the money due her by virtue of her] ketubah.11In this instance, the husband is required to pay his wife the money due her by virtue of her ketubah because, although he is bound by the evidence of his own eyes, it is not sufficient to require his wife to drink the bitter water. For that, the testimony of two witnesses is necessary.Similarly, if he hears people gossiping about her after she has been warned, that she entered into privacy with the man in question, to the extent that the women who weave at night by the moonlight chatter about her, saying that she committed adultery with the man concerning whom she has been warned, her husband is forbidden to remain married to her and must instead divorce her and pay her [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah.12The Rambam is speaking about an instance when, despite the gossip generated about the woman, there is no (or only one) witness who can testify about her entering into privacy with the man involved. Hence, because of her immodest conduct, he must divorce her. He must, however, pay the money due her by virtue of her ketubah, because, as stated in Sotah 6b, the bitter water will not test the chastity of a woman whose immodest conduct has become public knowledge.
[The following rules apply when] one witness comes and testifies that, after a warning was issued, she entered into privacy with the man concerning whom she was warned and remained long enough to engage in relations. If [the husband] considers [the witness] to be faithful, and he relies on him, he must divorce her and pay her [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah.13Since the testimony of one witness is not sufficient to require her to drink the bitter water, and yet the husband relies on the testimony of the witness, she is forbidden to the husband, but he must bear the financial burden of the prohibition. (See Hilchot Ishut 24:17.) If [he does] not [rely on that person], his wife remains permitted to him.14For a woman does not become forbidden until two witnesses testify that she entered into privacy with the man in question.
The court should issue a warning to the following women [who are suspected of immodest behavior]: a woman whose husband has become a deaf-mute or has lost control of his mental faculties, one whose husband is overseas or one whose husband is imprisoned. The intent is not to have [such a woman] drink [the bitter water],15For that is possible only when a warning was administered by the husband, as stated in the following halachah. but rather to disqualify her from receiving [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah.16Since the men in question are incapable of acting on their own, the court takes the initiative on their behalf. The court's action has two objectives: to maintain the moral standard of the Jewish people, and if that fails, to protect the husband's interest and cause a woman who acts immodestly to pay the penalty for her conduct.
What is implied? If the court hears that people are gossiping about [a particular woman], they call her and tell her: "Do not enter into privacy with so and so." If witnesses come afterwards and testify that she entered into privacy with the man concerning whom she was warned, and remained long enough to engage in relations, the court prohibits her [from engaging in relations] with her husband forever and tears up her marriage contract.When her husband returns, regains his health or is released from prison, he must give her a get.17From the commentaries, it appears that he is required to do so; he does not have an option. He cannot require her to drink [the bitter water], because he did not administer the warning himself.
[The following rules apply if a woman was required to] drink the bitter water [because of her husband's suspicion of a particular man] and did not die as a result of it, and afterwards, her husband gave her a warning with regard to that same man. If she enters into privacy with him, he cannot make her drink because of him a second time. Instead, she becomes forbidden to her husband forever and must be divorced without receiving [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah.18In this instance as well, entering into privacy with the man is considered an immodest act, sufficient cause for the woman to forfeit the money due her by virtue of her ketubah.If, however, her husband issued a warning to her regarding another man, and she entered into privacy with him in the presence of witnesses, she can be forced to drink the waters again. Indeed, this can happen several times, provided each time her husband has her drink because of another man.
If a woman's husband had her drink [the bitter water] because of a specific man and then divorced her and she remarried, her second husband can issue a warning to her with regard to the same man. If she enters into privacy with him, her husband can make her drink [the bitter water], because he is her second husband. Even if a hundred men married this woman one after the other, they can all have her drink [the bitter water] because of this same man.
[The following laws apply if] a woman was warned by her husband and then entered into privacy [with the man in question] after the warning, thus causing her to be required to drink [the bitter water]. If [even] one witness comes and states that she engaged in sexual relations with the man regarding whom she was warned in his presence, the woman is forbidden to her husband forever. She may not drink [the bitter water],19Even if she desires to in an attempt to prove her innocence. and must be divorced without receiving [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah. This applies even if the witness who testifies concerning her adultery is also one of the witnesses who testifies that she entered into privacy with [the man regarding whom she was warned].20If, however, the other witness who saw the man and the woman enter into privacy says that they did not engage in relations, the woman does not forfeit the money due her by virtue of her ketubah (Beit Shmuel 178:12).[This ruling is derived from Numbers 5:13]: "There is no witness against her."21Implied is that even if there is one witness, she is not to be tested by the bitter water. Generally, the Torah requires two witnesses for all matters involving marital law (Sotah 31b). In this case, an exception was made because the fact that a warning was issued and disobeyed is an indication of immodesty.
Even a woman, a servant, a maid-servant or someone disqualified from testifying because of [the transgression of] a Rabbinic prohibition, and even a relative,22All the individuals mentioned are normally not accepted as witnesses. Nevertheless, an exception is made in this instance, as the Rambam explains. The testimony of witnesses who have violated prohibitions of Scriptural origin is not accepted, because we suspect that they will lie. may testify with regard to a woman suspected of infidelity, saying that she committed adultery. This causes her to be forbidden to her husband forever, to be prevented from drinking [the bitter water] and to be divorced without receiving [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah.[The rationale is] that since the Torah accepts the testimony of one witness with regard to [the woman's] adultery [we see that the formal laws of testimony do not apply]. Therefore, anyone's testimony is accepted with regard to this matter.Even the five women who we assume hate each other23As stated in Hilchot Gerushin 12:16, these women are the woman's mother-in-law, her mother-in-law's daughter, her husband's other wife, her yevamah and her husband's daughter from another marriage. can offer testimony regarding each other,24The Rambam's wording refers to the following concept. Generally, because of the bad feelings that characterize the relationship between these pairs, testimony is also disqualified in the reverse of the above situations. For example, if the husband of the daughter of a woman's husband is missing, the woman may not testify about the matter, although she has no natural reason to hate the other woman. saying that they committed adultery [in these circumstances]. Their testimony is accepted with regard to causing her to be forbidden to her husband and not [to compel her] to drink [the bitter water]. It is not a sufficient basis to cause her to forfeit [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah. Instead, she collects [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah and leaves [his household].25The testimony of these women is accepted because through it, the woman is granted the money due her by virtue of her ketubah. We assume that these women would desire to discredit her entirely and cause her to forfeit this money. Since without their testimony, the woman is forbidden to her husband until she drinks the bitter water and forfeits the money due her by virtue of her ketubah, their testimony abets her position rather than harms it. (Indeed, note the gloss of Rabbi Akiva Eiger, who questions why the testimony of these women is accepted at all.)
If one acceptable witness comes and says that the woman committed adultery, she is not required to drink [the bitter water], as we stated. If another witness comes and contradicts his testimony, saying: "She did not commit adultery," the statements [of the second witness] are disregarded.26In most instances, when the statements of one witness are countered by the statements of another, the two are considered to be of equal weight, and thus the statements of the first witness are no longer considered.[The rationale is] with regard to a sotah, [the testimony of] one witness is considered equivalent to [that of] two [witnesses in ordinary matters]. Thus, the testimony of the second witness cannot nullify the testimony of the first witness, which is considered to be equivalent to [that of] two witnesses.27This principle applies not only with regard to a sotah, but with regard to all instances in which one witness's testimony is considered equivalent to that of two witnesses (Sotah 31b) - e.g., testimony regarding the death of a woman's husband (Hilchot Gerushin 12:18).
If, however, both come at the same time28I.e., one testified directly after the other. and one says: "She committed adultery," and the other says, "She did not commit adultery,"29Since the testimony of the first witness was never established, it is not given more weight than it would ordinarily. Since the woman's fidelity is in doubt, she is required to drink the bitter water. The principles in this and the following halachot are paralleled in Hilchot Gerushin, Chapter 12. or one says: "She committed adultery," and two others say, "She did not commit adultery,"30In this instance, the testimony of the pair of witnesses balances the testimony of the witness who said that she committed adultery, even if that witness's testimony had already been established in court. she must drink [the bitter water].
When one acceptable witness and many women or unacceptable witnesses come at the same time, and the acceptable witness says that the woman committed adultery, while the women or the unacceptable witnesses say that she did not, she is required to drink [the bitter water].31Compare to Hilchot Rotzeach USh'mirat HaNefesh 9:16. [The rationale is that the testimony of] one acceptable witness and [that of] many unacceptable witnesses are considered to be of equal weight.
If all the witnesses are unacceptable, the ruling depends on the majority.What is implied? If two women say she committed adultery, and three say she did not, she must drink [the bitter water]. If three say she did not commit adultery and four say that she did, she is not required to drink. If an equal number of women espouse each position, she must drink [the waters].32Since the woman's fidelity remains in doubt, she must drink the waters to clarify the situation.
In all instances that we said that a sotah should not drink [the waters] because of testimony that she committed adultery, she is forbidden to her husband forever and must be divorced without receiving [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah, for she was forbidden because [she received a] warning and entered into privacy [with the said man]. And she is prevented from drinking the waters, [which could] cause her [to be] permitted, because of the presence of the witness, as we explained.33See Halachah 14.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
When a woman is given a warning and enters into privacy [with the man in question], she is not compelled to drink the bitter water. Instead, if she says, "I committed adultery," she is not required to drink the waters, but she must be divorced without receiving [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah, and she is forbidden to her husband forever.Similarly, if she says: "I did not commit adultery, but I will not drink the waters,"1Although she claims innocence, she is still afraid of drinking the waters. See Chapter 4, Halachah 3. she is not forced to drink, but she must be divorced without receiving [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah.And if her husband says, "I don't want to have her drink," or if he engaged in relations with her after she entered into privacy [with the man in question], she should not drink [the bitter water].2As stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 2, from the time the woman enters into privacy with the man in question, her husband is forbidden to enter into relations with her. As such, if they engaged in relations, the bitter water will not show her guilt, as indicated by Halachah 8. Instead, she is given [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah3Because it is her husband's actions that prevent her from drinking the waters that can establish her innocence, he must bear the financial responsibility. and departs; she is forbidden to him forever.
The following women are not fit to drink [the bitter water] even though they desire to drink, and their husbands desire to have them drink. Instead, once witnesses testify that [such women] entered into privacy with the men in question after witnesses testify that a warning was granted, they are forbidden to their husbands and must be divorced without receiving [the money due them by virtue of] their ketubah. There are fifteen such women; they are:a woman who was consecrated but the marriage bond was not consummated,a yevamah who is waiting for her husband's brother to perform yibbum,4The commentaries raise a question based on Hilchot Yibbum 2:20, which states that when a yevamah engages in relations with another man, she does not become forbidden to her yavam. They explain that an exception is made when the yavam issues a warning and forbids the yevamah to enter into privacy with a particular man.a minor married to a man past the age of majority,a woman who is past majority who is married to a minor,the wife of an androgynous,5A person who has both male and female sexual organs.the wife of a blind man,the wife of a man who limps,who cannot speak, who is deaf, or whose hand has been cut off, andsimilarly, a woman who limps, who cannot speak, who is blind, whose hand has been cut off, or who is deaf.All the above are not fit to drink [the bitter water].6If they violate a warning given by their husbands and enter into privacy with the man in question, they are to be divorced without receiving the money due them by virtue of their ketubah.
What are the sources that exclude these women from drinking [the bitter water]? [Numbers 5:29] states: "When a woman deviates [from the paths of modesty] while married to her husband....""While married" excludes a woman who was consecrated, but the marriage bond was not consummated, and a yevamah who is waiting for her husband's brother to perform yibbum. "Her husband" excludes a minor married to a man past the age of majority.7When a girl below majority was not consecrated by her father, the consecration is not effective by Scriptural law. Even when she was consecrated by her father, she is not required to drink the bitter water unless she is warned after attaining majority. (See Halachah 4.) Note the Kessef Mishneh, who quotes a different source from that mentioned by the Rambam. "While married to her husband" excludes a woman who is past majority who is married to a minor8A woman consecrated by a minor is not considered consecrated at all (Hilchot Ishut 4:7)., and the wife of an androgynous, for he is not a man.9As stated in Hilchot Ishut 4;11, when an androgynous consecrates a woman, the status of the kiddushin is in doubt.[Numbers 5:13 states:] "And it was hidden from the eyes of her husband" - This excludes the wife of a blind man.10Who could not see, even when the two did not act in secrecy (Sotah 27a). "And the priest shall have the woman stand" [Ibid.:18] - This excludes a woman who limps. "And he shall place on her palm" [Ibid.] - This excludes a woman who does not have a hand or whose hand is crooked or shrunk to the extent that she cannot hold [the meal offering]. This applies even if only one hand is in this condition, for the verse uses the plural form of the word palm, [indicating that both hands must be fit to perform this act]."And the woman shall say" [Ibid.:22] - This excludes a woman who cannot speak. "And he shall say to the woman" [Ibid.:19] - This excludes a woman who cannot hear. And [the passage continues, Ibid.:20:] "When a woman deviates [from the path of modesty] while married to her husband..." - This indicates that she must be of sound body, possessing all the physical characteristics [mentioned previously] that he possesses, and he [must possess the characteristics mentioned that she possesses].This teaches that any physical factor that prevents her from drinking [the bitter water] prevents her husband from compelling her to drink. And any factor that prevents her husband from compelling her to drink prevents her from drinking.
When a minor is married off by her father, she is forbidden to her husband if she willingly commits adultery. Therefore, she is given a warning, not to compel her to drink [the bitter water], but so that she will be denied [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah, as stated above.11The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam's ruling, maintaining that a minor is never forbidden to her husband because of adultery unless he is a priest, basing his opinion on Yevamot 33b, which states: "The seduction of a minor is always considered equivalent to rape."In his gloss on Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 3:2, the Maggid Mishneh substantiates the Rambam's ruling, citing Ketubot 9a, which states that the statements of a husband who claims that his wife is not a virgin are accepted and cause her to be forbidden to him. According to the Rambam, this applies even when the girl is a minor. (See also the Kessef Mishneh.)With regard to a minor who is entitled to nullify her marriage through mi'un,12I.e., an orphan who was married off by someone other than her father. See Hilchot Ishut 4:8; Hilchot Gerushin 11:1. by contrast, no warning is given, for she has no desire to be forbidden to her husband. [Even if she commits adultery,] she is not forbidden to her husband, even if he is a priest.13Since according to Scriptural law, her marriage is not binding, relations with another man are not considered adulterous. Even a priest who may not marry a woman who engaged in a forbidden sexual relationship may remain married to this girl.
When a man issues a warning to a woman he consecrated or to his yevamah, and she entered into privacy [with the man in question] after [the husband] consummated their marriage, she must drink [the bitter water] like any other [married] woman.14Although these women are not required to drink if they enter into privacy with the man in question before the marriage is consummated, after its consummation the warning issued beforehand is effective.When a husband issued a warning to his wife and she enters into privacy [with the man in question] before her husband engaged in sexual relations with her,15I.e., the husband and the wife entered into a chuppah, effecting the stage of nisu'in. They did not, however, consummate the marriage. Before they did so, the wife entered into privacy with the man in question. she does not drink [the bitter water]. Instead, she is divorced without receiving [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah and is forbidden to her husband forever. [This is alluded to by Numbers 5:20, which] states: "And another man has lain with you other than your husband," [implied is] that relations with the husband preceded relations with the man in question.
[The following women are judged] like all other married women - who are permitted to remain married - and are required to drink [the bitter water if they violated a husband's warning]: a convert, a freed maidservant, the wife of a convert, the wife of a freed servant, a woman who is of illegitimate parenthood, the wife of a man of illegitimate parenthood and the wife of an impotent man - whether he became impotent naturally or through an act of man.16The words "who are permitted to remain married" are fundamental to the understanding of this halachah. All these women and/or their husbands mentioned are bound by different laws with regard to marriage from the Jewish people as a whole. Nevertheless, if they are permitted to their husbands or to their wives, the laws of a sotah apply.As such, an illegitimate man or woman must be married either to another illegitimate man or woman or to a convert, as stated in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah, Chapter 15. With regard to an impotent man, the laws regarding whom he is permitted to marry and whom he is forbidden to marry are stated in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah, Chapter 16.
A pregnant woman and a nursing woman are required to drink [the bitter water] in their present state.17We do not wait for her to give birth or for her to wean her child. Note Tosafot, Sotah 26a, who differ and maintain that we should wait for a pregnant woman to give birth before requiring her to drink. When a woman is required to drink [the bitter water], but her husband dies before she has the opportunity of doing so, she should neither drink18For her husband is no longer alive. nor collect [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah.19For she did not prove her innocence by drinking the waters.
Whenever a man has engaged in forbidden relations from the time he attained majority onward, the curse-bearing waters20The term is taken from Numbers 5:18. do not test [the fidelity of] his wife. Even if he engaged in relations with the woman he consecrated while she was living in her father's house - which is a Rabbinic prohibition21See Hilchot Ishut 10:1. The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam regarding this point, maintaining that Sotah 24b appears to indicate that the wife of a man who had relations with the woman he consecrated while she was living in her father's house must still drink the bitter water. The Kessef Mishneh justifies the Rambam's ruling. - the waters do not test [the fidelity of] his wife. [This is derived from Numbers 5:31, which] states: "The man will then be free of sin, and the woman will bear [the burden of] her sin." [Implied is that] when the man is "free of sin," "the woman will bear [the burden of] her sin."
Therefore, if a man's wife is forbidden to him because of a negative commandment, a positive commandment, or even [a Rabbinic prohibition - e.g.,] a sh'niyah, and he warned her and she entered into privacy [with the man in question], she should not drink [the bitter water].22For by engaging in relations with his wife, the man has transgressed a prohibition, and hence the waters will not test his wife's fidelity. Instead, she should be divorced and should not receive [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah. She becomes forbidden to him for this reason as well.When a man transgresses and marries a woman who was made pregnant by another man, or who is nursing a child she bore by another man, she may [be compelled to] drink [the bitter water], since there is no transgression involved [in their relationship].23It is forbidden to marry such women, as stated in Hilchot Gerushin 11:25. Nevertheless, since the prohibition is not inherent to the couple's relationship - as reflected in the fact that after the 24 months of nursing have passed, the couple may marry - but rather a result of the child's presence, it is not considered a sinful relationship. See the gloss of the Kessef Mishneh and the Mishneh LaMelech.The Rambam's wording here implies that the faithfulness of the sotah should be tested immediately. From his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sotah 4:3), it would appear that the couple are compelled to separate until the 24 months pass. Afterwards, if the husband desires to resume his relationship with his wife, she must drink the bitter water.
When a man is not married to a woman capable of bearing children, nor has he [fathered] children in [a previous marriage], and he marries a barren woman, a woman past the age of child-bearing or an aylonit, [the marriage is not considered desirable in the eyes of the Sages].24Every Jew is commanded to be fruitful and multiply. For this reason, as the Rambam states in Hilchot Ishut 15:7, the husband is obligated to divorce this woman. Therefore, she is not given the opportunity to demonstrate her fidelity by drinking the bitter water. [Therefore,] such a woman may not drink [the bitter water], nor does she receive [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah [if the husband divorces her for violating his warning].If, however, [the husband] has [already fathered] children, or he has another wife capable of bearing children, he may compel [his other wife] to drink [the bitter water] even if she is past the age of child-bearing, barren or an aylonit, and thus incapable of giving birth.25Significantly, the Rambam's ruling here reflects a change of mind from his ruling in his Commentary on the Mishnah (Sotah 4:3) where he rules that such women may not drink the bitter water even when the husband has fathered children already. For the Torah's statement, [Numbers 5:28] "And she will be cleared and she will conceive" applies solely to a woman capable of giving birth,26It is not, however, an exclusion preventing a woman who is not capable of bearing children from drinking the waters. See Sotah 25b. See the gloss of the Ra'avad. [implying] that if previously she would give birth in pain, she will give birth comfortably; if previously she would give birth to daughters, she will give birth to sons.
If [a husband] had [another] wife [capable of bearing children] or had children, but they died between the time when the warning was issued and the time the woman entered into privacy [with the man in question], the woman was already fit to drink the bitter water, and she should be compelled to drink.If [a husband] did not have children or [another] wife capable of bearing children aside from an aylonit or another woman [incapable of bearing children], and his divorcee bore him a son27I.e., he was married to an aylonit and a woman capable of bearing children. The woman capable of bearing children became pregnant, he divorced her and then issued a warning to the aylonit. between the time when the warning was issued and the time the woman entered into privacy [with the man in question], the aylonit was already excluded from drinking [and that ruling remains].
Whenever a warning was administered to a woman and she entered into privacy [with the man in question], but did not drink the bitter water - whether her husband did not desire to compel her to drink, she did not want to drink, a witness testified that she committed adultery, she was one of the women who are unfit to drink [the bitter water],28See Halachah 2. or the warning was administered by the court [and not by her husband]29See Chapter 1, Halachot 10-11. - since she becomes forbidden to her husband, she also becomes forbidden to the man with whom she entered into privacy just as she is forbidden to her husband.30I.e., if her husband divorces her, it is forbidden for her to marry the man concerning whom she was warned.If this other man transgresses and marries her, he is compelled to divorce her even if she has borne him many children. Based on the Oral Tradition our Sages taught: Just as she is forbidden to her husband, she is forbidden to the man with whom she engaged in relations.31This principle applies not only with regard to a sotah, but with regard to every adulterous relationship. The passage in the Torah mentions the word v'nitma'ah ("and she became defiled") twice, once in reference to the husband and once in reference to the adulterer. See Hilchot Gerushin 5:4-5. See also Halachah 15.
[Different rules apply when,] however, a woman was not warned and witnesses came and testified that she entered into privacy with a man, and then they discovered unsavory behavior: e.g., they entered [her room] after [the man in question did] and saw her tying her belt, they found wet spittle on the bed's canopy,32This indicates that someone was lying face up on the bed and could not turn to either side (Rashi, Yevamot 24a). See Hilchot Ishut 24:15 and notes, where these concepts are discussed in greater detail. or the like. If her husband divorces her because of this unsavory behavior,33He is not, however, compelled to divorce her. The matter is left to his initiative (Kessef Mishneh; Beit Shmuel 11:6). she should not marry the man with whom she is suspected [of having relations]; instead, she should be forbidden to him.If she transgresses and marries [this man] and children are born to them, she need not be divorced.34Since there is no conclusive evidence that she is forbidden, she is allowed to remain married, so that the reputation of her children will not be sullied. If she has not borne [this man] children, he must divorce her.
When does the above apply? When [the inhabitants of] a city gossiped about the man and woman in question for a day and a half or more, saying: "So and so committed adultery with so and so," and this rumor did not cease. [Moreover, this applies] only when neither [the man nor the woman in question] have enemies who spread this rumor.35The Ramah (Even HaEzer 11:1) differs and maintains that if there are both a rumor that continues spreading throughout the city, and witnesses who saw unsavory behavior, the husband is required to divorce his wife if she has not borne him children [Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 11:2)].If, however, the rumor was not widespread throughout the city, or the rumor ceased for reasons other than fear [different rules apply]. If she marries [the man in question], she need not be divorced although she has not borne him any children. Even when one witness comes and testifies that she committed adultery with him, she need not be divorced.36If, however, two witnesses testify to adultery, the adulterer is compelled to divorce her, as stated above.
If a woman who was divorced by her [first] husband for unsavory behavior marries another man and is later divorced by him, she is forbidden to marry the man because of whom she was divorced by her first husband. If, however, she marries him, he is not compelled to divorce her even though she has not borne him children.37Although the couple are forbidden to marry, since there were no witnesses to the act of adultery, and the second marriage interposed, a more lenient ruling is given than that stated in Halachah 13.
Whenever two witnesses testify that, while she was married to another man, a woman committed adultery38The Chelkat Mechokek 11:10 emphasizes that this law applies only when the woman willingly committed adultery. If she was raped while married to her first husband, she does not become forbidden to him. Moreover, she also does not become forbidden to the rapist, and if she is widowed or divorced, she is permitted to marry him. with the man to whom she is presently married, she must be divorced by her present husband even though she has borne him several children.In all the instances where we said that a woman must be divorced, she is not entitled to receive [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah.39For it is her immodest conduct that caused her to be forbidden.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
What is the process through which a sotah is compelled to drink the bitter water? First the husband comes to the court in his city and tells them: "I warned my wife [not to enter into privacy] with so and so, and she entered into privacy with him. These are the witnesses who will confirm my statements. She claims not to have committed adultery. I desire to have her drink the bitter water to verify this matter."The court then listens to the testimony of the witnesses. [If it is substantial,] they provide [the husband] with two sages1For they know that she is forbidden to him and will warn him against engaging in relations with her (Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Sotah 1:3). to watch over him, lest he engage in relations with her before she drinks the bitter water, for she is prohibited to him until that time,2And if he engages in relations with her, the bitter water will not test her fidelity, as reflected by Chapter 2, Halachah 5. and he is sent to Jerusalem. For a sotah is compelled to drink [the bitter water] only by the Supreme Court of 70 elders,3This refers to the Sanhedrin, the highest Jewish court. The obligation for a case involving a sotah to be tried before this body is derived from an association between this case and a rebellious elder (Sotah 7b). who [hold session] in the Temple.4More precisely, the Sanhedrin would hold session in the Chamber of Hewn Stone, which was located half within the Temple Courtyard and half outside the Temple Courtyard.Note the responsum of the Chida, Chayim Sha'al, (Volume II, section 4), which states that the High Court can try a sotah even when it does not hold session in the Temple Courtyard. Rather, according to his interpretation, the words "in the Temple" refer to the process of testing a sotah. Every aspect of the test is carried out in the Temple.
When they arrive in Jerusalem, the High Court has her sit in its presence while her husband is not present,5Some commentaries explain that if her husband is present, she will be motivated to uphold her previous statements and will not admit her guilt. Others explain that if her husband is present, she might be embarrassed to admit that she committed adultery. and they alarm her, frighten her and bring upon her great dread so that she will not [desire to] drink [the bitter water.6And thus cause God's name to be blotted out.They tell her: "My daughter, [we know] that wine has a powerful influence, frivolity has a powerful influence, immaturity has a powerful influence, bad neighbors have a powerful influence.7I.e., a candid admission of guilt is nothing to be ashamed of, because we understand the extenuating circumstances. Do not cause [God's] great name, which is written in holiness, to be blotted out in the water."And they tell her: "There are many who preceded you and were swept away [from the world].8I.e., you are not the first woman to have committed adultery. Many women have done so and they have been swept away from the world in punishment via the medium of the bitter water. Why follow in the same pattern? Admit your guilt. Men of greater and more honorable stature have been overcome by their natural inclination and have faltered." [To emphasize this,] they tell her the story of Judah and Tamar, his daughter-in-law,9Genesis, Chapter 38. The Bible relates how Tamar dressed up like a prostitute and seduced Judah. The story is significant not only because it shows how a person can be lured into sexual misconduct, but it also relates how Judah was not embarrassed to admit his guilt publicly. the simple meaning of the episode concerning Reuben and [Bilhah], his father's concubine,10Genesis 35:22 states that Reuben had relations with Bilhah, his father's concubine. According to Shabbat 55b, the verse is not meant to be interpreted literally, for actually he did not commit a sin of this nature. Nevertheless, to encourage the woman to admit her guilt, she is told the simple meaning of the narrative. and the story of Amnon and his sister,11II Samuel, Chapter 13, describes how Amnon, King David's firstborn, raped his half-sister Tamar. to make it easier for her to admit [her guilt].12I.e., hearing the example of these distinguished individuals' conduct will motivate her to admit her own shortcomings.If she says: "I committed adultery," or "I will not drink [the water],"13Although she does not admit her guilt explicitly, this statement is equivalent to an admission of guilt. she is to be divorced without receiving [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah, and the matter is dismissed.
If she persists in he claim of innocence, she is brought to the eastern gate of the Temple Courtyard, which faces the Holy of Holies.14This gate is referred to as the Gate of Nicanor. She should be taken from place to place [in the Temple Courtyard] and made to walk around it so that she will become tired and her spirits will sap [with the intent that perhaps] she will admit [her guilt].
If she persists in her claim, she is brought outside the eastern gate and made to stand there. If she usually dresses in white, she should dress in black. If black garments make her look attractive, she should dress in clothes that do not make her attractive. All silver and gold jewelry should be removed from her.
Many women are gathered [to see] her, for all the women present [on the Temple Mount] are obligated to observe her, [as implied by Ezekiel 23:48]: "So that all women will be taught not to follow their lewdness." Any man who wants to observe her may do so.15The presence of the onlookers serves two purposes: It embarrasses the woman being tested, and it spurs the onlookers themselves to higher moral practice.She stands among [the women] without a cloak or a veil, wearing only her clothes and a cap, as a woman dresses within her home.16See Hilchot Ishut 13:11 and 24:12, which describe these garments.
Neither her servants nor her maidservants are allowed to be there, because [when] she recognizes them, her spirits will be fortified.17Seeing familiar faces will encourage her to persist in her position, rather than admit her guilt.
Afterwards, the priest administers an oath to her in a language that she understands.18Although the process that follows is a ritual, it is necessary that the woman understand the oath and her response to it, for the oath to be binding upon her. Therefore, there is no necessity for it to be administered in Biblical Hebrew; any language that the woman understands is sufficient. He tells her in her language that [she is being subjected to this test] because of the warning that her husband gave her, [which she violated by] entering into privacy [with the man in question].He repeats for her in a language that she understands [the Biblical passage, Numbers 5:19-23]: "If a man has not lain with you, and you have not committed adultery, so as to be defiled to your husband, you shall be unharmed by this curse-bearing bitter water. But if you have committed adultery and you have become defiled, because a man other than your husband has lain with you... God will make you into a curse and into an oath among your people, causing your thigh to rupture and your belly to swell. This curse-bearing water will enter your body, causing your belly to swell and your thigh to rupture." [This serves as an oath]. She responds: "Amen, Amen,"19As the above passage concludes. Repeating Amen after an oath is equivalent to taking that oath oneself (Hilchot Sh'vuot 2:1). in a language she understands.He tells her that her belly will be affected first and afterwards, her thigh so as not to tarnish the reputation of the water.20Since the passage mentions both orders, the priest mentions that the order of retribution will be from the belly to the thigh, lest people say that the waters did not bring about the curse in the manner in which the Torah said they would (Sotah 9b).
Afterwards, a scroll of parchment from a kosher animal, like the parchment used for a Torah scroll,21See Hilchot Tefillin 1:10. See Chapter 4, Halachah 8, which mentions several factors in which an equivalence is made between the scroll used for a sotah and a Torah scroll. As stated in that halachah, the equivalence is based on Numbers 5:23, which refers to the scroll used for a sotah as a sefer, the same term used for a Torah scroll.The Jerusalem Talmud (Sotah 2:4) states that the parchment must be made from the hide of a kosher animal, lest the woman refuse to drink and the passage be required to be entombed. It would not be fitting for God's name to remain on parchment from a non-kosher animal. is brought. On it is written, word for word, letter for letter,22Originally, the passage would be copied from a Torah scroll. In the Second Temple era, Queen Heleni had fashioned a golden tablet with the words of this passage written on it (Yoma 37a). the entire passage that [the priest] administered to the woman as an oath.[The passage must be] written in Biblical Hebrew, with ink that does not contain kankantum,23In his Commentary on the Mishnah, Gittin 2:3, the Rambam defines this term with an Arabic word explained by Rav Kapach as referring to a green powder that when mixed with gallnut juice produces a black substance. Ink made with this substance cannot be rubbed out. See Chapter 4, Halachah 9. for the sake of the woman, as a get must be written with that intent.24See Hilchot Gerushin, Chapter 3. God's name should be written in the proper manner.25The Zohar, Volume III, page 124b, interprets this as meaning that chronologically the first letter of God's name must be written first; the second, second; etc. Perhaps this is the Rambam's intent as well.Alternatively, it is possible to explain that God's name is written with the letters י-ה-ו-ה, and not in another form. The words "Amen, Amen" should not be written.
Afterwards, an earthenware vessel26Sotah 9a states: She prepared wine for the adulterer in attractive goblets. As a consequence, the priest shall make her drink bitter water from a clay cup. that was never used for any task previously27Sotah 15b establishes an equivalence between the vessel that contains the water used for a sotah and the vessel that contains the water used to purify a person afflicted with tzara'at, a Biblical ailment somewhat like leprosy. And that vessel cannot have been used for any task previously (Hilchot Tum'at Tzara'at 11:1). and that does not look aged is brought. If one takes an aged vessel and returns it to a kiln so that it looks new, it is acceptable.A half a log28172.8 cubic centimeters according to Shiurei Torah, 298.5 cubic centimeters according to Chazon Ish. of water from the basin [from which the priests wash]29Numbers 5:17 states that "holy water must be taken." The Sifre interprets this as referring to "water that has been consecrated in a utensil, the water of the basin." is placed in it. There was a measuring vessel of that size in the Temple. Afterwards, the water is taken into the Sanctuary.
[In the Sanctuary,] there was a place, one cubit by one cubit, at the right as one entered, [covered by] a marble tile with a ring affixed to it.30The ring enables the tile to be lifted easily. [The priest] would lift the tile and take "from the dust... on the earth of the Tabernacle" [Numbers 5:17] and place it in the water, so that it could be seen [floating] on the water.Into this mixture is also placed a bitter substance, wormwood or the like, as implied by [ibid.:18], which refers to "the bitter water."He [then] dissolves [the writing of] the scroll in [the water], doing this for the sake of [the woman being tested]. He must dissolve [the writing] carefully, so that no trace of it remains on the scroll.
Afterwards,31Note the Kessef Mishneh, who questions the Rambam's source for the fact that the writing of the scroll would be dissolved before the woman's clothes were torn open. one of the priests [serving] in the Temple courtyard would approach her.32The Tosefta (Sotah 1:5) states that the priest would be chosen by a lottery. Chasdei David explains that a priest would be selected in this manner so that no one would think that one desired the task in order to view the woman's nakedness. He would take hold of her clothes from the front and rip them until he revealed her heart. Similarly, he would reveal her hair,33This is cited by the Rabbis as proof that a Jewish woman's hair must always be covered. Otherwise, she is considered immodest. See Hilchot Ishut 24:11-12. undoing the plaits of her hair, to make her look unattractive.He would then bring an Egyptian rope34I.e., a rope made of palm bast. to allude to the conduct of the Egyptians35As implied by Leviticus 18:3, the Egyptians were known for their immodest behavior. Thus, the imagery evoked by the rope also served to chastise the woman for her conduct (Jerusalem Talmud, Sotah 1:6). - which she emulated - and tie it above her breasts so that her clothes would not fall, for they were torn, and she be left standing naked. If an Egyptian [rope] is not available, he should bring any rope.
Afterwards, he would bring an isaron36An isaron is considered the size of 43.2 eggs. According to modern measure, the size of an egg is considered to be 57.6 cubic centimeters according to Shiurei Torah and 99.5 cubic centimeters according to the Chazon Ish. of barley37Sotah 15b notes that, in contrast to wheat, which is used as food for humans, barley is employed primarily as animal fodder. Since the woman acted like an animal, betraying her fidelity to her husband, the sacrifice she brings consists of grains used for beasts. meal purchased by the husband and place it in an Egyptian basket.38I.e., a wicker basket made of palm leaves. The allusion to Egypt is intended to convey the same symbolism as above.The rope and the basket should be purchased from the funds remaining in the Temple treasury.39See Hilchot Shekalim 2:4, which explains that this term refers to money collected from the half-shekalim donated by the entire Jewish people, which remains after the purchase of communal sacrifices. As stated in Hilchot Shekalim 4:8, these funds were used for various communal purposes. [The basket with the meal] should be placed in her hand to weary her.40This is intended to motivate her to admit her guilt. Until the meal offering is sacrificed, she may admit her guilt and thus free herself of the obligation to drink the bitter water and suffer the severe penalty involved (Sotah 14a).
Afterwards, the meal offering is taken from the basket and placed in a sacred vessel.41As befits a sacrificial offering. Neither oil nor frankincense should be placed upon it.42Note the commentary of Rashi on Numbers 5:15, which explains the rationale for these prohibitions. Adding frankincense and oil adorns the sacrifices, making them more attractive. More specifically, there are allegorical connotations to the above. Oil is a metaphor for light, and this woman acted in darkness. Frankincense is used as an allusion to the Matriarchs, who were the epitome of modesty, and this woman departed from their ways. If [these substances] are placed upon it, [the priest] should be lashed for [placing] both the oil and the frankincense individually,43I.e., each one is considered as a separate negative commandment. See Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 104-105) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvot 366-367). as [implied by Numbers 5:15]: "He shall not pour oil on it, nor place frankincense on it."
Throughout the time the priest uncovers the woman's hair and places the isaron [of meal] on her hand, the priest should hold the vessel containing the water in his hand and show it to the woman,44To frighten her and to encourage her to confess (Bemidbar Rabbah 9:33). as [implied by Numbers 5:18]: "The bitter, curse-bearing waters shall be in the hand of the priest."
Afterwards, he gives her [the water] to drink. After she drinks, he takes the sacred vessel containing the meal offering and places it on her hand. The priest then places his hand below her [hand] and waves the offering45The meal offering had to be waved by both the woman bringing it and the priest. The Jerusalem Talmud (Sotah 3:1) states that "the evil inclination does not operate at that time," and hence there is no danger that the physical contact will stir the priest to sexual desire. in [the portion of the Temple courtyard to] the east [of the altar], as is done with all other meal offerings.46See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 9:6-7.He should bring it to [each of the four compass directions] and up and down.47Sukkah 37b interprets this as acknowledgement of God's dominion over the entire universe. Menachot 62a explains that this is a measure to check undesirable winds. Afterwards, he brings the meal offering to the horn at the southwestern corner of the altar, as is done with other meal offerings brought by private individuals.48See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 13:12, which describes the offering of meal offerings brought by private individuals.He should take a fistful of the meal and offer it on the fire. The remainder [of the meal] should be eaten by the priests.49See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 12:9, which describes the consumption of the meal offerings.
If the woman is guiltless, she may depart; she is permitted to her husband. If she committed adultery, her face will immediately turn pale yellow, her eyes will bulge forth, and her veins will surface.Everyone immediately shouts, "Take her out [of the Women's Courtyard]! Take her out!" so that she does not have a menstrual emission [there],50Sotah 20b states that the terror of death might provoke menstruation. for women who are in a menstrual state make the Women's Courtyard impure.51The Rambam's wording, based on that of the Mishnah (Sotah 3:3), requires some clarification. The intent appears to be, not that the Women's Courtyard becomes impure, but that the woman becomes impure, and in that state she is forbidden to be in the Women's Courtyard. See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 3:3.They take her out of the Women's Courtyard, where she was standing. Her belly swells first and then her thigh ruptures and she dies.
When she dies, the adulterer because of whom she was compelled to drink will also die, wherever he is located. The same phenomena, the swelling of the belly and the rupture of the thigh, will also occur to him.All the above applies provided her husband never engaged in forbidden sexual relations in his life. If, however, her husband ever engaged in forbidden relations, the [bitter] waters do not check [the fidelity of] his wife.
If [a husband] transgressed and compelled his wife to drink [the bitter water], although he previously entered into a forbidden relationship, he adds further transgression to his sin. For he causes God's name [which is not] pronounced to be blotted out on the waters for no reason and defames the reputation of the waters [used to test] a sotah. For his wife will tell others that she committed adultery and that the [bitter] waters did not harm her, without knowing that it was her husband's deeds that prevented the waters from checking her [fidelity].
Therefore, when the number of people who openly committed adultery increased in the Second Temple era, the Sanhedrin52Sotah 47a states that this took place in the time of Rabban Yochanan ben Zakkai, shortly before the destruction of the Second Temple. nullified the use of the bitter water, relying on the verse in the [prophetic] tradition, [Hoshea 4:14]: "I will not punish your daughters when they commit harlotry."
When a sotah has merit because of Torah study53Sotah 21a says that this refers to the woman's efforts in assisting her husband and her sons in their studies. - although she herself is not obligated to study the Torah54See Hilchot Talmud Torah 1:1,13. - her merit prolongs [her life] and she does not die immediately. Instead, she continues to be weakened,55Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Sotah 3:3). Others render the term as "she deteriorates." and suffers severe illness until she dies after a year, two years or three years, according to her merit. [When she dies,] she dies with a swollen belly and ruptured limbs.
When a sotah drinks the bitter water and does not die immediately, she is permitted to her husband, even if he is a priest.56Who is forbidden to engage in relations with a woman who took part in forbidden sexual relations. Even if illness begins to set in and her limbs become afflicted, as long as her belly does not swell or her thigh rupture, she is permitted.57The Mishneh LaMelech (in the gloss on Halachah 24) explains that in this halachah, the Rambam's intent is that one might think that the fact that she becomes afflicted by sickness indicates that she was raped - i.e., the bitter water had an effect, but because she did not willfully engage in the transgression, she did not die. To negate this hypothesis, the Rambam states that even a priest is allowed to continue married life with such a woman.When, however, her belly begins to expand and her thigh begins to rupture, she is forbidden.58For this is a sign of adulterous relationships.
When a sotah who was innocent drinks [the bitter water], she becomes stronger and her face glows. If she was afflicted by sickness [that prevented her from conceiving],59The bracketed additions are based on the commentary of the Meiri. it will disappear; she will conceive and give birth to a male. If she previously had difficulty giving birth, she will give birth speedily. If she would give birth to girls, she will give birth to males.
If witnesses who say that she committed adultery come after she drinks the bitter water, she should be divorced without receiving [the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah, and she is forbidden to her husband.This applies even when none [of the negative consequences] mentioned above occur to her. For the [bitter] waters will check only [the fidelity of a woman] concerning whom there are no witnesses who will testify to her sexual misconduct.60When there are witnesses, there is no need for the miraculous activity of the water. For ultimately the witnesses will testify in court and cause the woman to be forbidden to her husband (Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Sotah 1:1). Moreover, it is possible that her husband is not guiltless, and it is because of him that the waters did not check his wife.61See Halachah 17.If, however, one witness comes and testifies that a woman committed adultery, she is not forbidden [to] her husband and can remain married to him. For she drank [the bitter water].62I.e., had the witness testified before she drank the bitter water, she would not have been allowed to drink them, as stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 14. Nevertheless, once she drank the waters, the testimony of one witness is not sufficient to cause her to be considered guilty.
When a woman was compelled to engage in adulterous relationships or did so unintentionally,63See Hilchot Ishut 24:20. or lay naked in the embrace of the man regarding whom she was warned, but did not engage in vaginal relations,64See the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Yevamot 6:1) for a more specific definition of the Hebrew term derech evarim. [her fidelity] will not be checked by the [bitter] waters, as [implied by the following verses]. [Numbers 5:13 states:] "And she was not taken against her will," thus excluding a woman who was raped. [Ibid.:27 states:] "And she was unfaithful to her husband," excluding a woman who acted unintentionally." And [ibid.:13 states]: "And a man laid with her, [imparting] his seed," excluding an embrace without intercourse.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
On the fifteenth of Adar, the court attends to the needs of the community at large.1See Hilchot Arachin 8:1, Hilchot Kilayim 2:15, and Hilchot Rotzeach 8:6, where reference is made to various services performed by the court at that time. [At that time,] they check which women should be compelled to drink, so that they can compel them to drink,2The commentaries note that the court cannot actually compel a woman to drink the bitter water. All it can do is issue a warning so that she will become forbidden to her husband, as stated in Chapter 1, Halachot 10:11. and to which should be given a warning so that they are divorced without receiving [the money due them by virtue of] their ketubah.A sotah can, [however,] be compelled to drink at any time of the year.3I.e., although the court pays attention to this matter in Adar, it is possible for a sotah to be compelled to drink at any time of the year. See Hilchot Sh'vitat Yom Tov 7:11, which states that it was customary to have a sotah drink the bitter water during Chol HaMo'ed when there will be many people visiting the Temple.
A sotah is compelled to drink the bitter water only during the daytime.4See Halachah 7. The entire day is fit for this purpose.Two sotot should not be compelled to drink at the same time, as implied by [the verse]:5The commentaries note that there is no verse in the Torah that uses the wording cited by the Rambam. There are, however, several from which it could be implied that only one sotah should be compelled to drink at one time. "And the priest shall have her stand."
When a sotah says, "I will not drink [the bitter water]," because she is overcome by fear, she has the option of retracting and saying that she will drink the waters. If, however, she says that she will not drink when she is healthy and not affected by fear, she may not change her mind and say that she will drink [the bitter water].6Her original refusal to drink the waters is interpreted as an admission of guilt that cannot be retracted.
If she says, "I will not drink," before the scroll [with God's name] written for her is blotted out, the scroll is entombed. It is not fit to be used for another sotah.7For every scroll must be written for the sake of the woman who drinks its waters, as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 8. See also Halachah 11 of this chapter. Her meal offering is scattered on the ash heap.8The "ash heap" was a place in the Temple Courtyard, east of the altar, where sacrifices that became disqualified were burned. Rashi (Sotah 20a) states that this offering also had to be burned.If she says, "I will not drink [the water]," after the scroll has been blotted out, we take hold of her and force her to drink the water.
We intimidate her so that she will drink, and we tell her: "My daughter. If you are certain that you are innocent, stand firm. Drink [the water] without fear. For the water can be compared to the powder of a drug placed on the skin. If there is a wound, it will penetrate and descend. If there is no wound, it will have no effect."
If she says, "I committed adultery," although the scroll has been blotted out, the waters should be poured out,9She is not compelled to drink them. At the outset, their purpose was to determine whether or not she was innocent. Through her admission, that determination was made (Rashi, Sotah 20a). for they are not of a sacred nature,10Although God's name was blotted out in it, this does not endow it with holiness. and her meal offering is scattered on the ash heap.
When the scroll for a sotah is written at night, it is unacceptable, as [implied by Numbers 5:22-25], which states: "[The priest] shall write,... he shall give to drink,... and he shall offer," [establishing an equivalence between these different activities]. Just as the sacrifice must be offered during the daytime,11As must all sacrifices. so too the writing of the scroll and making the woman drink must be performed during the day.12Significantly, in his Commentary on the Mishnah (Sotah 2:4), the Rambam quotes a different proof-text as the source for this concept.If [the scroll] is written in non-sequential order, it is not acceptable, [as implied by Numbers 5:23, which] states: "[The priest shall write] these [curses]" - i.e., in sequence.If he wrote the scroll before she accepted the oath, it is unacceptable, [as implied by ibid.:21-23, which] state: "And he will administer the oath... and he will write."13I.e., in that order.
If he wrote it as a letter,14The Kessef Mishneh quotes Rashi (Sotah 17b) as stating that this means without having the lines of the scroll ruled (sirtut) before it is written. it is unacceptable, for the verse states "on a scroll." If he writes it on two sheets [of parchment], it is unacceptable, for the verse states "on a scroll" - i.e., one and not two or three.It may not be written on paper or on untreated parchment,15For a more detailed definition of the term the Rambam uses, see Hilchot Tefillin 1:6. but rather on a parchment scroll, [as implied by] the use of the term: "on a scroll." If it is written on paper or on untreated parchment, it is unacceptable.
If the scroll is written by an Israelite,16I.e., a person other than a priest. or a priest who is a minor, it is unacceptable, for [Numbers 5:23] states: "And the priest shall write...."He should not write it with kumos, kankantum,17In his Commentary on the Mishnah, Gittin 2:3, the Rambam mentions Arabic terms for these words. Rav Kapach explains the meaning as follows: Kumos and kankantum are two similar substances, yellow and green powders, which when mixed with gallnut juice produce a black substance. Others translate kumos as gum or resin and kankantum as vitriol or atramentum sutorum. or with any other substance that leaves a permanent mark. Instead, he should use ink18See Hilchot Tefillin 1:4, which describes how ink was made. without kankantum, for the verse states: "And he will write and he will blot out." [Implied is that one must] write [with a substance] that can be blotted out. If one writes with a substance that leaves a permanent impression, it is unacceptable.
If [when the writing of the scroll is being blotted out] any trace of the writing remains, it is unacceptable until it is thoroughly blotted out.If [the priest] writes one letter and then blots it out, and then writes another letter and blots it out, completing [the writing of the entire scroll in this manner], it is unacceptable. It must be written out completely [at one time to be acceptable].
If the scroll was not written for the sake of the woman, or it was not blotted out for the sake of the woman, it is unacceptable.If [a priest] wrote two scrolls, [one for each of] two sotot and blotted them out into the same cup or blotted them out into two cups, but [afterwards] mixed them together in one cup and gave the two women to drink from it, it is unacceptable. Neither of the women drank [only the water in which] her scroll [was blotted out].If [two scrolls] were blotted out in two different cups, mixed together and then separated again into two different cups, the women should not be given the water to drink. If, however, they were forced to drink [this water], it is acceptable.19Sotah 18a states that the decision in this instance resolves around the question of bererah - i.e., the idea that retroactively it can be considered that an activity was performed originally with an intent that becomes clarified only afterwards.There is an unresolved debate among the Sages if the principle of bererah is accepted with regard to questions of Scriptural law, and therefore, the more stringent approach is taken. In this instance, this implies that God's name should not be blotted out a second time.Note the Minchat Chinuch, who asks how this questionable drinking of the water is considered sufficient to release a woman from the prohibition she incurred after violating her husband's warning and entering into privacy with the man in question.Note also that Halachah 2 states that two sotot should not be forced to drink at the same time.If [the water prepared for a sotah]20This is not a continuation of the previous subject, but rather deals with an ordinary instance in which water was prepared for one sotah. is spilled, [the priest] should write another scroll and bring other water.21We do not say that God's name should not be blotted out a second time because of one woman. If [the water] spills, but some remains, the woman should not be forced to drink it.22For at the outset, the woman must drink all the water in which her scroll was blotted out. If she drinks [the remaining water], it is acceptable.23Sotah (ibid.) also leaves this as an unresolved question. Since there is no binding decision that it is acceptable, the Rambam rules as above, that one may not blot out God's name in such a situation.
If the water for a sotah is kept overnight, it becomes unacceptable.24Since it came from the basin - and was measured in a sacred vessel - it must be used on the day on which it was taken. See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashin, ch. 3. If one placed the dust25Mentioned in Chapter 3, Halachah 10. [in the cup] before the water, it is unacceptable.If there is no dust in the Sanctuary, one should bring dust from outside the Sanctuary, leave it in the Sanctuary and then take some of it and place it on the water. He should not use ash;26Although in some halachic contexts (see Hilchot Shechitah 14:13) ash is considered to be dust, in this instance, the phrase "from the dust that is on the earth of the Tabernacle" implies a similarity between dust and earth (Sotah 16a). he may, however, use rotten produce,27Our translation follows Sotah 16b. The Meiri states that this refers to rotten wood. for it is considered to be dust.
[The priest] should not dig with a hatchet [under the floor of] the Sanctuary to remove dust, as [implied by Numbers 5:17]: "the dust that is on the earth of the Sanctuary."28I.e., that it existed there previously (Sotah 15b). If one did dig and remove dust, it is acceptable.
If [the priest] first brought her meal offering and then had her drink the water, it is acceptable.29Although this deviates from the order stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 15, Sotah 19a states that this order is also acceptable, after the fact.If her meal offering became impure before it was placed in a sacred vessel, it should be redeemed like any other meal offering that became impure before being consecrated in a sacred vessel,30See Hilchot Issurei Mizbe'ach 6:5. In such an instance, although the meal has been designated for use as a sacrifice, since it has not been placed in a sacred vessel, its actual substance has not become consecrated. and she should bring another meal offering.31With the money received from redeeming the first one. If the meal offering became impure after being consecrated in a sacred vessel, it should be burned.32Since it was placed in a sacred vessel, it became consecrated. Consequently, once it became impure it must be burned, as stated in Hilchot Pesulei Hamukdashim 19:1.Similarly, if a woman admitted to committing adultery before the fistful of meal was taken from the meal offering,33The meal offering must be burned, because the offering of a sotah is acceptable only when it is being used to test the fidelity of a woman. Once she has admitted her guilt, that is unnecessary. Nor may it be offered as a voluntary offering, for a sotah's offering is of barley meal, and voluntary offerings may be brought from wheat only, but not from barley. she refused to drink [the water],34See Halachah 4. her husband was unwilling to have her drink [the water], witnesses came [and testified that she] committed adultery,35In this instance as well, the question of the woman's fidelity has been clarified. [her husband] died, or she died,36As stated above, the purpose of the offering is to test the woman's fidelity and thus allow her to resume relations with her husband. If that objective is no longer relevant, as in the latter two instances mentioned in the halachah, the offering is not brought. the entire meal offering should be burned. If any of these things happened after the fistful of meal was offered, the remainder of the meal offering should not be eaten.37Many authorities maintain that a printer's error has crept into the text and the text should read "the remainder is eaten." Nevertheless, the majority favor the version stated above.
If [the sotah's] husband was a priest, the remainder of her meal offering should not be eaten, because he has a portion in it.38As stated in Leviticus 6:15, a meal offering brought by a priest should not be eaten, but instead burned on the altar. It should not, however, be burned on the altar in its entirety, as are other meal offerings brought by male priests, because the woman also has a portion in it.39The meal offerings brought by priests are offered on the altar entirely, without a fistful of meal being separated. For a meal offering brought by a non-priest to be acceptable, by contrast, the fistful of meal must be separated and burned as a distinct entity. See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 12:12. Therefore, the fistful [of meal] is offered as a distinct entity, and the remainder is scattered on the ash heap.If the witnesses are discovered to have lied,40The term used by the Rambam (and his source, Sotah 6b) refers to hazamah, when the testimony of the witnesses is disqualified because others testify that they and the witnesses were together in another place at the time the witnesses say the act took place. Seemingly, the same law would apply if the witnesses' testimony was disqualified on other grounds. the meal offering is considered to be a non-sacred entity.41It need not be redeemed. The rationale is that it was consecrated based on a false premise - that the woman had entered into privacy with the man in question. Whenever an entity is consecrated on a false premise, the consecration is not binding.
If a man warns his wife against [entering into privacy with] several men, and she entered into privacy with each of the men in question, she is required to bring one meal offering that includes them all when her husband requires her to drink [the bitter water].[This is implied by Numbers 5:15, which uses a plural term when referring to] "the meal offering [brought because of] the warnings" - i.e., one offering can requite several warnings.42The commentaries have questioned why the Rambam quotes the derivation of this concept from the Midrash (Sifre Zuta), instead of citing the Talmud (Keritot 9b), which cites a different proof-text.
[Based on the principle of] gilgul [sh'vuah],43Gilgul Sh'vuah implies that when taking an oath on one claim, a person may be required to include a variety of related claims in that oath. See Hilchot To'en V'Nit'an 1:12. the husband may have the woman include in her oath that she did not commit adultery with the man concerning whom she was given a warning or with any other man, that she did not commit adultery during the time between her consecration and the consummation of the marriage, nor after the consummation.He may not, however, have her include that she did not engage in relations [with another man] before she was consecrated or between the time she was divorced [and remarried], if she was in fact divorced and remarried. The rationale is that even if she engaged in relations [with other men at that time], she would not be forbidden [to her husband]. And whenever she is not forbidden to him, he cannot make any stipulations regarding her conduct.For this reason, if a man married his yevamah, he cannot compel her to include in her oath that she did not engage in relations with others while she was waiting for him to perform yibbum.44For even if she did engage in relations with another man at that time, she would not be forbidden to her yavam (Hilchot Yibbum 2:20). He may, however, compel her to include in her oath that she did not commit adultery when married to his brother. For if she committed adultery when married to his brother, she is forbidden to him.Similarly, if [the husband] divorced his wife and remarried her, he may compel her to include in her oath that she did not commit adultery when married to him originally. Similarly, he may have her include in her oath that she will not commit adultery in the future or that she will not commit adultery if he divorces her and remarries her. [In such an instance,] if she commits adultery in the future, the waters will check her [fidelity], and [if she is guilty,] the physical phenomena [described above] will be visited upon her.All the above is implied by [the woman's response to the oath, Numbers 5:22]: "Amen, Amen." [This can be interpreted as meaning] Amen with regard to this man; Amen with regard to others. Amen with regard to the time when I was married; Amen with regard to the time when I was consecrated. Amen with regard to the past; Amen with regard to the future.
It is a mitzvah for Israelites to issue warnings to their wives,45Sotah 3a records a difference of opinion regarding this matter between Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Yishmael. Rabbi Akiva states, as the Rambam rules here, that a man is obligated to issue a warning, while Rabbi Yishmael maintains that the matter is optional. Other commentaries note that the first mishnah in the tractate of Sotah appears to indicate that it is forbidden for a husband to issue a warning. (This concept is derived as follows: The mishnah begins: "When a man issued a warning...." From this wording, our Sages infer that the mishnah is speaking after the fact. At the outset, a warning should not be given.)Significantly, Rabbi Akiva was noted for his love of his fellow man, as he stated: "'Love your fellow man as yourself,'... this is a great general principle within the Torah." This implies - and so is evident from the continuation of the Rambam's words - that the warning is not an instrument of strife, but rather is intended to prompt love and closeness. [as implied by Numbers 5:14] "And he shall warn his wife." [Our Sages said that] whoever issues a warning to his wife has become possessed by a spirit of purity.A warning should not be issued in a spirit of levity, nor in the midst of conversation, nor with frivolity, nor in the midst of an argument, nor with the purpose of instilling fear.If, however, a man transgressed and issued a warning to his wife under such circumstances, the warning is binding.
It is not proper for a man to rush and at the outset issue a warning in the presence of witnesses.46For this is likely to cause shame and embarrassment and prevent healthy communication between husband and wife. If, however, a warning that was delivered gently and in private is not effective, then the husband should warn his wife in the presence of witnesses. Instead, he should [first speak to his wife] privately and gently, in a spirit of purity and caution, in order to guide her to the proper path and remove obstacles.Whenever a person is not careful regarding [the conduct of] his wife, his sons and the members of his household, warning them,47I.e., giving them gentle warnings, as mentioned in the first clause of this halachah. and scrutinizing their ways at all times so that he knows that they are perfect without sin or transgression, he is himself a sinner, as [implied by Job 5:24]: "And you shall know that your tent is at peace and scrutinize your dwelling, and you shall not sin."48One may infer that failing to invest oneself in such scrutiny is sinful.
