=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
משקין בית השלחין – a weary land and thirsty for water. The Aramaic translation of “tired and weary,” is thirstiness and tired.
משקין במועד – for it is a business that cannot be postponed without irretrievable loss is permissible on the Festival (i.e., the Intermediate Days of the Festival). For a field which needs irrigation from the time when one begins to water it, if one does not water it frequently, it immediately becomes lost, as is taught at the end of Mishnah [3 – of this chapter, seeds which have not been watered before the Festival should not be watered on the Festival, for they will not suffer loss, but if they “drank” before the Festival, he should water them during the Festival. And specifically, a bright, shade-less field (i.e., vegetable or grain field) of grain which needs irrigation, we water them on the Festival, but fields which are moist of a tree, it is not permitted on the Festival, for they don’t suffer loss. And in the Seventh Year, it is permitted to water whether it is a field that needs irrigation or whether it is a field sufficiently watered by rain [and not needing irrigation], and because of the Festival alone, our Mishnah took this.
שיצא בתחילה – that goes out now from the start, and we don’t suspect for since it is new, lest its banks overflow and people come to repair them on the Festival and there is great trouble/labor.
שלא יצא בתחלה – when it is old.
אבל לא ממי גשמים – a decree because of water from a swipe well.קילון are water of a deep pit/cistern and in it is collected rain water, and from it there is greater trouble to draw it out.
עוגיות – trenches that they would make in the roots of olives and in the roots of vines in order that they would fill up with water.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
מי שהפך – It is the manner of people that they turn their olives in the vat or pit where olives are packed until they form a viscid mass where they are piled up and when one wants to bring them into the building containing the tank [and all the implements] for pressing olives, and if he does not bring them into the press to grind them after he has turned them over, they become lost.
וארעו אבל – who is prohibited to do work.
או שהטעתו פועלים – that did not come to work and the Festival arrived.
טוען – upon the olives a beam of the olive press for the first time and sweep them out, ion order that a bit of the oil flows a bit so that they will not loose it, but not during the second time because they will not lose any more, and from here we learn that things that are permitted during the Festival (i.e., on the Intermediate Days of the Festival/Hol HaMoed), it is forbidden for a mourner to do them with his hand during his days of mourning, for since it (i.e., the Mishnah) teaches “an occasion for mourning befell him,” and on account of the mourning he delays until the Festival, he applies the pressing beam [for the first time] for the olives during the Festival, but during the days of his mourning, he would be prohibited to press with his hand even the first beat, but others press for him.
זולף – he pours the olives on the back of the olive press, and every matter that he pours is called זילוף/sprinkling.
וגומר – pressing them (olives) and wine/grape pressing in the olive press.
וגף – close the lip of the barrels. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yosi.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
אלו מגלחין. הבא ממדינת הים – During the Festival, for he did not have time to shave prior to the Festival. And this is a case of one who departed for business or to a thing that was necessary, if he didn’t depart other than to a mere walk/doing errands, it is prohibited [to shave].
והיוצא מבית האסורין – and even if he was imprisoned at the hand of an Israelite who would let him shave, because he was in pain.
ומנודה – who released him from his excommunication during the Festival, but prior to the Festival, he was not able to shave since someone who was excommunicated is prohibited to cut his hair.
ומי שנדר – [vowed] not to shave, and he could not find a Sage that would release him from his vow prior to the Festival. Alternatively, he did not find an opening for regret other than during the Festival.
והנזיר – who completed his being a Nazirite vow during the Festival.
ה"ג והמצורע העולה מטומאתו לטהרתו – if his seventh day occurs during the Festival, he is permitted to take a haircut, as it is written (Leviticus 14:9): “On the seventh day he shall shave off all his hair [– of head, beard, and eye-brows…].” And the shaving of the bald spot [on the head or in the beard] is not considered, for it is not other than a small thing when he shaves around the bald spot. And there reason that it is prohibited to shave on the Festival outside of those who are taught in the Mishnah is in order that they should not intend to shave during the Festival when they are idle from work and the First Day of the Festival comes when they are disgraced, that is is the reason also that the they prohibited laundering on the Festival.
