=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
הלוקח עובר חמורו של נכרי – when it is in the womb of its mother and it is a firstling (i.e., male or female). And for this reason, it (i.e., the Mishnah) took [the words], “the fetus of his donkey,” for there is no holy unclean animal with regard to its first-born other than the firstborn of a donkey alone, but since the words are few of the firstborn of the donkey, he decided and permitted it. But all of these other chapters speak of a first born of a pure animal.
אף על פי שאינו רשאי – to sell to a heathen a large animal, because of work on Shabbat that would be performed by it (see Tractate Avodah Zarah, Chapter 1, Mishnah 6 – where the Halakha is established that it is forbidden to sell a heathen a large animal – originally owned by an Israelite).
והמשתתף לו – even if the portion of the heathen is substantial and known, as for example, the [yet unborn] firstborn’s arm or leg, or that of its mother. Any time that if they would sever from it that limb, the animal remains with a blemish – this is the partnership of the heathen and it is exempt [from redemption].
והמקבל ממנו – that the female donkey belongs to the heathen that an Israelite receives and takes care of it in order that they will divide its offspring, but the body of the animal belongs to the heathen.
פטור מן הבכורה – that fetus that he (i.e., the Israelite) purchased from the heathen or that he sold to the heathen is not holy, for since the heathen has a portion in it or in its mother, as it states (Numbers 3:13): “I consecrated every first-born in Israel, [man and beast, to Myself, to be Mine],” but not of the heathen.
אם פטרו את של ישראל במדבר – the Levites did not exempt the animals of the Israel in the wilderness, that the first-born of the cattle, [the] cattle [of the Levites] replaced [and redeemed] it, as it is written (Numbers 3: 45): “and the cattle of the Levites in place of their cattle,” but rather, this is how it should be read: The Levities released/served as ransom the holiness of the first born of the Israelites in the wilderness, as it is written (Numbers 3:45): “Take the Levites in place of all the first-born among the Israelite people, [and the cattle of the Levites in place of their cattle; and the Levites shall be Mine, the LORD’s],” but if the sanctity of the Levites released/ransomed the sanctity of the Israelites, it is a law that they would release/ransom themselves. But after we learned that the sanctity of the first-born was released/ransomed from the livestock of the Levities, we learned that the released/ransomed of their donkeys are exempt from [the rules governing] the first-born, as it is written (Numbers 18:15): “but you shall have the first-born of man redeemed, and you shall also have the firstling of impure animals redeemed,” all that the first-born of man has, the first-born of impure animals have, and all that the first-born of man doesn’t have, is not found in the first-born of impure animals. But from the first born of pure animals, the Priests and Levites were not exempt, as we learn ahead.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
הלוקח עובר פרתו. אע"פ שאינו רשאין – to sell him a large animal (see Tractate Bekhorot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1 and Tractate Avodah Zarah, Chapter 1, Mishnah 6).

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
הלוקח. עז בת שנתה – [a goat] a year old that produced an offspring within its first year.
ודאי- that offspring belongs to the Kohen, for prior to this it had not produced offspring.
ספק - it would be sent to pasture until a blemish befalls it and the owners would consume it in its blemishes (see Tractate Bekhorot, Chapter 2, Mishnayot 6-7). But if it is a doubtful firstling donkey, he would separate a lamb and it would be his.
טנוף (discharge from the womb indicating abortion) – bubbles/pustules of blood that the animal discharges. And they show them to a wise shepherd and recognizes them if they are because of the pregnancy that it miscarried and perhaps it discharged within the first year which is a doubtful offspring and it is exempt from the laws of firstlings, therefore, even a goat that is one year old is doubtful.
שליא – a kind of covering over the fetus that the fetus is lying in it (i.e., placenta).
שפיר – above from the placenta is a membrane/skin that has in it congealed blood and it is called the sac of a fetus. And my teachers/Rabbis explained, it is a piece of flesh that has on it the form of a human. But there are those who say that is called a sac of a fetus, because it is made like a tube.
ששפעה חרדת דם (that discharged a clod of blood) – that discharged a portion of blood (see also Tractate Hullin, Chapter 4, Mishnah 7 regarding to the placenta).
הרי זו תקבר – to inform that it was exempted from the [law of] the firstling, for a person who sees that they bury it knows that what comes after it (i.e., born afterwards) is not holy for the [law of] the firstling. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiva and [according to] Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
עד כמה. להטפל בבכור – to be engaged with its (i.e., the firstling’s) raising prior to giving it to the Kohen.
בדקה עד שלשים יום ובגסה עד חמשים – In the Gemara (Tractate Bekhorot 26b), we derive it, from what is written (Exodus 22:28): “You shall not put off the skimming of the first yield of your vats. You shall give Me the first-born among your sons,” and adjacent to it (Exodus 22:29), “You shall do the same with your cattle and your flocks,” and they show an incongruity/objection, “your bull” which is mentioned earlier in Scripture to “the skimming of the first yield of your vats” which is early, and “your flocks” which is later than the “the first-born among your sons” but “the skimming of the first yield of your vats” which are the first-fruits are offered at fifty days, that the grain is ripened on Passover and we don’t bring the first-fruits until Atzeret/Shavuot, as it is written (Exodus 23:16): “and the Feast of the Harvest, of the first fruits of your work, [of what you sow in the field], and just as you do for the “skimming of the first yield of your vats, which you do not bring until the end of fifty days, so you do for your bulls that you do not bring it until fifty days, and in the manner that you act regarding the first-born of your sons, as it is written concerning it (Numbers 18:16): “Take as their redemption price from the age of one month up,” similarly you should do for your flock that you should not bring it until thirty days.
בדקה שלשה חדשים – because its care-taking (i.e., of small cattle) is more troublesome (see Talmud Bekhorot 26b and Talmud Bava Metzia 69a), for its teeth are thin and it is not able to eat grass. And if it won’t be with its mother it will die. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
לא יתנו לו – for since its care-taking is cast upon an Israelite for fifty days, and the Kohen said to him “Within this time [period], give it to me and I will pasture/tend it.” It is similar to someone who rents it that he saves him from the trouble on the condition that he (i.e., the owner) will give it to him and not to another Kohen, and this is similar to a Kohen who helps/assists in the granary/threshing floor to thresh and to winnow in order that they will give him the heave-offerings/Terumot, and it is taught [in a Baraitha] that Kohanim and Levites who assist in the granary/threshing floor, they don’t give them have-offerings and tithes. But if [the animal] had a blemish and he said to him: “Give it to me and I will consume it, for since it was pointed out to him, e was not like the Kohen who assists in the granary.
בין תמים בין בעל מחם – whether at the time of the Temple or whether at the present time, every year it is his, he is permitted to uphold it. And a firstling with a blemish, we derive that it is given to a Kohen, and he consumes it with its blemish for since it is written (Numbers 18:18): “But their meat shall be yours,” is the plural language, whether it is pure firstling or whether it is a firstling with a blemish.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
כל פסולי המוקדשין (all consecrated animals that are disqualified) – Holy Things that had a blemish befall them, if we sell them at a high price, it is a benefit of discretion to Temple property. Therefore, they are sold in the bazaar/shop, that is the marketplace where they sell in the rest of the unconsecrated meat and there it is sold at a high price.
ונשקלין בליטרא – to be sold in the manner that the butchers sell unconsecrated meat, for since they are able to sell it at a high price, they add to its worth when they redeem them from Temple property.
חוץ מן הבכור ומן המעשר – that if they are sold at a high price their benefit is to owners. The firstling, its benefit is to the Kohen, for the meat of a firstling is consumed by everyone, but the Kohen sells it and takes its monetary worth, for the Kohen is called the owners of the firstling. But because of the benefit of the regular individual/commoner, we do not treat lightly Holy Things to treat them with the custom of unconsecrated things to sell them in a bazaar/shop, but rather in his house, and even though people will not cut the meat so much. But they are not measured with a litra but rather by estimation, and if he loses [a bit], it does not matter.
ושוקלין מנה כנגד מנה – that if he has a piece of unconsecrated meat that is weighted in the litra, he can weigh the meat of a firstling against it. But tithes we don’t weigh a Maneh against a Maneh, for at it appears as if he sells it, and the tithe of cattle it is prohibited to sell it at all because it is not written regarding it (see Numbers 18:17): “[But the firstlings of cattle, sheep, or goats] may not be redeemed,” in the manner that it is written regarding a firstling but rather (Leviticus 27:33): “[If he does make substitution for it, then it and its substitute shall both be holy:] it cannot be redeemed/לא יגאל,” and we taught in Sifrei [B’midbar] that regarding a firstling where it states “it cannot be ransomed,” tithes, where it states concerning it, “it shall not be redeemed”, is no sold, neither living nor slaughtered, and not pure and not with a blemish.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
על אלו מומין. נפגמה – there is no notch without loss, but a slit [in the ear] implies also without loss, and the measurement of a notch is when one makes a notch deep a=enough for the nail to halt on passing over the edge (see Talmud Bekhorot 37b).
חסחוס (if the ear is split from the cartilage inwards) – the lobe of the ear which is called TANRUS in the foreign language.
אבל לא מן העור- for the distinguished skin is healthy and it is not a blemish and this skin is the soft ear-lap.
נקיבה מלא כרשינה – that there is in the cavity of the incision a measurement of the berry of vetch, whether the incision is long or whether it is round, if there is in all of them to combine in its cavity like the measurement of a berry of a vetch, this is a blemish.
שתהא נפרכת – it becomes crumbles and broken pieces when they handle it. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi. But these blemishes that are considered in our Mishnah, when they slaughter upon them the firstling, we derive from Biblical verses, as it is written (Deuteronomy 15:21): “But if it has a defect,” is a generalization, “lameness or blindness” is a detail, “any serious defect” – it returned to provide a generalization, you do not judge other than what is similar to the detail. Just as the detail explains open blemishes that do not return [to their healthy state], so also, all open blemishes and they don’t return [to their healthy state] (and the Halakha is according to the first Tanna/teacher).

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
מומין אלו – that invalidate the firstling, invalidate the Kohen in his Divine service, whether they are permanent or transient all the while that they are upon him.
הכילון (one whose head has the shape of a basket/wedge shaped – see Talmud Bekhorot 43b) – that his head is pointed from above and wide below. And it is similar to the covering of a wine jug which is called an אכלה (or אוכלא/basket or אובלא/perforated trough – vessel made of willow trigs) – therefore it is called a כילון.
והלפתן (turnip-shaped) – that his head is similar to a turnip, that it is wide from above and becomes narrower from below.
מקבן (one whose head is mallet-shaped – see Tractate Bekhorot 43b) – that his head is similar to a mallet, in that the forehead protrudes outward and similarly, his neck from behind him, but his temples are even with his head, and he is similar to a hammer – that is a mallet that goes forth from before him and from behind him.
ושראשו שקוט (whose head is abruptly bent, angular; forehead receding abruptly – see Talmud Bekhorot 43b) – This is our reading. There are those who explain that his head protrudes greatly, and extends outward towards his face. But there are those who explain that it does not protrude at all in front of him, like the matter that it leaps from behind him, that his head does not protrude from behind him at all, and that he is lacking, that it is similar to one that a piece of him is severed from behind him. But the language of שקיפס, is that of a lump of brittle stone that was thrown at it (an idolatrous statue) [see Sanhedrin 64a), that a piece from him was taken. And in the Tosefta it counts also a sunken neck/צואר שקוע, that his head is placed between his shoulders and it is similar to one who has no neck.
ובעלי החטוטרת ר' יהודה מכשיר – that when he has a bone in the hump/hunch, everyone does not dispute that it is a blemish. But they dispute, when it doesn’t have a bone. Rabbi Yehuda holds that it is a mere piece of flesh, but the Rabbis hold, as Scripture States (Leviticus 21:21): “No man among the offspring of Aaron the priest who has a defect [shall be qualified to offer the LORD’s gift],” those who are fit within the seed of Aaron shall serve, but he who is not fit among the seed of Aaron shall not serve. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
יש בכור לנחלה – to take a double portion (see Deuteronomy 21:17).
ואינו כבו לכהן – to give to a Kohen his redemption price of five Selas (see Numbers 18:16).
הבא אחר הנפלים – as for example, that they were twins. One of whom was premature that his months [of fetal development] were not finished for him, and [the other one], whose months [of fetal development] were completed for him, but the premature one whose months [of fetal development] were not finished for him, his head came out alive and he retracted himself, and his [twin] brother preceded him and went out. This latter [of the two] is the first-born for inheritance, for the first one [whose head came out alive] did not cause him to suffer loss, and even though the exodus of the first [fetus] is considered to be a valid birth. And the reason, because it is written (Deuteronomy 21:17): “since he is the first fruit of his vigor,” that [child over whose death] the heart of the father is grieved (see Tractate Niddah 23b) if he (i.e., the child) dies, this excludes the premature [child] whose head came out first, who is not a viable child, [he] is one whom the heart of the father is not grieved for. But in regard to the opening of the womb (i.e., being the first born/first birth), this [latter] child, for the All-Merciful assigned, but the first [child whose head had exited the womb], was the firstborn of the womb.
ובן תשעה מת שיצא ראשו – and went back inside [the womb], and his brother came out [fully first], is the first-born for inheritance. But he is not considered the first, for his father is not grieved for him, but regarding the Kohen [for the redemption of the first-born], he is not the first-born of the womb. Ut if his head came out first alive at the age of nine [months] and afterwards, he was restored [to the womb] and [subsequently] died, he that comes after him also is not the first-born for inheritance.
וכן המפלת בהמה כו' – it is not considered to be exempted from inheritance, for the heart of the father is not grieved for them. But it is the first-born of the womb.
וחכמים אומרים עד שיהא בו מצורת אדם – it is not considered the firstborn after the womb, and the one who comes after him is a first born for a Kohen (i.e., requiring redemption by his parents). And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
סנדל (a flat, fish-shaped abortion -see Tractate Niddah, Chapter 3, Mishnah 4) – a piece of flesh made in the image of a sandal/flat fish, and it lacks the form of limbs, and regularly comes together with the child. But the language of סנדל has explanations/commentaries that are hated and poor.
או שליא – that there is no placenta without a child but that it is softened. But however, it is the opening of the womb.
ושפיר מרוקם (fully-formed fetus)– a piece of flesh that is has the articulated shape of the form of a fetus. And because it is made like an egg-shell, it is called a sack of a fetus.
והיוצא מחותך – that it is severed limb by limb and in this manner it all came out. But if the head is severed, it was not the first of the womb if his brother preceded and came out before the coming out of most of the limbs of the severed one, and it would be also be a first born for the Kohen.
שכבר ילדה - that in regard to inheritance of the father, it is written (Deuteronomy 21:17): “the first fruit of his vigor”, but regarding the Kohen, the All-Merciful depends upon the opening of the womb (see Exodus 13:2 and 12).
עודה שפחה – even if she is still a heathen maid-servant at her first birth and was freed now. Or [if] she was a heathen and converted but when she came into the hand of an Israelite, she gave birth, also [the child] is a first born for inheritance, for he had not [yet] had children.
רבי יוסי הגלילי אומר בכור לנחלה ולכהן – for the sons that are born while she was a heathen do not open the womb. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi HaGelili.
נתגיירה מעוברת – and her husband is with her and she gave birth. Behold that child is a firstborn for a Kohen, for he is the firstborn of the womb for an Israelite, but not for inheritance, for since his conception is not in holiness (because she was not yet a Jewish woman at that time), he is not eligible for inheritance, for he is the seed of an idolater, the All-Merciful declared him free/ownerless, as it is written (Ezekiel 23:20): “[she lusted for concubinage with them, whose members were like those of asses] and whose organs like those of stallions.”
וילדה היא וכהנת – a Jewish woman who had never given birth and daughter of a Kohen who had given birth, and it is not know which of them (i.e., the babies born) was the child of an Israelite woman.
או היא ולויה – for a Levite woman, her son is also exempt from the five Selaim, as we stated in the first chapter (see actually, Tractate Bekhorot, Chapter 2, Mishnah 1).
או היא ואשה שכבר ילדה – and it is not known which is her son (as the babies had been mixed up).
כבור לכהן – and the husband of the woman giving birth for the first time is liable for the five Selaim to the Kohen [for redemption of their first-born son], for the male child has [responsibility] all that he has.
ולא לנחלה – for he did not know the son of whom it is.
וכן מי שלא שהתה כו' – he is the first-born for a Kohen. And he will redeem himself. But not for inheritance for he does not know who conceived him. And even like an heir entitled to a single share he was not conceived, for this one (i.e., one child) supersedes him regarding this (i.e., entitlement to being a first-born) and that one (i.e., a different child) supersedes him regarding that (i.e., level of inheritance). But our Mishnah which teaches that he is not [the first-born] for inheritance purposes, it states regarding who comes after him, for the one who comes after him is not the first born for inheritance, for perhaps there is doubt if he is the son after him (see Talmud Bekhorot 47b).
מלא גנינים ([an abortion consisting of] a bag full of a many-colored substance – see also Tractate Niddah, Chapter 3, Mishnah 3 and Niddah 24b) – many colors. Another explanation – worms. That the fetus is made completely of many small, thin pieces similar to worms.
דגים וחגבים – they are not offspring, for it was not stated about them a creation like a human.
יום ארבעים – from when she became pregnant, it is merely water, and there isn’t an embryo until the day after the fortieth day, for on the fortieth day is the creation of the embryo.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
מעשר בהמה – (Leviticus 27:32): “[All tithes of the herd or flock] of all that passes under the shepherd’s staff, every tenth one – shall be holy,” and they offer up its fat and its blood, but the rest of its flesh is consumed in purity by the owners in Jerusalem according to the law of peace-offerings. But if it has a blemish, they consume it in impurity in every place.
בפני הבית ושלא בפני הבית – but nowadays, it was stated by the Rabbis that they don’t separate the tithe of cattle, because of a snare/stumbling block, for we lack the Temple to offer it and it is necessary to delay until a blemish befalls it and it becomes a snare for shearing and Temple service or perhaps someone will slaughter it without a blemish.
אבל לא במוקדשין - as for example, the lighter Holy Things, for there is one who says that they are the money of the owners, that you might think I would say that it should be tithed. It comes to tell us that [the words] (Leviticus 27:33) “shall both be holy,” the All-Merciful said but not that it was already holy.
בכבשים ובעזים – that is to say, and this practice holds for lambs and goats.
ומתעשרין מזה על זה – for since the All-Merciful extended the scope [with the use of the word] "וצאן"/or the flock (Leviticus 27:33) – as in above , that implies all flock is considered one species regarding tithing.
בחדש – that were born after Rosh Hodesh Elul which is the New Year for the tithing of cattle (see also Tractate Rosh Hashanah, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1).
ובישן – that were born prior to Elul.
ואין מתעשרין מזה על זה – from the new on the old, and from the old on the new, as it is written (Deuteronomy 14:22): "עשר תעשר"/You shall set aside [every year] a tenth part [of the yield of your sowing that is brought in from the field], the Biblical verse speaks of two tithes, one the tithe of cattle/animals, and the other is the tithing of grain/produce. Just as [regarding] the tithing of grain, one does not [tithe] from the new on the old, as it is written, “every year”/"שנה שנה" , which implies, and not from this year on a different year, so also not the tithing of cattle from the new on the old [year].
