=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
ארבעה ראשי שנים הן. למלכים – [Regarding] Israelite kings, we count for them from Nisan, for if King ruled [in the month of] Shevat or Adar, when Nisan arrived, he completed for himself one year and we begin to count the second year. And we derive this from Scripture from Nisan we count this for them, as it is written (I Kings 6:1): “In the four hundred and eightieth year after the Israelites left the land of Egypt, in the month of Ziv – that is, the second month – in the fourth year of his reign over Israel, Solomon [began to build the House of the LORD].” [The Rabbis] make an analogy between Kingdom of Solomon and the Exodus from Egypt. Just as [concerning] the Exodus from Egypt, we count it from Nisan, so too for the Kingdom of Solomon we count it from Nisan. And for the kings of the nations of the world, we count from Tishrei, and that is as it is taught in the Mishnah further along, that “the first of Tishrei is the first day for years, that is for the years of the kings of the world. And we derive from it, that since we are accustomed to count the time of documents by the years of the king from the year that he stood in [rule] because of the peace of the kingdom, for if the king stood in Adar and the scribe wrote for him [a document] in the Nisan of after thirteen months, Nisan of the second year, since that Nisan is the New Year of the Kings, it would be an antedated note and ineligible [for use], because this Nisan would be of the third year. And antedated notes of indebtedness are ineligible [for use], for it is found that he would be seizing sold property unlawfully, that they took the field from the borrower whether from the time of the document until the time of loan, which is not according to the law, for the sale had preceded the loan. Therefore, they fined him to lose also from the time of the loan onwards and he may not collect from mortgaged properties.
ולרגלים – This is how it should be understood: The Festival that it is, which is Passover, is the New Year for Festivals concerning those who make vows, for if three festivals passed upon him from the time that he made a vow and he didn’t fulfill it, he violates the prohibition of being late to fulfill it (see Deuteronomy 23:22,24: “When you make a vow to the LORD your God, do not put off fulfilling it, for the LORD your God will requite it of you, and you will have incurred guilt…You must fulfill what has crossed your lips and perform what you have voluntarily vowed to the LORD your God, having made the promise with your own mouth.” See also Ecclesiastes 5:3: “When you make a vow to God, do not delay fulfilling it. For He has no pleasure in fool; what you vow, fulfill.”). But Rabbi Shimon says that he does not trespass it on delaying [fulfillment of the vow] until three festivals have passed in order, and the Festival of Matzot (i.e., Passover) is first, as they are arranged in Scripture (Deuteronomy 16:16): “[Three times a year –] on the Feast of Unleavened Bread, on the Feast of Weeks, and on the Feast of Booths – [all your males shall appear before the LORD your God in the place that He will choose…]”; and the legal decision is that when only one festival passes, and if he didn’t bring his vow, he transgresses a positive commandment, as it is written (Deuteronomy 12:5-6): “…There you are to go. And there you are to bring your burnt offerings [and other sacrifices, your tithes and contributions…].” The first festival that you come to, you must bring, and when three festivals have passed, you have transgressed on not being late. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon who requires three festivals in their order.
ראש השנה למעשר בהמה – for we do not tithe from those born in this year together with those which were born in its neighbor, as it is written (Deuteronomy 14:22): “You shall set aside [every year] a tenth part [of all the yield of your sowing that is brought from the field].” The Biblical verse speaks of two tithes, one the tithe of grain and the other is the tithe of cattle, and the Biblical verse says: "שנה שנה"/”every year,” and not from one year on its neighbor.
ורבי אלעזר ורבי שמעון אומרים באחד בתשרי – Since they (i.e., the Rabbis) made an analogy between the tithing of cattle and the tithing of grain, just as [concerning] the tithing of grain – its Rosh Hashanah is Tishrei, so, also, the tithing of cattle, its Rosh Hashanah is Tishrei. And the First Tanna holds that since they made an analogy [between] the tithing of cattle to the tithing of grain, as it is written, “You shall set aside [every year] a tenth part [of all he yield of your sowing that is brought from the field],” just as grain is when it is near to completion of its tithing, whose Rosh Hashanah is Tishrei, and it is near to being completed, for all the days of [sunlight], it stands in the granary to dry out, so too the tithing of cattle, which is close to its being completing its being tithed, which is the first Elul, as the cattle give birth in [the month of] Av where their pregnancies being completed, and this we derive from Scripture, as it is written (Psalms 65:14): “The meadows are clothed with flocks, the valleys mantled with grain…” When are the meadows clothed with flocks – that is to say, when they are clothed from the males coming up and becoming pregnant? At the time when the valleys are mantled with grain, that is, in Adar, when the seeds sprout and are well-recognized, and they give birth in Av, for the time of pregnancy of small cattle is five months. Therefore, the New Year of the tithing of cattle is on the first of Elul, near its completion.
לשנים – for the years of the kings of he world, as we have explained above.
ולשמיטין וליובלות – When Tishrei enters, it is forbidden to plow and seed from the Torah.
ולנטיעה – if he planted a tree forty-five days prior to the first of Tishrei, which are two weeks for taking root, for the shoot/young tree takes root in two weeks, and thirty days after taking root is considered a year, for thirty days in a year are considered [to be] a year, which is forty-five days. And when the first of Tishrei arrives, we count it as the second year of the years of fruit of trees of the first three years, and the Tishrei of the next year, we count it as the third year, and after the third ear, when the first of Tishrei arrives of the fourth year, if this plant formed recognizable fruit, they are still prohibited [from being consumed] because of fruit of trees of the first three years/Orlah; and even though Tishrei is the Rosh Hahanah for planting, Tu Bishvat is the New Year for the tree and this has already become a tree. Therefore, its year does not become renewed to leave the status of Orlah/fruit of the first three years until Tu Bishvat. And from then on, if fruit form on it, it has the status of Fourth Year fruit which are to be consumed in Jerusalem. And on Tu Bishvat of the next year, they have left from the status of fourth year fruit when they form from here onwards.
ולירקות – for the tithing of vegetables, for we do not donate for sacred purposes from vegetation that was harvested before Rosh Hashanah on the vegetation that was harvested after Rosh Hashanah.
ראש השנה לאילן – for the matter of tithing of fruits, for we don’t tithe fruits of the tree that formed prior to Shevat on [fruit] that formed after Shevat, for with regard to a tree, we go after the formation of the fruit. Alternatively, we derive from it with regard to the third year of Shemitah/the seven-year cycle in which we observe the Poor Tithe, for those fruits which formed from Rosh Hashanah of third year until Shevat, we judge them like the fruit of the second year that passed and we practice on them First Tithe and Second Tithe, and from Shevat and onward, we practice tho them First Tithe and the Poor Tithe.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
אם אינן מכירין אותו – If the Jewish court does not recognize concerning the witness if he trustworthy or fit/valid.
משלחים – the Jewish court that is in his city.
אחר עמו – another pair of witnesses to testify about him before the Great Jewish Court which sanctifies the [New] Moon.
משקלקלו המינין – that they hired false witnesses to deceive the Sages.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
ראוהו בית דין וכל ישראל – on the night of the thirtieth, for you might think I should say that since the Jewish court and the enter Jewish people saw him, it became revealed that on the thirtieth day, it (i.e., the New Moon) appeared to be sanctified. This tells us that if it got dark and the night of the thirty-first arrived and the Jewish court had not said that it was sanctified, we intercalate the month and establish Rosh to be on the thirty-first day.
נחקרו העדים – this is how it should be understood. Alternatively, only the witnesses were examined but there was insufficient time for them to state that it (i.e., the New Month), was sanctified until the night of the thirty-first arrived, and we intercalate the month. For you might think I should say, that the examination of the witnesses should come at the beginning of the legal proceedings, and [the announcing] of “it is sanctified, it is sanctified” should be like the conclusion of the legal proceedings. For the conclusion of the deliberations should be at night and we should sanctify it at night. This comes to teach us that it is not so, for we do not sanctify the [New] Month at night. But however, if on the night of the thirtieth, they (i.e., the witnesses) saw the moon with the setting of the sun, and there is a delay in the day to state that it is sanctified prior to the appearance of the stars, we sanctify it, for it is not considered nighttime until the appearance of the stars.
יעמדו שמים ויעידו – Our Mishnah is speaking about a case such as where the Jewish court saw it (i.e., the New Moon) at night on the night of the thirtieth, and it is impossible to sanctify the moon at night. Therefore, the next day, two [witnesses] would stand up and testify, for if not for the testimony of these [two], on what would then sanctify? But if the Jewish court saw it (i.e., the New Moon) with sunset at the time when there was a delay to state, “it is sanctified,” they should sanctify through their observation, and that the hearing that they hear from witnesses would not be greater than seeing, for concerning the Sanctification of the Moon, it is not written “testimony/"עדות" , but like this, they saw and sanctified.
יעמדו שנים – on the morrow when they come to state, “it is sanctified.”
ויושיבו מחבריהם אצל היחיד – And even though an individual who is an expert can judge even on his own, the Sanctification of the [New] Moon is not [done] by a [sole] individual., For there is no one recognized by the public as an expert judge (see Talmud Rosh Hashanah 25b) besides Moses our Teacher, and yet the All-Merciful says to him [only after] Aaron is with him, as it is written (Exodus 12:1-2): “The LORD said to Moses and Aaron [in the land of Egypt]: This month shall mark for you [the beginning of months]…..”

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
יום טוב של ר"ה. במקדש היו תוקעים – [They would sound the Shofar in the Temple], for the Sounding of the Shofar is not “work,” but the Rabbis made a decree against this lest someone take it in his hand and remove it four cubits in the public domain [and hence violate the law against carrying in the public domain on Shabbat] but in Temple, this decree was not made, for there is no prohibition against the Rabbinical law of being out of harmony with the celebration of the day in the Temple.
אבל לא במדינה – Not in Jerusalem and not in the country. And Maimonides explains that all of Jerusalem is called מקדש/Temple/Sanctuary, and the rest of the land of Israel is called the country.
בכל מקום שיש בו ב"ד – even if they are not established/fixed other than by chance that they came there and sound the Shofar.
אלא ביבנה – where the Great Sanhedrin was there in its days, and also in every place where the Great Sanhedrin was exiled to, but not in the Jewish courts of twenty-three.
אמרו לו וכו' – there is a difference between [the teachers who state] : “they said to him” and the First Tanna, for the First Tanna holds that every place where there is a Jewish court, and even one by chance; whereas the “they said to him” hold that both Yavneh and any place that has a fixed Jewish court like that in Yavneh [can sound the Shofar], but not a Jewish court by chance. And the Halakha is according to the “they said to him.”
