=== 1 | 1 ===
Happy is the one who has not followed the counsel of the wicked,or taken the path of sinners,or joined the company of the insolent;
rather, this one delights in GOD’s teaching,and studiesastudies Or “recites”; lit. “utters.” that teaching day and night.
Such a one is like a tree planted beside streams of water,which yields its fruit in season,whose foliage never fades,and whatever it produces thrives.bit produces thrives Or “he does prospers.” 
Not so the wicked;rather, they are like chaff that wind blows away.
Therefore the wicked will not survive judgment,nor will sinners, in the assembly of the righteous.
For GOD cherishes the way of the righteous,but the way of the wicked is doomed.

=== 2 | 2 ===
Why do nations assemble,and peoples plotaplot Lit. “utter.” vain things;
kings of the earth take their stand,and regents intrigue togetheragainst the one anointed by GOD?bagainst the one anointed by GOD Lit. “against GOD and against His anointed one.” 
“Let us break the cords of their yoke,shake off their ropes from us!”
The One who is enthroned in heaven laughs;my Sovereign mocks at them.
Then [God] speaks to them in anger,terrifying them with divine rage,
“But I have installed My kingon Zion, My holy mountain!”
Let me tell of the decree: GOD said to me,“You are My son,I have fathered you this day.cYou are My son, / I have fathered you this day I.e., GOD agrees to provide the king with what fathers in the ancient Near East normally provide sons: ongoing protection and aid, in return for accountability. Compare 2 Sam. 7.14 and Ps. 89.27ff. 
Ask it of Me,and I will make the nations your domain;your estate, the limits of the earth.
You can smash them with an iron mace,shatter them like potter’s ware.”
So now, O kings, be prudent;accept discipline, you rulers of the earth!
Serve GOD in awe;tremble with fright,dtremble with fright Meaning of Heb. uncertain; in contrast to others “rejoice with trembling.” 
pay homage in good faith,epay homage in good faith Meaning of Heb. uncertain. lest [God] be angered, and your way be doomedin the mere flash of divine anger.Happy are all who take refuge in [God].

=== 3 | 3 ===
A psalm of David when he fled from his son Absalom.
O ETERNAL One, my foes are so many!Many are those who attack me;
many say of me,“There is no deliverance for him through God.”    Selah.aSelah A liturgical direction of uncertain meaning. 
But You, O ETERNAL One, are a shield about me,my glory, who holds my head high.
I cry aloud to GOD,who answers me from the holy mountain.    Selah. 
I lie down and sleep and wake again,for GOD sustains me.
I have no fear of the myriad forcesarrayed against me on every side.
Rise, O ETERNAL One!Deliver me, O my God!For You slap all my enemies in the face;bface Lit. “cheek.” You break the teeth of the wicked.
Deliverance is GOD’s;Your blessing be upon Your people!    Selah. 

=== 4 | 4 ===
For the leader; with instrumental music.aFor the leader; with instrumental music Meaning of Heb. uncertain. A psalm of David.
Answer me when I call,O God, my vindicator!You freed me from distress;have mercy on me and hear my prayer.
You who side against me,bwho side against me Or “high and mighty ones,” or “people”; force of Heb. uncertain. how long will my glory be mocked,will you love illusions,have recourse to frauds?    Selah. 
Know that GOD keeps the faithful close; GOD hears when I call out.
So tremble, and sin no more;ponder it on your bed, and sigh.csigh In contrast to others “be still.”    Selah. 
Offer sacrifices in righteousnessand trust in GOD.
Many say, “O for good days!”Bestow Your favor on us,dBestow Your favor on us Lit. “Lift up the light of Your countenance upon us”; cf. Num. 6.25–26. O ETERNAL One.
You put joy into my heartwhen their grain and wine show increase.
Safe and sound, I lie down and sleep,for You alone, O ETERNAL One, keep me secure.efor You alone, O ETERNAL ONE, keep me secure Or “for You, O ETERNAL ONE, keep me alone and secure.” 

=== 5 | 5 ===
For the leader; on neḥiloth.aFor the leader; on neḥiloth Meaning of Heb. uncertain. A psalm of David.
Give ear to my speech, O ETERNAL One;consider my utterance.
Heed the sound of my cry,my Sovereign and God,for I pray to You.
Hear my voice, O ETERNAL One, at daybreak;at daybreak I plead before You, and wait.
For You are not a God who desires wickedness;evil cannot abide with You;
the wanton cannot endure in Your sight.You detest all evildoers;
You doom those who speak lies;deceitful murderers GOD abhors.
But I, through Your abundant love, enter Your house;I bow down in awe at Your holy temple.
O ETERNAL One, lead me along Your righteous [path]blead me along Your righteous [path] Or “as You are righteous, lead me.” because of my watchful foes;make Your way straight before me.
For there is no sincerity on their lips;clips Lit. “mouth.” their heart is [filled with] malice;their throat is an open grave;their tongue slippery.
Condemn them, O God;let them fall by their own devices;cast them out for their many crimes,for they defy You.
But let all who take refuge in You rejoice,ever jubilant as You shelter them;and let those who love Your name exult in You.
For You surely bless the righteous, O ETERNAL One,encompassing them with favor like a shield.

=== 6 | 6 ===
For the leader; with instrumental music on the sheminith.aFor the leader; with instrumental music on the sheminith Meaning of Heb. uncertain. A psalm of David.
O ETERNAL One, do not punish me in anger,do not chastise me in fury.
Have mercy on me, O ETERNAL One, for I languish;heal me, O ETERNAL One, for my bones shake with terror.
My whole being is stricken with terror,while You, ETERNAL One—O, how long!
O ETERNAL One, turn! Rescue me!Deliver me as befits Your faithfulness.
For there is no praise of You among the dead;in Sheol, who can acclaim You?
I am weary with groaning;every night I drench my bed,I melt my couch in tears.
My eyes are wasted by vexation,worn out because of all my foes.
Away from me, all you evildoers,for GOD heeds the sound of my weeping.
GOD heeds my plea, GOD accepts my prayer.
All my enemies will be frustrated and stricken with terror;they will turn back in an instant, frustrated.

=== 7 | 7 ===
Shiggaion of David,aShiggaion of David Meaning of Heb. uncertain. which he sang to GOD, concerning Cush, a Benjaminite.
O my ETERNAL God, in You I seek refuge;deliver me from all my pursuers and save me,
lest, like a lion, they tear me apart,rending in pieces, and no one save me.
O my ETERNAL God, if I have done such things,if my hands bear the guilt of wrongdoing,
if I have dealt evil to my ally—I who rescued my foe without rewardbI who rescued my foe without reward Meaning of Heb. uncertain; in contrast to others “or stripped my foe clean.”—
then let the enemy pursue and overtake me;let my life be trampled to the ground,and my body dwell in the dust.    Selah. 
Rise, O ETERNAL One, in Your anger;assert Yourself against the fury of my foes;cagainst the fury of my foes Or “in Your fury against my foes.” bestir Yourself in my behalf;You have ordained judgment.
dMeaning of verse uncertain. Let the assembly of peoples gather about You,with You enthroned above, on high.
GOD judges the peoples;vindicate me, O ETERNAL One,for the righteousness and blamelessness that are mine.
Let the evil of the wicked come to an end,but establish the righteous;the One who probes the mind and conscienceeconscience Lit. “kidneys.” is God the Righteous.
I look to God to shield me;fI look to God to shield me Cf. Ibn Ezra and Kimhi; lit. “My Shield is upon God.” the deliverer of the upright.
God vindicates the righteous;God pronounces doomgpronounces doom In contrast to others “has indignation.” each day.
If someone [wicked] does not turn back, but whets his sword,bends his bow and aims it,
then against himself he readies deadly weapons,and makes his arrows sharp.hMeaning of these verses uncertain. Or, with God as the main subject: “If one does not turn back, [God] whets a sword, / bends a bow and aims it— / 14preparing deadly weapons for him, / and making the arrows sharp.” 
See, he hatches evil, conceives mischief,and gives birth to fraud.
He has dug a pit and deepened it,and will fall into the trap he made.
His mischief will recoil upon his own head;his lawlessness will come down upon his skull.
I will praise GOD for being righteous,and sing a hymn to the name of GOD Most High.

=== 8 | 8 ===
For the leader; on the gittith.aFor the leader; on the gittith Meaning of Heb. uncertain. A psalm of David.
O ETERNAL One, our Sovereign,how majestic is Your name throughout the earth—You who have covered the heavens with Your splendor!bYou who have covered the heavens with Your splendor Meaning of Heb. uncertain; or “You whose splendor is celebrated all over the heavens!” 
cMeaning of verse uncertain. From the mouths of infants and sucklingsYou have founded strength on account of Your foes,to put an end to enemy and avenger.
When I behold Your heavens, the work of Your fingers,the moon and stars that You set in place,
what are human beings that You have been mindful of them,mortals that You have taken note of them,
that You have made them little less than divine,ddivine Or “the angels.” and adorned them with glory and majesty?
You have made them master over Your handiwork,laying the world at their feet—
sheep and oxen, all of them,and wild beasts, too;
the birds of the heavens, the fish of the sea,whatever travels the paths of the seas.
O ETERNAL One, our Sovereign, how majestic is Your name throughout the earth!

=== 9 | 9 ===
For the leader; ʻalmuth labben.aFor the leader; ʻalmuth labben Meaning of Heb. uncertain; some mss. and ancient versions, ʻal muth labben, as though “over the death of the son.” A psalm of David.
I will praise You, ETERNAL One, with all my heart;I will tell all Your wonders.
I will rejoice and exult in You,singing a hymn to Your name, O Most High.
When my enemies retreat,they stumble to their doom at Your presence.
For You uphold my right and claim,enthroned as righteous judge.
You blast the nations;You destroy the wicked;You blot out their name forever.
bMeaning of verse uncertain. The enemy is no more—ruins everlasting;You have torn down their cities;their very names are lost.
But GOD, whose throne is set up for judgment, abides forever;
it is [God] who judges the world with righteousness,rules the peoples with equity.
GOD is a haven for the oppressed,a haven in times of trouble.
Those who know Your name trust You,for You do not abandon those who turn to You, O ETERNAL One.
Sing a hymn to the ETERNAL, who reigns in Zion;cwho reigns in Zion Or “O You who dwell in Zion.” declare God’s deeds among the peoples.
For [God] does not ignore the cry of the afflicted;the One who requites bloodshed is mindful of them.dClauses transposed for clarity. 
Have mercy on me, O ETERNAL One;see my affliction at the hands of my foes,You who lift me from the gates of death,
so that in the gates of Fair ZioneFair Zion Lit. “the Daughter of Zion.” I might tell all Your praise,I might exult in Your deliverance.
The nations sink in the pit they have made;their own foot is caught in the net they have hidden.
GOD is known,having worked judgment;the wicked are snared by their own devices. Higgaion.fHiggaion Meaning of Heb. uncertain.    Selah. 
Let the wicked begbe In contrast to others “return to.” in Sheol,all the nations who ignore God!
Not always shall the needy be ignored,nor the hope of the afflicted forever lost.
Rise, O ETERNAL One!Let not mortals have power;let the nations be judged in Your presence.
Strike fear into them,hStrike fear into them Meaning of Heb. uncertain. O ETERNAL One;let the nations know they are only mortals.    Selah. 

=== 10 | 10 ===
Why, O ETERNAL One, do You stand aloof,heedless in times of trouble?
The wicked in their arrogance hound the lowly—may they be caught in the schemes they devise!amay they be caught in the schemes they devise Or “they (i.e., the lowly) are caught by the schemes they devised.” 
The wicked crow about their unbridled lusts;the grasping revile and scorn GOD.
The wicked, arrogant as they are,in all their scheming [think],bThe wicked crow … their scheming [think] Meaning of Heb. uncertain. “God does not carecGod does not care Lit. “There is no God.” and does not call to account.”dClauses transposed for clarity. 
Their ways prosper at all times;Your judgments are far beyond them;they snort at all their foes.
Such people think, “I shall not be shaken,through all time never be in trouble.”
Their mouth is full of oaths, deceit, and fraud;mischief and evil are under their tongue.
They lurk in outlying places;from a covert they slay the innocent;their eyes spy out the hapless.
They wait in a covert like a lion in a lair;wait to seize the lowly;they seize the lowly as they pull their net shut;
they stoop, they crouch,and the hapless fall prey to their might.eand the hapless fall prey to their might Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
They think, “God is not mindful,the divine face is hidden and never looks.”
Rise, O ETERNAL One!Strike at them,fStrike at them Lit. “Lift Your hand.” O God!Do not forget the lowly.
Why should the wicked scorn God,thinking You do not call to account?
You do look!You take note of mischief and vexation!To requite is in Your power.gTo requite is in Your power Meaning of Heb. uncertain. To You the hapless can entrust themselves;You have ever been the orphans’ help.
O break the power of the wicked and evildoers,so that when You look forhlook for A play on darash, which in vv. 4 and 13 means “to call to account.” their wickednessYou will find it no more.
GOD is sovereign for ever and ever;the nations will perish from thisithis Heb. “His.” land.
You will listen to the entreaty of the lowly, O ETERNAL One,You will make their hearts firm;You will incline Your ear
to champion the orphan and the downtrodden,that mere earthly mortals tyrannize no more.jthat mere earthly mortals tyrannize no more Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 

=== 11 | 11 ===
For the leader. Of David.In GOD I take refuge;how can you say to me,“Take to the hills like a bird!athe hills like a bird Meaning of Heb. uncertain; lit. “your hill, bird!” 
For see, the wicked bend the bow,they set their arrow on the stringto shoot from the shadows at the upright.
When the foundations are destroyed,what can the righteous do?”bWhen the foundations are destroyed, / what can the righteous do? Or “For the foundations are destroyed; what has the Righteous One done?” Or “If the foundations are destroyed, what have the righteous accomplished?” 
 GOD is in the divine holy palace; GOD—whose throne is in heaven,whose eyes behold, whose gaze searches humankind.
GOD seeks out someone righteous,but loathes the wicked one who loves injustice.
[God] will rain down upon the wicked blazing coals and sulfur;a scorching wind shall be their lot.ctheir lot Lit. “the portion of their cup.” 
For GOD is righteous,and loves righteous deeds;the upright shall behold God’s face.

=== 12 | 12 ===
For the leader; on the sheminith. A psalm of David.
Help, O ETERNAL One!For the faithful are no more;the loyal have vanished from among mortals.
People speak lies to one another;their speech is smooth;they talk with duplicity.
May GOD cut off all flattering lips,every tongue that speaks arrogance.
They say, “By our tongues we shall prevail;with lips such as ours, who can be our master?”
“Because of the groans of the plundered poor and needy,I will now act,” says GOD.“I will give help,” [God] affirms to them.a“I will give help,” [God] affirms to them Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
GOD’s words are pure words,silver purged in an earthen crucible,refined sevenfold.
You, O ETERNAL One, will keep them,guarding each from this agebfrom this age Meaning of Heb. uncertain. evermore.
On every side the wicked roamwhen baseness is exalted among mortals.cwhen baseness is exalted among mortals Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 

=== 13 | 13 ===
For the leader. A psalm of David.
How long, O ETERNAL One; will You ignore me forever?How long will You hide Your face from me?
How long will I have cares on my mind,grief in my heart all day?How long will my enemy have the upper hand?
Look at me, answer me, O my ETERNAL God!Restore the luster to my eyes,lest I sleep the sleep of death;
lest my enemy say, “I have overcome him,”my foes exult when I totter.
But I trust in Your faithfulness,my heart will exult in Your deliverance.I will sing to GOD,who has been good to me.

=== 14 | 14 ===
aCf. Psalm 53. For the leader. Of David.The scoundrel thinks,“God does not care.”bGod does not care Lit. “There is no God”; cf. 10.4. HumancHuman Heb. “Their.” deeds are corrupt and loathsome;no one does good.
GOD looks down from heaven on humankindto find someone with understanding,someone mindful of God.
All have turned bad,altogether foul;there is no one who does good,not even one.
Are they so witless, all those evildoers,who devour my people as they devour food,and do not invoke GOD?
There they will be seized with fright,for God is present in the circle of the righteous.
You may set at naught the counsel of the lowly,but GOD is their refuge.
O that the deliverance of Israel might come from Zion!When GOD restores the fortunes of this covenanted people,Jacob will exult, Israel will rejoice.

=== 15 | 15 ===
A psalm of David. GOD, who may sojourn in Your tent,who may dwell on Your holy mountain?
Anyone who lives without blame,who does what is right,and in their heart acknowledges the truth;
whose tongue is not given to evil;awhose tongue is not given to evil Meaning of Heb. uncertain; or “who has no slander upon the tongue.” who has never done harm to a compatriot,or borne reproach for [acts toward] a neighbor;
for whom someone contemptible is abhorrent,but who honors those who fear GOD;who keeps an oath even when it hurts;
who has never lent money at interest,or accepted a bribe against the innocent.One who acts thus shall never be shaken.

=== 16 | 16 ===
A michtamamichtam Meaning of Heb. uncertain. of David.Protect me, O God, for I seek refuge in You.
I say to GOD,“You are my Sovereign, my benefactor;there is none above You.”bmy benefactor; / there is none above You In contrast to others “I have no good but in You.” 
As to the holy and mighty ones that are in the land,my whole desire concerning them is that
those who espouse another [god]may have many sorrows!cAs to the holy and mighty ones … sorrows Meaning of Heb. uncertain; “holy and mighty ones” taken as epithets for divine beings; cf. qedoshim in Ps. 89.6, 8, and ʼaddirim in 1 Sam. 4.8. I will have no part of their bloody libations;their names will not pass my lips.
GOD is my allotted share and portion;dportion Lit. “cup.” You control my fate.
Delightful country has fallen to my lot;lovely indeed is my estate.
I bless GOD who has guided me;my conscienceeconscience Lit. “kidneys.” admonishes me at night.
I am ever mindful of GOD’s presence—who is at my right hand; I shall never be shaken.
So my heart rejoices,my whole being exults,and my body rests secure.
For You will not abandon me to Sheol,or let Your faithful one see the Pit.
You will teach me the path of life.In Your presence is perfect joy;delights are ever in Your right hand.

=== 17 | 17 ===
A prayer of David.Hear, O ETERNAL One, what is just;heed my cry, give ear to my prayer,uttered without guile.
My vindication will come from You;Your eyes will behold what is right.
You have visited me at night, probed my mind,You have tested me and found nothing amiss;I determined that my mouth should not transgress.
As for mortals’ dealings,in accord with the command of Your lips,aI determined … lips Meaning of Heb. uncertain. I have kept in view the fatebfate Cf. Prov. 1.19; lit. “paths.” of the lawless.
My feet have held to Your paths;my legs have not given way.
I call on You;You will answer me, God;turn Your ear to me,hear what I say.
Display Your faithfulness in wondrous deeds,You who deliver with Your right handthose who seek refuge from assailants.
Guard me like the apple of Your eye;hide me in the shadow of Your wings
from the wicked who despoil me,my mortal enemies whocmy mortal enemies who Or “from my enemies who avidly.” encircle me.
Their hearts are closed to pity;dTheir hearts are closed to pity Meaning of Heb. uncertain. they mouth arrogance;
now they hem in our feet on every side;they set their eyes roaming over the land.
They areeThey are Heb. “He is.” like a lion eager for prey,a king of beasts lying in wait.
Rise, O ETERNAL One! Go forth to meet my enemies.fmy enemies Heb. “him.” Bring them down;rescue me from the wicked with Your sword,
from mortals, O ETERNAL One, with Your hand,from mortals whose share in life is fleeting.But as to Your treasured ones,fill their bellies.gfrom mortals, O ETERNAL ONE, … fill their bellies Meaning of Heb. uncertain. Their children too shall be satisfied,and have something to leave over for their young.
Then I, justified, will behold Your face;awake, I am filled with the vision of You.

=== 18 | 18 ===
aThis poem occurs again at 2 Sam. 22, with a number of variations, some of which are cited in the following notes. For the leader. Of David, the servant of GOD, who addressed the words of this song to GOD after GOD had saved him from the hands of all his enemies and from the clutches of Saul.
He said:I adore you, O ETERNAL One, my strength,bI adore you, O ETERNAL ONE, my strength Not in 2 Sam. 22.2. 
O ETERNAL One, my crag, my fortress, my deliverer,my God, my rock in which I take shelter,my shield, my mighty champion,cmighty champion Lit. “horn of rescue.” my haven.
All praise! I called on GODdAll praise! I called on GOD Construction of Heb. uncertain. and was delivered from my enemies.
RopeseRopes Cf. 2 Sam. 22.5 “breakers.” of Death encompassed me;torrents of BelialfBelial I.e., the netherworld, like “Death” and “Sheol.” terrified me;
ropes of Sheol encircled me;snares of Death confronted me.
In my anguish I called on the ETERNAL,cried out to my God,who from a heavenly abodega heavenly abode Lit. “His temple”; cf. v. 10. heard my voice,whose ears received my cry.
Then the earth rocked and quaked;the foundations of the mountains shook—rocked by divine indignation;
smoke went up from God’s nostrils,devouring fire from God’s mouth—live coals blazing forth.
[God] bent the sky and came down,thick cloud beneath divine feet.
[God] mounted a cherub and flew,gliding on the wings of the wind.
[God] made darkness a screen—pavilions of dark thunderheads,dense clouds of the sky all around.
In the divine brilliance,hail and fiery coals pierced those clouds.hpierced those clouds Cf. 2 Sam. 22.13 “blazed.” 
Then GOD thundered from heaven,the Most High gave forth voice—hail and fiery coalsihail and fiery coals Not in 2 Sam. 22.14.—
letting shafts fly, and scattering them;discharging lightning, and routing them.
The ocean bed was exposed;the foundations of the world were laid bareby Your mighty roaring, O ETERNAL One,at the blast of Your breath.jYour breath Lit. “the breath of Your nostrils.” 
Reaching down from on high, [God] took me,drawing me out of the mighty waters—
rescuing me from my fierce enemy,from foes too strong for me.
They confronted me on the day of my calamity,but GOD was my support—
bringing me out to freedom,pleased with me enough to rescue me.
GOD rewarded me according to my merit—requiting the cleanness of my hands—
for I have kept to the ways of GOD and have not been guilty before my God;
for I am mindful of all God’s rulesand have not disregarded God’s laws.
I have been blameless toward [God],and have guarded myself against sinning;
and GOD has requited my merit,according to the evident cleanness of my hands.
With the loyal, You deal loyally;with the blameless,kthe blameless Heb. “blameless man.” blamelessly.
With the pure, You act purely,and with the perverse, You are wily.
It is You who deliver lowly folk,but haughty eyes You humble.
It is You who light my lamp;my ETERNAL God lights up my darkness.
With You, I can rush a barrier;lbarrier Cf. note to 2 Sam. 22.30; or “troop.” with my God, I can scale a wall.
The way of God is perfect;the word of the ETERNAL is pure.[God] shields all who seek refuge.
Truly, who is a god except the ETERNAL,who is a rock but our God?—
the God who girded me with might,who made my way secure;
who made my legs like a deer’s,and set me firmly on themthe Taking bamothai as a poetic form of bamoth; cf. Hab. 3.19; in contrast to others “my.” heights;
who trained my hands for battle—my arms can bend a bow of bronze!
You have granted me the shield of Your protection;Your right hand has sustained me,Your carencare Meaning of Heb. uncertain; in contrast to others “condescension.” has made me great.
You have let me stride on freely;my feet have not slipped.
I pursued my enemies and overtook them;I did not turn back till I destroyed them.
I struck them down,and they could rise no more;they lay at my feet.
You have girded me with strength for battle,brought low my adversaries before me,
made my enemies turn tail before me;I wiped out my foes.
They cried out, but there was none to deliver;to GOD, who did not answer them.
I ground them fine as windswept dust;I trod them flat like dirt of the streets.
You have rescued me from the strife of people;You have set me at the head of nations;peoples I knew not must serve me.
At the mere report of me they are submissive;foreign peoples cower before me.
Foreign peoples lose courage,and come trembling out of their strongholds.oand come trembling out of their strongholds Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
GOD lives! Blessed is my rock!Exalted be God, my deliverer,
the God who has vindicated meand made peoples subject to me,
who rescued me from my enemies,who raised me clear of my adversaries,saved me from the lawless opposition!
For this I sing Your praise among the nations, ETERNAL One,and hymn Your name:
According great victoriespAccording great victories Cf. 2 Sam. 22.51, “Tower of victory.” to YourqYour Heb. 3rd person. king,keeping faith with YourrYour See preceding note. anointed,with David and his offspring evermore.

=== 19 | 19 ===
For the leader. A psalm of David.
The heavens declare the glory of God,the sky proclaims God’s handiwork.
Day to day makes utterance,night to night speaks out.
There is no utterance,there are no words,whose sound goes unheard.awhose sound goes unheard With Septuagint, Symmachus, and Vulgate; or “their sound is not heard.” 
TheirbTheir Namely, of the heavens. voicecvoice Cf. Septuagint, Symmachus, and Vulgate; Arabic qawwah, “to shout.” carries throughout the earth,their words to the end of the world.[God] placed in them a tent for the sun,
who is like a groom coming forth from the chamber,like a hero, eager to run his course.
His rising-place is at one end of heaven,and his circuit reaches the other;nothing escapes his heat.
The teaching of GOD is perfect,renewing life;the decrees of GOD are enduring,making the simple wise,
The precepts of GOD are just,rejoicing the heart;the instruction of GOD is lucid,making the eyes light up.
The fear of GOD is pure,abiding forever;the judgments of GOD are true,righteous altogether,
more desirable than gold,than much fine gold;sweeter than honey,than drippings of the comb.
Your servant pays them heed;in obeying them there is much reward.
Who can be aware of errors?Clear me of unperceived guilt,
and from willful sinsdwillful sins Or “the arrogant”; cf. 119.51. keep Your servant;let them not dominate me;then shall I be blamelessand clear of grave offense.
May the words of my mouthand the prayer of my hearteheart For leb as a source of speech, see note to Eccl. 5.1. be acceptable to You,O ETERNAL One, my rock and my redeemer.

=== 20 | 20 ===
For the leader. A psalm of David.
May GOD answer you in time of trouble,the name of Jacob’s God keep you safe—
sending you help from the sanctuary,and sustaining you from Zion.
May [God] receive the tokensareceive the tokens Cf. ʼazkarah, “token portion” of grain offering; Lev. 2.2, 9, 16, etc. of all your grain offerings,and approvebapprove Meaning of Heb. uncertain. your burnt offerings.    Selah. 
May your desire be granted,your every plan fulfilled.
May we shout for joy in your victory,arrayed by standards in the name of our God.May GOD fulfill your every wish.
Now I know that GOD will give victory to our anointed one,will answer him from the heavenly sanctuarywith the mighty victories of God’s right arm.
They [call] on chariots, they [call] on horses,but we call on the name of the ETERNAL our God.
They collapse and lie fallen,but we rally and gather strength.
O ETERNAL One, grant victory to the king;may [God] answer us when we call.cO ETERNAL ONE, grant victory to the king; / may [God] answer us when we call Or “O ETERNAL ONE, grant victory! / May the King answer us when we call,” depicting GOD as the figure who leads the (divine) army into battle. 

=== 21 | 21 ===
For the leader. A psalm of David.
O ETERNAL One, the king rejoices in Your strength;how greatly he exults in Your victory!
You have granted him the desire of his heart,have not denied the request of his lips.    Selah. 
You have proffered him blessings of good things,have set upon his head a crown of fine gold.
He asked You for life; You granted it;a long life, everlasting.
Great is his glory through Your victory;You have endowed him with splendor and majesty.
You have made him blessed forever,gladdened him with the joy of Your presence.
For the king trusts in GOD;through the faithfulness of the Most Highhe will not be shaken.
Your hand is equal to all Your enemies;Your right hand overpowers Your foes.
You set them ablaze like a furnacewhen You show Your presence.awhen You show Your presence Or “at the time of Your anger.” GOD in anger destroys them;fire consumes them.
You wipe their offspring from the earth,their issue from among humankind.
For they schemed against You;they laid plans,but could not succeed.
For You make them turn backbFor You make them turn back Meaning of Heb. uncertain. by Your bows aimed at their face.
Be exalted, O ETERNAL One, through Your strength;we will sing and chant the praises of Your mighty deeds.

=== 22 | 22 ===
For the leader; on ayyeleth ha-shaḥar.aayyeleth ha-shaḥar Meaning of Heb. uncertain. A psalm of David.
My God, my God,why have You abandoned me;why so far from delivering meand from my anguished roaring?
My God,I cry by day—You answer not;by night, and have no respite.
But You are the Holy One,enthroned,the Praise of Israel.bBut You are the Holy One, / enthroned, / the Praise of Israel Or “But You are holy, enthroned upon the praises of Israel.” 
In You our ancestors trusted;they trusted, and You rescued them.
To You they cried outand they escaped;in You they trustedand were not disappointed.
But I am a worm, less than human;cless than human Or “inconsequential.” scorned by everyone, despised by people.
All who see me mock me;they curl their lips,dthey curl their lips Lit. “they open wide with a lip.” they shake their heads.
“Let him commit himself to GOD;let [God] rescue him,let [God] save him,for [God] is pleased with him.”
You drew meedrew me Meaning of Heb. uncertain. from the womb,made me secure at my mother’s breast.
I became Your charge at birth;from my mother’s womb You have been my God.
Do not be far from me,for trouble is near,and there is none to help.
Many bulls surround me,mighty ones of Bashan encircle me.
They open their mouths at melike tearing, roaring lions.
My life ebbs away:fMy life ebbs away Lit. “I am poured out like water.” all my bones are disjointed;my heart is like wax,melting within me;
my vigor dries up like a shard;my tongue cleaves to my palate;You commit me to the dust of death.
Dogs surround me;a pack of evil ones closes in on me,like lions [they maul] my hands and feet.glike lions [they maul] my hands and feet With Rashi; cf. Isa. 38.13. 
I take the count of all my boneswhile they look on and gloat.
They divide my clothes among themselves,casting lots for my garments.
But You, O ETERNAL One, be not far off;my strength, hasten to my aid.
Save my life from the sword,my precious lifehprecious life Lit. “only one.” from the clutches of a dog.
Deliver me from a lion’s mouth;from the horns of wild oxen rescueirescue Lit. “answer.” me.
Then will I proclaim Your fame to my kin,praise You in the congregation.
You who fear GOD, give praise!All you offspring of Jacob, show honor!Be in dread, all you offspring of Israel!
For [God] did not scorn, and did not spurn,the pleajplea Or “plight.” of anyone lowly;[God] did not turn awaykturn away Lit. “hide His face.” from them;when they cried out, [God] listened.
Because of You I offer praiselBecause of You I offer praise Lit. “From You is my praise.” in the great congregation;I pay my vows in the presence of God’s worshipers.
Let the lowly eat and be satisfied;let all who seek GOD give praise.Always be of good cheer!
Let all the ends of the earth pay heed and turn to GOD,and the peoples of all nations prostrate themselves before You;
for sovereignty is GOD’s,who rules the nations.
mMeaning of verse uncertain; in contrast to others “All the fat ones of the earth shall eat and worship; / All they that go down to the dust shall kneel before Him, / Even he that cannot keep his soul alive.” All those in full vigor shall eat and prostrate themselves;all those at death’s door, whose spirits flag,shall bend the knee in submission.
Offspring shall serve [God];the Sovereign’s fame shall be proclaimed to the generation 
to come;they shall tell of the beneficence to people yet to be born,for [God] has acted.

=== 23 | 23 ===
A psalm of David. GOD is my shepherd;I lack nothing.
[God] makes me lie down in green pastures,and leads me to water in places of repose—awater in places of repose In contrast to others “still waters.” 
renewing my life,guiding me in the right pathsas befits the divine name.
Though I walk through a valley of deepest darkness,ba valley of deepest darkness In contrast to others “the valley of the shadow of death.” I fear no harm, for You are with me;Your rod and Your staff—they comfort me.
You spread a table for me in full view of my enemies;You anoint my head with oil;my drink is abundant.
Only goodness and steadfast love shall pursue meall the days of my life,and I shall dwell in GOD’s housefor many long years.

=== 24 | 24 ===
Of David. A psalm.The earth is GOD’s and all that it holds,the world and its inhabitants.
For [God] founded it upon the ocean,set it on the nether-streams.
Who may ascend GOD’s mountain?Who may stand in that holy place?—
Anyone who has clean hands and a pure heart,who has not taken a false oath by MyaMy Ancient versions and some mss. read in the 3rd person. lifeor sworn deceitfully.
They shall carry away a blessing from GOD,a just reward from God, their deliverer.
Such is the circlebcircle Lit. “generation.” of those who turn to You,cYou Heb. 3rd person. Jacob, who seek Your presence.    Selah. 
O gates, lift up your heads!Up high, you everlasting doors,so the KingdKing I.e., the One who leads the celestial army. of glory may come in!
Who is the King of glory?—GOD, mighty and valiant, GOD, valiant in battle.
O gates, lift up your heads!Lift them up, you everlasting doors,so the King of glory may come in!
Who is the King of glory?—GOD of Hostsis truly the King of glory!    Selah. 

=== 25 | 25 ===
Of David. א O ETERNAL One, I set my hope on You;
ב my God, in You I trust;may I not be disappointed,may my enemies not exult over me.
ג O let no one who looks to You be disappointed;let the faithless be disappointed, empty-handed.
ד Let me know Your paths, O ETERNAL One;teach me Your ways;
ה ו guide me in Your true way and teach me,for You are God, my deliverer;it is You I look to at all times.
ז O ETERNAL One, be mindful of Your compassionand Your faithfulness;they are old as time.
ח Be not mindful of my youthful sins and transgressions;in keeping with Your faithfulness consider what is in my favor,as befits Your goodness, O ETERNAL One.
ט Good and upright is GOD,who shows sinners the way.
י [God] guides the lowly in the right path,and teaches the lowly the godly way.
כ All GOD’s paths are steadfast lovefor those who keep the decrees of the covenant.
ל As befits Your name, O ETERNAL One,pardon my iniquity though it be great.
מ Whoever fears GOD will be shown what path to choose.
נ They shall live a happy life,and their children shall inherit the land.
ס GOD’s counselacounsel Or “secret.” is for those who show reverence;to them the covenant is made known.
ע My eyes are ever toward GOD,who will loose my feet from the net.
פ Turn to me, have mercy on me,for I am alone and afflicted.
צ My deep distressbMy deep distress Lit. “The distress of my heart.” increases;deliver me from my straits.
ר Look at my affliction and suffering,and forgive all my sins.
See how numerous my enemies are,and how unjustly they hate me!
ש Protect me and save me;let me not be disappointed,for I have sought refuge in You.
ת May integrity and uprightness watch over me,for I look to You.
O God, redeem Israelfrom all its distress.

=== 26 | 26 ===
Of David.Vindicate me, O ETERNAL One,for I have walked without blame;I have trusted in GOD;I have not faltered.
Probe me, O ETERNAL One, and try me,test my heart and mind;aheart and mind Lit. “kidneys and heart.” 
for my eyes are on Your steadfast love;I have set my course by it.bfor my eyes are on Your steadfast love; / I have set my course by it Or “I am aware of Your faithfulness, and always walk in Your true [path].” 
I do not consort with scoundrels,or mix with hypocrites;
I detest the company of evildoers,and do not consort with the wicked;
I wash my hands in innocence,and walk around Your altar, O ETERNAL One,
raising my voice in thanksgiving,and telling all Your wonders.
O ETERNAL One, I love Your temple abode,the dwelling-place of Your glory.
Do not sweep me away with sinners,or [snuff out] my life with murderers,
who have schemes at their fingertips,and hands full of bribes.
But I walk without blame;redeem me, have mercy on me!
My feet are on level ground.In assemblies I will bless GOD.

=== 27 | 27 ===
Of David. GOD is my light and my help;whom should I fear? GOD is the stronghold of my life,whom should I dread?
When evildoers assail meto devour my fleshato devour my flesh Or “to slander me”; cf. Dan. 3.8; 6.25.—it is they, my foes and my enemies,who stumble and fall.
Should an army besiege me,my heart would have no fear;should war beset me,still would I be confident.
One thing I ask of GOD,only that do I seek:to live in GOD’s houseall the days of my life,to gaze upon GOD’s beauty,to frequentbto frequent Meaning of Heb. uncertain. the temple.
I will be sheltered in God’s pavilionon an evil day,granted the protection of God’s tent,and raised up high upon a rock.
Now is my head highover my enemies round about;I sacrifice in that tent with shouts of joy,singing and chanting a hymn to GOD.
Hear, O ETERNAL One, when I cry aloud;have mercy on me, answer me.
In Your behalfcIn Your behalf Meaning of Heb. uncertain. my heart says:“Seek My face!”O ETERNAL One, I seek Your face.
Do not hide Your face from me;do not thrust aside Your servant in anger;You have ever been my help.Do not forsake me, do not abandon me,O God, my deliverer.
Though my father and mother abandon me, GOD will take me in.
Show me Your way, O ETERNAL One,and lead me on a level pathbecause of my watchful foes.
Do not subject me to the will of my foes,for false witnesses and unjust accusershave appeared against me.
Had I not the assurancethat I would enjoy GOD’s goodnessin the land of the living…
Look to GOD;be strong and of good courage!O look to GOD!

=== 28 | 28 ===
Of David.O ETERNAL One, I call to You;my rock, do not disregard me,for if You hold aloof from me,I shall be like those gone down into the Pit.
Listen to my plea for mercywhen I cry out to You,when I lift my handstoward Your inner sanctuary.
Do not count meacount me Or “drag me off”; meaning of Heb. uncertain. with the wicked and evildoerswho profess goodwill toward their fellowswhile malice is in their heart.
Pay them according to their deeds,their malicious acts;according to their handiwork pay them,give them their deserts.
For they do not consider GOD’s deeds,the work of divine hands.May [God] tear them down,never to rebuild them!
Blessed is GOD,who listens to my plea for mercy.
GOD is my strength and my shield,the One in whom my heart trusts.I was helped,bhelped Or “strengthened.” and my heart exulted,so I will give glory with my song.
GOD is their strength;ctheir strength Septuagint, Saadia, and others render, and some mss. read, ʻoz leʻammo, “the strength of God’s people.” and a stronghold for the deliverance of our anointed ruler.dour anointed ruler Heb. “His anointed one.” 
Deliver and bless Your very own people;tend them and sustain them forever.

=== 29 | 29 ===
A psalm of David.Ascribe to GOD, O divine beings,ascribe to GOD glory and strength.
Ascribe to GOD the glory of that name;bow down to GOD, majestic in holiness.
GOD’s voice is over the waters;the God of glory thunders, GOD, over the mighty waters.
The voice of GOD is power; GOD’s voice is majesty;
GOD’s voice breaks cedars; GOD shatters the cedars of Lebanon—
making Lebanon skip like a calf,amaking Lebanon skip like a calf Lit. “makes them skip like a calf, Lebanon and Sirion….” Sirion, like a young wild ox.
GOD’s voice kindles flames of fire;
GOD’s voice convulses the wilderness; GOD convulses the wilderness of Kadesh;
GOD’s voice causes hinds to calve,and strips forests bare;band strips forests bare Or “brings ewes to early birth.” while in the divine temple all say “Glory!”
GOD sat enthroned at the Flood; GOD sits enthroned, ruler forever.
May strength be granted to GOD’s people;may GOD bless this people with well-being.

=== 30 | 30 ===
A psalm of David. A song for the dedication of the House.athe House I.e., the temple. 
I extol You, O ETERNAL One,for You have lifted me up,and not let my enemies rejoice over me.
O my ETERNAL God,I cried out to You,and You healed me.
O ETERNAL One, You brought me up from Sheol,preserved me from going down into the Pit.
O you faithful of GOD, sing out,and praise that holy name.
For [God] is angry but a moment,and when pleased, there is life.One may lie down weeping at nightfall;bOne may lie down weeping at nightfall Or “Weeping may linger for the night.” but at dawn there are shouts of joy.
When I was untroubled,I thought, “I shall never be shaken,”
for You, O ETERNAL One, when You were pleased,made [me]c[me] Following Saadia, R. Isaiah of Trani; cf. Ibn Ezra. firm as a mighty mountain.When You hid Your face,I was terrified.
I called to You, O ETERNAL One;to my Sovereign I made appeal,
“What is to be gained from my death,ddeath Lit. “blood.” from my descent into the Pit?Can dust praise You?Can it declare Your faithfulness?
Hear, O ETERNAL One, and have mercy on me;O ETERNAL One, be my help!”
You turned my lament into dancing,you undid my sackcloth and girded me with joy,
that [my] whole being might sing hymns to You endlessly;O my ETERNAL God, I will praise You forever.

=== 31 | 31 ===
For the leader. A psalm of David.
I seek refuge in You, O ETERNAL One;may I never be disappointed;as You are righteous, rescue me.
Incline Your ear to me;be quick to save me;be a rock, a stronghold for me,a citadel, for my deliverance.
For You are my rock and my fortress;You lead me and guide me as befits Your name.
You free me from the net laid for me,for You are my stronghold.
Into Your hand I entrust my spirit;You redeem me, O ETERNAL One, faithful God.
I detest those who rely on empty folly,but I trust in GOD.
Let me exult and rejoice in Your faithfulnesswhen You notice my affliction,are mindful of my deep distress,
and do not hand me over to my enemy,but grant me relief.agrant me relief Lit. “make my feet stand in a broad place.” 
Have mercy on me, O ETERNAL One,for I am in distress;my eyes are wasted by vexation,my substance and body too.bmy substance and body too Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
My life is spent in sorrow,my years in groaning;my strength fails because of my iniquity,my limbs waste away.
Because of all my foesI am the particular butt of my neighbors,a horror to my friends;those who see me on the street avoid me.
I am put out of mind like the dead;I am like an object given up for lost.
I hear the whisperings of many,intriguecintrigue In contrast to others “terror.” on every side,as they scheme together against me,plotting to take my life.
But I trust in You, O ETERNAL One;I say, “You are my God!”
My fate is in Your hand;save me from the hand of my enemies and pursuers.
Show favor to Your servant;as You are faithful, deliver me.
O ETERNAL One, let me not be disappointed when I call You;let the wicked be disappointed;let them be silenced in Sheol;
let lying lips be stilledthat speak haughtily against the righteouswith arrogance and contempt.
How abundant is the goodthat You have in store for those who fear You,that You do in full viewfor those who take refuge in You.
You grant them the protection of Your presenceagainst the opposition’s schemes;dagainst the opposition’s schemes Or “against human schemes.” You shelter them in Your pavilionfrom contentious tongues.
Blessed is GOD,who has been wondrously faithful to me,a veritable bastion.
Alarmed, I had thought,“I am thrust out of Your sight”;yet You listened to my plea for mercywhen I cried out to You.
So love GOD, all you faithful; GOD guards the loyal,and more than requitesthe one who acts arrogantly.
Be strong and of good courage,all you who wait for GOD.

=== 32 | 32 ===
Of David. A maskil.amaskil Meaning of Heb. uncertain. Happy is the one whose transgression is forgiven,whose sin is covered over.
Happy the person whom GOD does not hold guilty,and in whose spirit there is no deceit.
As long as I said nothing,my limbs wasted awayfrom my anguished roaring all day long.
For night and dayYour hand lay heavy on me;my vigor wanedas in the summer drought.    Selah. 
Then I acknowledged my sin to You;I did not cover up my guilt;I resolved, “I will confess my transgressions to GOD,”and You forgave the guilt of my sin.    Selah. 
Therefore let all the faithful pray to Youupon discovering [their sin],bupon discovering [their sin] Meaning of Heb. uncertain; in contrast to others “in a time when You may be found.” that the rushing mighty watersnot overtake them.
You are my shelter;You preserve me from distress;You surround me with the joyous shouts of deliverance.    Selah. 
Let me enlighten youand show you which way to go;let me offer counsel; my eye is on you.
Be not like a senseless horse or mulewhose movement must be curbed by bit and bridle;cwhose movement must be curbed by bit and bridle Meaning of Heb. uncertain. far be it from you!dfar be it from you Meaning of Heb. uncertain; for this rendering cf. Ibn Ezra. 
Many are the torments of the wicked,but those who trust in GOD shall be surrounded with favor.
Rejoice in GOD and exult, O you righteous;shout for joy, all the upright!

=== 33 | 33 ===
Sing forth, O you righteous, to GOD;it is fitting that the upright offer praise.
Praise GOD with the lyre;with the ten-stringed harp sing out;
sing [God] a new song;play sweetly with shouts of joy.
For the word of GOD is right,and God’s every deed is faithful.
[God] loves what is right and just;the earth is full of GOD’s faithful care.
By the word of GOD the heavens were made,by the breath of God’s mouth, all their host.
[God] heaps up the ocean waters like a mound,stores the deep in vaults.
Let all the earth fear GOD;let all the inhabitants of the world feel dread.
For [God] spoke, and it was;issued the command, and it endured.
GOD frustrates the plans of nations,brings to naught the designs of peoples.
What GOD plans endures forever,what [God] designs, for ages on end.
Happy the nation whose God is the ETERNAL,the people who are chosen as a permanent possession.
GOD looks down from heavenand sees all humankind.
From God’s dwelling-place the divine gaze toucheson all the inhabitants of the earth—
the One who fashions the hearts of them all,who discerns all their doings.
Kings are not delivered by a large force;warriors are not saved by great strength;
horses are a false hope for deliverance;for all their great power they provide no escape.
Truly GOD’s eye is on those who show reverence,who wait for God’s faithful care
to save them from death,to sustain them in famine.
We set our hope on GOD,who is our help and shield;
in whom our hearts rejoice,in whose holy name we trust.
May we enjoy, O ETERNAL One, Your faithful care,as we have put our hope in You.

=== 34 | 34 ===
Of David, when he feigned madness in the presence of Abimelech, who turned him out, and he left.awhen he feigned madness … and he left Cf. 1 Sam. 21.14ff.
א I bless GOD at all times;praise is ever in my mouth.
ב I glory in GOD;let the lowly hear it and rejoice.
ג Exalt GOD with me;let us extol the divine name together.
ד I turned to GOD, and I was answered;I was saved from all my terrors.
ה People look to [God] and are radiant;ו let their faces not be downcast.
ז Here was a lowly man who called—GOD listened,and delivered him from all his troubles.
ח The angel of GOD camps around those who show awe,and rescues them.
ט Taste and see how good GOD is;happy the onebone Or “virile man.” who takes refuge in the divine!
י Fear the ETERNAL, you consecrated ones,for those who fear [God] lack nothing.
כ Lions have been reduced to starvation,but those who turn to GOD shall not lack any good.
ל Come, my children, listen to me;I will teach you what it is to fear GOD.
מ Which of you are eager for lifeand desire years of good fortune?
נ Guard your tongue from evil,your lips from deceitful speech.
ס Shun evil and do good,seek amitycamity Or “integrity.” and pursue it.
ע GOD’s eyes are on the righteous,the ears, attentive to their cry.
פ GOD’s face is set against evildoers,to erase their names from the earth.
צ TheydThey Namely, the righteous of v. 16. cry out, and GOD hears,and saves them from all their troubles.
ק GOD is close to the brokenhearted;those crushed in spirit are delivered.
ר Though their misfortunes be many, GOD will save the righteous from them all,
ש Keeping all his bones intact,not one of them being broken.
ת One misfortune is the deathblow of the wicked;the foes of the righteous shall be ruined.
 GOD redeems the life of those who render service;no one who takes refuge in [God] shall be ruined.

=== 35 | 35 ===
Of David.O ETERNAL One, strive with my adversaries,give battle to my foes,
take up shield and buckler,and come to my defense;
ready the spear and javelinagainst my pursuers;tell me, “I am your deliverance.”
Let those who seek my lifebe frustrated and put to shame;let those who plan to harm mefall back in disgrace.
Let them be as chaff in the wind, GOD’s angel driving them on.
Let their path be dark and slippery,with GOD’s angel in pursuit.
For without cause they hid a net to trap me;without cause they dug a pitaa pit Transferred from first clause for clarity. for me.
Let disaster overtake them unawares;let the net they hid catch them;let them fall into it when disaster [strikes].
Then shall I exult in GOD,rejoice in having been delivered.
All my bones shall say,“ETERNAL One, who is like You?You save a pauper from someone stronger,a needy pauper from a despoiler.”
Malicious witnesses appearwho question me about things I do not know.
They repay me evil for good,[seeking] my bereavement.
Yet, when they were ill,my dress was sackcloth,I kept a fast—may what I prayed for happen to me!bmay what I prayed for happen to me Meaning of Heb. uncertain; lit. “my prayer returns upon my bosom.” 
I walked about as though it were my friend or my kin;I was bowed with gloom, like one mourning for a mother.
But when I stumble, they gleefully gather;wretches gather against me,I know not why;they tear at me without end.
With impious, mocking grimacecthey tear … grimace Meaning of Heb. uncertain. they gnash their teeth at me.
O my Sovereign, how long will You look on?Rescue me from their attacks,dfrom their attacks Meaning of Heb. uncertain. my precious life, from the lions,
that I may praise You in a great congregation,acclaim You in a mighty throng.
Let not my treacherous enemies rejoice over me,or those who hate me without reason wink their eyes.
For they do not offer amity,but devise fraudulent schemes against harmless folk.
They open wide their mouths at me,saying, “Aha, aha, we have seen it!”
You have seen it, O ETERNAL One;do not hold aloof!O my Sovereign, be not far from me!
Wake, rouse Yourself for my cause,for my claim, O my God and my Sovereign!
Take up my cause, O my ETERNAL God, as You are beneficent,and let them not rejoice over me.
Let them not think,“Aha, just what we wished!”Let them not say,“We have destroyed him!”
May those who rejoice at my misfortunebe frustrated and utterly disgraced;may those who vaunt themselves over mebe clad in frustration and shame.
May those who desire my vindicationsing forth joyously;may they always say,“Extolled be GOD who desires the well-being of one who renders service,”
while my tongue shall recite Your beneficent acts,Your praises all day long.

=== 36 | 36 ===
For the leader. Of the servant of GOD, of David.
I knowaI know Lit. “In my heart is.” what Transgression says to the wicked;they have no sense of the dread of God,
because its speech is seductive to themtill their iniquity be found out and they be hated.bMeaning of verse uncertain. 
Their words are evil and deceitful;they will not consider doing good.
In bed they plot mischief;they are set on a path of no good,they do not reject evil.
O ETERNAL One, Your faithfulness reaches to heaven;Your steadfastness to the sky;
Your beneficence is like the high mountains;Your justice like the great deep;human and animal You deliver, O ETERNAL One.
How precious is Your faithful care, O God!Humankind shelters in the shadow of Your wings.
They feast on the rich fare of Your house;You let them drink at Your refreshing stream.
With You is the fountain of life;by Your light do we see light.
Bestow Your faithful care on those devoted to You,and Your beneficence on the upright.
Let not the foot of the arrogant tread on me,or the hand of the wicked drive me away.
There lie the evildoers, fallen,thrust down, unable to rise.

=== 37 | 37 ===
Of David. א Do not be vexed by evildoers;do not be incensed by wrongdoers;
for they soon wither like grass,like verdure fade away.
ב Trust in GOD and do good,abide in the land and remain loyal.
Seek GOD’s favor,and you will be granted the desires of your heart.
ג Leave allaall Lit. “your way.” to GOD;be trusting; [God] will do it—
causing your vindication to shine forth like the light,the justice of your case, like the noonday sun.
ד Be patient and wait for GOD,do not be vexed by the one who is prospering—the opponent who carries out schemes.
ה Give up anger, abandon fury,do not be vexed;it can only do harm.
For evildoers will be cut off,but those who look to GOD—they shall inherit the land.
ו A little longer and there will be no wicked;you will look at where they were—they will be gone.
But the lowly shall inherit the land,and delight in abundant well-being.
ז The wicked scheme against the righteous,and gnash their teeth at them.
My Sovereign laughs at them,knowing that their day will come.
ח The wicked draw their swords, bend their bows,to bring down the lowly and needy,to slaughter the upright.bthe upright Lit. “those whose way is upright.” 
Their swords shall pierce their own hearts,and their bows shall be broken.
ט Better the little that a righteous person hasthan the great abundance of the wicked.
For the arms of the wicked shall be broken,but GOD is the support of the righteous.
י GOD is concerned for the needscneeds Lit. “days.” of the blameless;their portion lasts forever;
they shall not come to grief in bad times;in famine, they shall eat their fill.
כ But the wicked shall perish,and GOD’s enemies shall be consumed,like meadow grassdmeadow grass Meaning of Heb. uncertain. consumed in smoke.
ל The wicked borrow and do not repay;the righteous are generous and keep giving.
Those blessed by [God] shall inherit the land,but those who are cursed shall be cut off.
מ People’s stepsePeople’s steps Or “[Even] the steps of virile men.” are made firm by GOD,when their way is a delight to [God].
Though they stumble, they do not fall down,for GOD gives them support.
נ I have been young and am now old,but I have never seen someone righteous abandoned,or their children seeking bread.
They are always generous, and lend,and their children are held blessed.
ס Shun evil and do good,and you shall abide forever.
For GOD loves what is right,and does not abandon those who are faithful.They are preserved forever,while the children of the wicked will be cut off.
The righteous shall inherit the land,and abide forever in it.
פ The mouth of the righteous utters wisdom,and their tongue speaks what is right.
The teaching of their God is in their heart;their feet do not slip.
צ The wicked watch for the righteous,seeking to put them to death;
GOD will not abandon them to their power,and will not let them be condemned in judgment.
ק Look to GOD and keep to the godly way,and you will be raised high that you may inherit the land;when the wicked are cut off, you shall see it.
ר I saw the wicked, powerful,well-rooted like a robust native tree.
Suddenly they vanished and were gone;I sought them, but they were not to be found.
ש Mark the blameless, note the upright,for there is a future for the person of integrity.
But transgressors shall be utterly destroyed,the future of the wicked shall be cut off.
ת The deliverance of the righteous comes from GOD,their stronghold in time of trouble.
GOD helps them and rescues them,rescues them from the wicked and delivers them,for in [God] they seek refuge.

=== 38 | 38 ===
A psalm of David. Lehazkir.aLehazkir Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
O ETERNAL One, do not punish me in wrath;do not chastise me in fury.
For Your arrows have struck me;Your blows have fallen upon me.
There is no soundness in my flesh because of Your rage,no wholeness in my bones because of my sin.
For my iniquities have overwhelmed me;boverwhelmed me Lit. “passed over my head.” they are like a heavy burden, more than I can bear.
My wounds stink and festerbecause of my folly.
I am all bent and bowed;I walk about in gloom all day long.
For my sinews are full of fever;there is no soundness in my flesh.
I am all benumbed and crushed;I roar because of the turmoil in my mind.
O my Sovereign, You are aware of all my entreaties;my groaning is not hidden from You.
My mind reels;my strength fails me;my eyes too have lost their luster.
My friends and companions stand back from my affliction;my kin stand far off.
Those who seek my life lay traps;those who wish me harm speak malice;they utter deceit all the time.
But I am like the deaf, unhearing,like the mute who cannot speak up;
I am like one who does not hear,whose mouth has no retort.
But I wait for You, O ETERNAL One;You will answer, O my Sovereign, my God.
For I fear they will rejoice over me;when my foot gives way they will vaunt themselves against me.
For I am on the verge of collapse;my pain is always with me.
I acknowledge my iniquity;I am fearful over my sin;
for my mortal enemies are numerous;my treacherous foes are many.
Those who repay evil for goodharass me for pursuing good.
Do not abandon me, O ETERNAL One;my God, be not far from me;
hasten to my aid,O my Sovereign, my deliverance.

=== 39 | 39 ===
For the leader; for Jeduthun. A psalm of David.
I resolved I would watch my steplest I offend by my speech;I would keep my mouth muzzledwhile the villain was in my presence.
I was dumb, silent;I was veryavery Cf. use of ṭwb in Hos. 10.1; Jonah 4.4. stillwhile my pain was intense.
My mind was in a rage,my thoughts were all aflame;I spoke out:
Tell me, O ETERNAL One, what my term is,what is the measure of my days;I would know how fleeting my life is.
You have made my life just handbreadths long;its span is as nothing in Your sight;no human endures any longer than a breath.bno human endures any longer than a breath Meaning of Heb. uncertain.    Selah. 
Everyone walks about as a mere shadow;mere futility is their hustle and bustle,amassing and not knowing who will gather in.
What, then, can I count on, O my Sovereign?In You my hope lies.
Deliver me from all my transgressions;make me not the butt of the benighted.
I am dumb, I do not speak up,for it is Your doing.
Take away Your plague from me;I perish from Your blows.
You chastise everyone in punishment for sin,consuming like a moth what they treasure.No human is more than a breath.    Selah. 
Hear my prayer, O ETERNAL One;give ear to my cry;do not disregard my tears;for like all my forebearsI am an alien, resident with You.
Look away from me, that I may recover,cthat I may recover Meaning of Heb. uncertain. before I pass away and am gone.

=== 40 | 40 ===
For the leader. A psalm of David.
I put my hope in GOD,who inclined toward me,and heeded my cry.
I was lifted out of the miry pit,the slimy clay,and my feet were set on a rock,my legs steadied.
A new song was placed into my mouth,a hymn to our God.May many see it and stand in awe,and trust in GOD.
Happy is the oneathe one Or “a virile man.” who trusts in GOD,who turns not to the arrogant or to followers of falsehood.
You, O my ETERNAL God, have done many things;the wonders You have devised for uscannot be set out before You;bYou, O my ETERNAL God, have done many things; / the wonders You have devised for us / cannot be set out before You Or “You, O my ETERNAL God, have done many things— / the wonders You have devised for us; / none can equal You.” I would rehearse the tale of them,but they are more than can be told.
You gave me to understand thatcYou gave me to understand that Meaning of Heb. uncertain. You do not desire sacrifice and grain offering;You do not ask for burnt offering and purgation offering.
Then I said,“See, I will bring a scroll recounting what befell me.”dSee, I will bring a scroll recounting what befell me Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
To do what pleases You, my God, is my desire;Your teaching is in my inmost parts.
I proclaimed [Your] righteousness in a great congregation;see, I did not withhold my words;O ETERNAL One, You must know it.
I did not keep Your beneficence to myself;I declared Your faithful deliverance;I did not fail to speak of Your steadfast love in a great congregation.
O ETERNAL One, You will not withhold from me Your compassion;Your steadfast love will protect me always.
For misfortunes without number envelop me;my iniquities have caught up with me;I cannot see;they are more than the hairs of my head;I am at my wits’ end.eI am at my wits’ end Or “my courage fails me.” 
fCf. Psalm 70. O favor me, ETERNAL One, and save me;O ETERNAL One, hasten to my aid.
Let those who seek to destroy my lifebe frustrated and disgraced;let those who wish me harmfall back in shame.
Let those who say “Aha! Aha!” over mebe desolate because of their frustration.
But let all who seek You be glad and rejoice in You;let those who are eager for Your deliverance always say,“Extolled be GOD!”
But I am poor and needy;may my Sovereign devise [deliverance] for me.You are my help and my rescuer;my God, do not delay.

=== 41 | 41 ===
For the leader. A psalm of David.
Happy is someone who is thoughtful of the wretched;in bad times may GOD keep themathem I.e., the thoughtful person. from harm.
May GOD guard them and preserve them;and may they be thought happy in the land.Do not subject them to the will of their enemies.
GOD will sustain them on their sickbed;You shall wholly transform their bed of suffering.bYou shall wholly transform their bed of suffering Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
I said, “O ETERNAL One, have mercy on me,heal me, for I have sinned against You.”
My enemies speak evilly of me,“When will he die and his name perish?”
Each of them who comes to visit speaks falsely,storing up evil thoughts—speaking them once outside.
All my enemies whisper together against me,imagining the worst for me.
“Something baneful has settled in him;he’ll not rise from his bed again.”
My ally in whom I trusted,even someone who shares my bread,has been utterly false to me.chas been utterly false to me Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
But You, O ETERNAL One, have mercy on me;let me rise again and repay them.
Then shall I know that You are pleased with me:when my enemy cannot shout in triumph over me.
You will support me because of my integrity,and let me abide in Your presence forever.
Blessed is the ETERNAL, God of Israel,from eternity to eternity.Amen and Amen.

=== 42 | 42 ===
For the leader. A maskil of the Korahites.
Like a hind crying for water,awater Lit. “watercourses.” my soul cries for You, O God;
my soulbsoul Or “throat.” thirsts for God, the living God;O when will I come to appear before God!
My tears have been my food day and night;I am ever taunted with, “Where is your God?”
When I think of this, I pour out my soul:how I walked with the crowd, moved with them,cwalked with the crowd, moved with them Meaning of Heb. uncertain. the festive throng, to the House of Godwith joyous shouts of praise.
Why so downcast, my soul,why disquieted within me?Have hope in God;I will yet give praisefor God’s saving presence.dfor God’s saving presence Several ancient versions and Heb. mss. connect the end of this verse with the first word in v. 7, reading yeshuʻot panai we-ʼElohai, “my ever-present help, my God,” as in v. 12 and 43.5. 
O my God, my soul is downcast;therefore I think of Youin this land of Jordan and Hermon,in Mount Mizar,
where deep calls to deepin the roar of Your cataracts;eYour cataracts Meaning of Heb. uncertain. all Your breakers and billows have swept over me.
By day may GOD devote faithful care,so that at night a song may be with me:a prayer to the God of my life.
I say to God, my rock,“Why have You forgotten me,why must I walk in gloom,oppressed by my enemy?”
Crushing my bones,fCrushing my bones Meaning of Heb. uncertain. my foes revile me,taunting me always with, “Where is your God?”
Why so downcast, my soul,why disquieted within me?Have hope in God;I will yet give praise,my ever-present help, my God.

=== 43 | 43 ===
aA continuation of Psalm 42. Vindicate me, O God,champion my causeagainst faithless people;rescue me from treacherous, dishonest opponents.
For You are my God, my stronghold;why have You rejected me?Why must I walk in gloom,oppressed by the enemy?
Send forth Your light and Your truth;they will lead me;they will bring me to Your holy mountain,to Your dwelling-place,
that I may come to the altar of God,God, my delight, my joy;that I may praise You with the lyre,O God, my God.
Why so downcast, my soul,why disquieted within me?Have hope in God;I will yet give praise,my ever-present help, my God.

=== 44 | 44 ===
For the leader. Of the Korahites. A maskil.
We have heard, O God,our ancestors have told usthe deeds You performed in their time,in days of old.
With Your hand You planted them,displacing nations;You brought misfortune on peoples,and drove them out.
It was not by their sword that they took the land,their arm did not give them victory,but Your right hand, Your arm, and Your goodwill,for You favored them.
You are my king,aking See note at 24.7. O God;decree victories for Jacob!
Through You we gore our foes;by Your name we trample our adversaries;
I do not trust in my bow;it is not my sword that gives me victory;
You give us victory over our foes;You thwart those who hate us.
In God we glory at all times,and praise Your name unceasingly.    Selah. 
Yet You have rejected and disgraced us;You do not go with our armies.
You make us retreat before our foe;our enemies plunder us at will.
You let them devour us like sheep;You disperse us among the nations.
You sell Your people for no fortune,You set no high price on them.
You make us the butt of our neighbors,the scorn and derision of those around us.
You make us a byword among the nations,a laughingstockblaughingstock Lit. “wagging of the head.” among the peoples.
I am always aware of my disgrace;I am wholly covered with shame
at the sound of taunting revilers,in the presence of the vengeful foe.
All this has come upon us,yet we have not forgotten You,or been false to Your covenant.
Our hearts have not gone astray,nor have our feet swerved from Your path,
though You cast us, crushed, to where the sea monstercsea monster Heb. tannim = tannin, as in Ezek. 29.3; 32.2. is,and covered us over with deepest darkness.
If we forgot the name of our Godand spread forth our hands to a foreign god,
God would surely search it out,as the One who knows the secrets of the heart.
It is for Your sake that we are slain all day long,that we are regarded as sheep to be slaughtered.
Rouse Yourself; why do You sleep, O my Sovereign?Awaken, do not reject us forever!
Why do You hide Your face,ignoring our affliction and distress?
We lie prostrate in the dust;our body clings to the ground.
Arise and help us,redeem us, as befits Your faithfulness.

=== 45 | 45 ===
For the leader; on shoshannim.ashoshannim Meaning of Heb. uncertain. Of the Korahites. A maskil. A love song.
My heart is astir with gracious words;I speak my poem to a king;my tongue is the pen of an expert scribe.
You are fairer than all mortals;your speech is endowed with grace;rightly has God given you an eternal blessing.
Gird your sword upon your thigh, O hero,in your splendor and glory;
bMeaning of verse uncertain. in your glory, win success;ride on in the cause of truth and meekness and right;and let your right hand lead you to awesome deeds.
Your arrows, sharpened,[pierce] the breast of the king’s enemies;peoples fall at your feet.c[pierce] the breast of the king’s enemies; / peoples fall at your feet Clauses transposed for clarity. 
Your divine throneddivine throne Cf. 1 Chron. 29.23. is everlasting;your royal scepter is a scepter of equity.
You love righteousness and hate wickedness;rightly has God, your God, chosen to anoint youwith oil of gladness over all your peers.
All your robes [are fragrant] withmyrrh and aloes and cassia;from ivoried palaceslutes entertain you.
Royal princesses are your favorites;the consort stands at your right hand,decked in gold of Ophir.
Take heed, lass, and note,incline your ear:forget your people and your father’s house,
and let the king be aroused by your beauty;since he is your lord, bow to him.
O Tyrian lass,the wealthiest people will court your favor with gifts,
goods of all sorts.The royal princess,her dress embroidered with golden mountings,
is led inside to the king;egoods of all sorts … to the king Meaning of Heb. uncertain. maidens in her train, her companions,are presented to you.
They are led in with joy and gladness;they enter the palace of the king.
Your sons will succeed your fathers;you will appoint them princes throughout the land.
I commemorate your fame for all generations,so peoples will praise you forever and ever.

=== 46 | 46 ===
For the leader. Of the Korahites; alamoth.aalamoth Meaning of Heb. uncertain. A song.
God is our refuge and stronghold,a help in trouble, very near.
Therefore we are not afraidthough the earth reels,though mountains topple into the sea—
its waters rage and foam;in its swell mountains quake.    Selah. 
There is a river whose streams gladden God’s city,the holy dwelling-place of the Most High.
God is in its midst, it will not be toppled;by daybreak God will come to its aid.
Nations rage, kingdoms topple;at the sound of God’s thunder the earth dissolves.
GOD of hosts is with us;the God of Jacob is our haven.    Selah. 
Come and see what GOD has done,how devastation has been wrought on the earth.
[God] puts a stop to wars throughout the earth,breaking the bow, snapping the spear,consigning wagons to the flames.
“Desist! Realize that I am God!I dominate the nations;I dominate the earth.”
GOD of hosts is with us;the God of Jacob is our haven.    Selah. 

=== 47 | 47 ===
For the leader. Of the Korahites. A psalm.
All you peoples, clap your hands,raise a joyous shout for God.
For GOD Most High is awesome,great ruler over all the earth,
who subjects peoples to us,sets nations at our feet.
[God] chose our heritage for us,the pride of Jacob the beloved.    Selah. 
God ascends midst acclamation; the ETERNAL, to the blasts of the horn.
Sing, O sing to God;sing, O sing to our sovereign;
for God is ruler over all the earth;sing a hymn.ahymn Heb. maskil, a musical term of uncertain meaning. 
God reigns over the nations;God is seated on the holy throne.
The great of the peoples are gathered together,the retinue of Abraham’s God;for the guardians of the earth belong to God,who is greatly exalted.

=== 48 | 48 ===
A song. A psalm of the Korahites.
GOD is great and much acclaimedin the city of our God,the holy mountain—
fair-crested, joy of all the earth,Mount Zion, summit of Zaphon,aZaphon A term for the divine abode. city of the great ruler.
Through its citadels, God has become known as a haven.
See, the kings joined forces;they advanced together.
At the mere sight of it they were stunned,they were terrified, they panicked;
they were seized there with a trembling,like a woman in the throes of labor,
as the Tarshish fleet was wreckedin an easterly gale.bas the Tarshish fleet … gale See 1 Kings 22.49. 
The likes of what we heard we have now witnessedin the city of GOD of hosts,in the city of our God—may God preserve it forever!    Selah. 
In Your temple, God,we meditate upon Your faithful care.
The praise of You, God, like Your name,reaches to the ends of the earth;Your right hand is filled with beneficence.
Let Mount Zion rejoice!Let the townsctowns Or “women.” of Judah exult,because of Your judgments.
Walk around Zion,circle it;count its towers,
take note of its ramparts;go throughdgo through Meaning of Heb. uncertain. its citadels,that you may recount it to a future age.
For God truly is our God forever,who will lead us evermore.eevermore Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 

=== 49 | 49 ===
For the leader. Of the Korahites. A psalm.
Hear this, all you peoples;give ear, all inhabitants of the world,
both low and high,rich and poor alike.
My mouth utters wisdom,my speechamy speech Lit. “utterance of my heart”; on leb, cf. 19.15. is full of insight.
I will turn my attention to a theme,set forth my lesson to the music of a lyre.
In time of trouble, why should I fearthe encompassing evil of those who would supplant me—
those who trust in their riches,who glory in their great wealth?
Ah, itbAh, it Or “A brother.” cannot redeem anyone,or pay one’s ransom to God;
the price of life is too high;and so one ceases to be, forever.
Shall anyone live eternally,and never see the grave?
For one sees that the wise die,that the foolish and ignorant both perish,leaving their wealth to others.
Their gravecTheir grave Heb. qirbam, taken with ancient versions and medieval commentators as the equivalent of qibram. is their eternal home,the dwelling-place for all generationsof those once famous on earth.
Mortals do not abide in honor;they are like the beasts that perish.
Such is the fate of those who are self-confident,the end of those pleased with their own talk.dthe end of those pleased with their own talk Meaning of Heb. uncertain.    Selah. 
Sheeplike they head for Sheol,with Death as their shepherd.The upright shall rule over them at daybreak,and their form shall waste away in Sheoltill its nobility be gone.eand their form … gone Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
But God will redeem my life from the clutches of Sheol,by taking me.    Selah. 
Do not be afraid when someone else becomes rich,when their household goods increase;
for when they die they can take none of it along;their goods cannot follow them down.
Though they congratulate themselves in their lifetime—“All must admit that you did well by yourself”fAll must admit that you did well by yourself Meaning of Heb. uncertain.—
yet they must join the company of their ancestors,who will never see daylight again.
Mortals do not understand honor;they are like the beasts that perish.

=== 50 | 50 ===
A psalm of Asaph.God, the ETERNAL God,aGod,…God Heb. ʼEl ʼElohim. spokeand summoned the world from east to west.
From Zion, perfect in beauty,God appeared
—let our God come and not fail to act![God] was preceded by devouring fire,with a fierce storm all around.
The heavens above were summoned,and the earth, for the trial of God’s people.
“Bring in My devotees,who made a covenant with Me over sacrifice!”
Then the heavens proclaimed God’s righteousness,for this is a God who judges.    Selah. 
“Pay heed, My people, and I will speak,O Israel, and I will arraign you.I am God, your God.
I censure you not for your sacrifices,and your burnt offerings, made to Me daily;
I claim no bull from your estate,no he-goats from your pens.
For Mine is every animal of the forest,the beasts on a thousand mountains.ba thousand mountains Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
I know every bird of the mountains,the creatures of the field are subject to Me.
Were I hungry, I would not tell you,for Mine is the world and all it holds.
Do I eat the flesh of bulls,or drink the blood of he-goats?
Sacrifice a thank offering to God,and pay your vows to the Most High.
Call upon Me in time of trouble;I will rescue you, and you shall honor Me.”
And to the wicked, God said:“Who are you to recite My laws,and mouth the terms of My covenant,
seeing that you spurn My discipline,and brush My words aside?
You fall in with a thief when you see one,and throw in your lot with adulterers;
you devote your mouth to evil,and yoke your tongue to deceit;
you are busy maligning your kin,defaming the child of your mother.
If I failed to act when you did these things,you would fancy that I was like you;so I censure you and confront you with charges.
Mark this, you who are unmindful of God,lest I tear you apart and no one save you.
Whoever sacrifices a thank offering honors Me,and to one who sets out on the proper waycand to one who sets out on the proper way Meaning of Heb. uncertain. I will show the salvation of God.”

=== 51 | 51 ===
For the leader. A psalm of David, 
when Nathan the prophet came to him after he had come to Bathsheba.awhen Nathan … Bathsheba Cf. 2 Sam. 12. 
Have mercy upon me, O God,as befits Your faithfulness;in keeping with Your abundant compassion,blot out my transgressions.
Wash me thoroughly of my iniquity,and purify me of my sin;
for I recognize my transgressions,and am ever conscious of my sin.
Against You alone have I sinned,and done what is evil in Your sight;so You are just in Your sentence,and right in Your judgment.
Indeed I was born with iniquity;with sin my mother conceived me.
bMeaning of verse uncertain. Indeed You desire truth about that which is hidden;teach me wisdom about secret things.
Purge me with hyssop till I am pure;wash me till I am whiter than snow.
Let me hear tidings of joy and gladness;let the bones You have crushed exult.
Hide Your face from my sins;blot out all my iniquities.
Fashion a pure heart for me, O God;create in me a steadfast spirit.
Do not cast me out of Your presence,or take Your holy spirit away from me.
Let me again rejoice in Your help;let a vigorous spirit sustain me.
I will teach transgressors Your ways,that sinners may return to You.
Save me from bloodguilt,O God, God, my deliverer,that I may sing forth Your beneficence.
O my Sovereign, open my lips,and let my mouth declare Your praise.
You do not want me to bring sacrifices;You do not desire burnt offerings;
True sacrifice to God is a contrite spirit;God, You will not despisea contrite and crushed heart.
May it please You to make Zion prosper;rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.
Then You will want sacrifices offered in righteousness,burnt and whole offerings;then bulls will be offered on Your altar.

=== 52 | 52 ===
For the leader. A maskil of David, 
when Doeg the Edomite came and informed Saul, telling him, “David came to Ahimelech’s house.”aCf. 1 Sam. 22.9ff. 
Why do you boast of your evil, brave fellow?God’s faithfulness never ceases.bnever ceases Lit. “is all the day.” 
Your tongue devises mischief,like a sharpened razor that works treacherously.
You prefer evil to good,the lie, to speaking truthfully.    Selah. 
You love all pernicious words,treacherous speech.
So God will tear you down for good,will break you and pluck you from your tent,and root you out of the land of the living.    Selah. 
The righteous, seeing it, will be awestruck;they will jibe at you,cyou Heb. “him.” saying,
“Here was a fellow who did not make God his refuge,but trusted in his great wealth,relied upon his mischief.”
But I am like a thriving olive tree in God’s house;I trust in the faithfulness of God forever and ever.
I praise You forever, for You have acted;I declare that Your name is gooddI declare that Your name is good Meaning of Heb. uncertain; in contrast to others “I will wait for Your name for it is good.” in the presence of Your faithful ones.

=== 53 | 53 ===
aCf. Psalm 14. For the leader; on mahalath.bmahalath Meaning of Heb. unknown. A maskil of David.
The scoundrel thinks,“God does not care.”cGod does not care Lit. “There is no God”; cf. 10.4. Mortals’dMortals’ Heb. “Their.” wrongdoing is corrupt and loathsome;no one does good.
God looks down from heaven on humankindto find someone with understanding,someone mindful of God.
Everyone is dross,altogether foul;there is no one who does good,not even one.
Are they so witless, those evildoers,who devour my people as they devour food,and do not invoke God?
There they will be seized with fright—never was there such a fright—for God has scattered the bones of your besiegers;you have put them to shame,enever was there … put them to shame Meaning of Heb. uncertain. for God has rejected them.
O that the deliverance of Israel might come from Zion!When God restores the fortunes of this covenanted people,Jacob will exult, Israel will rejoice.

=== 54 | 54 ===
For the leader; with instrumental music. A maskil of David, 
when the Ziphites came and told Saul, “Know, David is in hiding among us.”aCf. 1 Sam. 23.19. 
O God, deliver me by Your name;by Your power vindicate me.
O God, hear my prayer;give ear to the words of my mouth.
For strangers have risen against me,and those who are ruthless seek my life;they are unmindful of God.    Selah. 
See, God is my helper;my Sovereign is my support.
[God] will repay the evil of my watchful foes;by Your faithfulness, destroy them!
Then I will offer You a freewill sacrifice;I will praise Your name, ETERNAL One, for it is good,
for it has saved me from my foes,and let me gaze triumphant upon my enemies.

=== 55 | 55 ===
For the leader; with instrumental music. A maskil of David.
Give ear, O God, to my prayer;do not ignore my plea;
pay heed to me and answer me.I am tossed about, complaining and moaning
at the clamor of the enemy,because of the oppression of the wicked;for they bring evil upon meand furiously harass me.
My heart is convulsed within me;terrors of death assail me.
Fear and trembling invade me;I am clothed with horror.
I said,“O that I had the wings of a dove!I would fly away and find rest;
surely, I would flee far off;I would lodge in the wilderness;    selah 
I would soon find me a refugefrom the sweeping wind,from the tempest.”
O my Sovereign, confound their speech, confuse it!For I see lawlessness and strife in the city;
day and night they make their rounds on its walls;evil and mischief are inside it.
Malice is within it;fraud and deceit never leave its square.
It is not an enemy who reviles me—I could bear that;it is not my foe who boasts against me—for then I could hide;
but it is you, my equal,my companion, my friend;
sweet was our fellowship;we walked together in God’s house.
Let [God] incite death against them;may they go down alive into Sheol!For where they dwell,there evil is.
As for me, I call to God; GOD will deliver me.
Evening, morning, and noon,I complain and moan,and my voice is heard.
[God] redeems me unharmedfrom the battle against me;it is as though many are on my side.ait is as though many are on my side Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
God who has reigned from the first,who will have no successor,hears and humbles those who show no reverence.    Selah. 
My companionbMy companion Heb. “He,” i.e., the friend of v. 14. caused harm to alliesand broke a pact—
with talk smoother than butter,yet with a mind set on war;with words that were softer than oil,yet in fact were drawn swords.
Cast your burden on GOD and you will be sustained;the righteous will never be allowed to collapse.
For You, O God, will bring them down to the nethermost Pit—those treacherous murderers;they shall not live out half their days—but I trust in You.

=== 56 | 56 ===
For the leader; on yonath elem reḥokim.ayonath elem reḥokim Meaning of Heb. uncertain. Of David. A michtam; when the Philistines seized him in Gath.
Have mercy on me, O God,for people persecute me;all day long my adversary oppresses me.
My watchful foes persecute me all day long;many are my adversaries, O Exalted One.
When I am afraid, I trust in You,
in God, whose word I praise,in God I trust;I am not afraid;what can mortalsbmortals Lit. “flesh.” do to me?
All day long they cause me grief in my affairs,cthey cause me grief in my affairs Meaning of Heb. uncertain. they plan only evil against me.
They plot, they lie in ambush;they watch my every move, hoping for my death.
Cast them out for their evil;subdue peoples in Your anger, O God.
dMeaning of verse uncertain. You keep count of my wanderings;put my tears into Your flask,into Your record.
Then my enemies will retreat when I call on You;this I know, that God is for me.
In God, whose word I praise,in GOD, whose word I praise,
in God I trust;I am not afraid;what can mere humans do to me?
I must pay my vows to You, O God;I will render thank offerings to You.
For You have saved me from death,my foot from stumbling,that I may walk before God in the light of life.

=== 57 | 57 ===
For the leader; al tashḥeth.aal tashḥeth Meaning of Heb. uncertain. Of David. A michtam; when he fled from Saul into a cave.
Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me,for I seek refuge in You,I seek refuge in the shadow of Your wings,until danger passes.
I call to God Most High,to God who is good to me,
who will reach down from heaven and deliver me—sending down steadfast love;my persecutor reviles.    Selah. 
As for me, I lie down among lions who devour humans—whose teeth are spears and arrows,whose tongue is a sharp sword.
Exalt Yourself over the heavens, O God,let Your glory be over all the earth!
They prepared a net for my feet to ensnare me;bto ensnare me Cf. Mishnaic Heb. kefifah, a wicker basket used in fishing. they dug a pit for me,but they fell into it.    Selah. 
cCf. 108.2–6. My heart is firm, O God;my heart is firm;I will sing, I will chant a hymn.
Awake, O my soul!Awake, O harp and lyre!I will wake the dawn.
I will praise You among the peoples, O my Sovereign;I will sing a hymn to You among the nations—
for Your faithfulness is as high as heaven;Your steadfastness reaches to the sky.
Exalt Yourself over the heavens, O God,let Your glory be over all the earth!

=== 58 | 58 ===
For the leader; al tashḥeth. Of David. A michtam.
O mighty ones,aO mighty ones Meaning of Heb. uncertain. do you really decree what is just?Do you judge humankind with equity?
In your minds you devise wrongdoing in the land;with your hands you deal out lawlessness.bwith your hands you deal out lawlessness Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
The wicked are defiant from birth;the liars go astray from the womb.
Their venom is like that of a snake,a deaf viper that stops its ears
so as not to hear the voice of charmersor the expert mutterer of spells.
O God, smash their teeth in their mouth;shatter the fangs of lions, O ETERNAL One;
let them melt, let them vanish like water—aim Your arrows that they be cut down—
like a snail that melts away as it moves;clike a snail that melts away as it moves Meaning of Heb. uncertain. like a woman’s stillbirth—may they never see the sun!
Before the thorns grow into a bramble,whirl them away alive in fury.dthe thorns grow … in fury Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
The righteous will rejoice when they see revenge;they will bathe their feet in the blood of the wicked.
People will say,“There is, then, a reward for the righteous;there is, indeed, divine justice on earth.”

=== 59 | 59 ===
For the leader; al tashḥeth. Of David. A michtam; when Saul sent men to watch his house in order to put him to death.awhen Saul sent … death Cf. 1 Sam. 19.11. 
Save me from my enemies, O my God;secure me against my assailants.
Save me from evildoers;deliver me from murderers.
For see, they lie in wait for me;fierce people plot against mefor no offense of mine,for no transgression, O ETERNAL One;
for no guilt of minedo they rush to array themselves against me.Look, rouse Yourself in my behalf!
You, O ETERNAL One, God of hosts,God of Israel,bestir Yourself to bring all nations to account;have no mercy on any treacherous villain.    Selah. 
They come each evening growling like dogs,roaming the city.
They rave with their mouths,sharp wordsbsharp words Lit. “swords.” are on their lips;[they think,] “Who hears?”
But You, O ETERNAL One, laugh at them;You mock all the nations.
O mycmy With several mss.; cf. v. 18; Heb. 3rd person. strength, I wait for You;for God is my haven.
My faithful God will come to aid me;God will let me gloat over my watchful foes.
Do not kill them lest my people be unmindful;with Your power make wanderers of them;bring them low, O our shield, my Sovereign,
because of their sinful mouths,the words on their lips.Let them be trapped by their pride,and by the imprecations and lies they utter.
In Your fury put an end to them;put an end to them that they be no more;that it may be known to the ends of the earththat God does rule over Jacob.    Selah. 
They come each evening growling like dogs,roaming the city.
They wander in search of food;and whine if they are not satisfied.
But I will sing of Your strength,extol each morning Your faithfulness;for You have been my haven,a refuge in time of trouble.
O my strength, to You I sing hymns;for God is my haven, my faithful God.

=== 60 | 60 ===
For the leader; on shushan eduth.ashushan eduth Meaning of Heb. uncertain. A michtam of David (to be taught), 
when he fought with Aram-naharaim and Aram-zobah, and Joab returned and defeated Edom—[an army] of twelve thousand men—in the Valley of Salt.bCf. 2 Sam. 8; 1 Chron. 18. 
O God, You have rejected us,You have made a breach in us;You have been angry;restore us!
You have made the land quake;You have torn it open.Mend its fissures,for it is collapsing.
You have made Your people suffer hardship;You have given us wine that makes us reel.cYou have given us wine that makes us reel Or “You have sated Your people with a bitter draft.” 
Give those who fear You because of Your trutha banner for rallying.dGive those … rallying Meaning of Heb. uncertain.    Selah. 
eCf. Ps. 108.7–14. That those whom You love might be rescued,deliver with Your right hand and answer me.
God promised in the sanctuaryfin the sanctuary Or “by God’s holiness.” that I would exultingly divide up Shechem,and measure the Valley of Sukkoth;
Gilead and Manasseh would be mine,Ephraim my chief stronghold,Judah my scepter;
Moab would be my washbasin;on Edom I would cast my shoe;acclaim me, O Philistia!
Would that I were brought to the bastion!Would that I were led to Edom!
But You have rejected us, O God;God, You do not march with our armies.
Grant us Your aid against the foe,for human help is worthless.
We shall triumph with God,who will trample our foes.

=== 61 | 61 ===
For the leader; with instrumental music. Of David.
Hear my cry, O God,heed my prayer.
From the end of the earth I call to You;when my heart is faint,You lead me to a rock that is high above me.
For You have been my refuge,a tower of strength against the enemy.
O that I might dwell in Your tent forever,take refuge under Your protecting wings.    Selah. 
O God, You have heard my vows;grant the requestarequest Taking the noun yrsht as an alternate form of ʼrsht; cf. Ps. 21.3. of those who fear Your name.
Add days to the days of the king;may his years extend through generations;
may he dwell in God’s presence forever;appointbappoint Meaning of Heb. uncertain. steadfast love to guard him.
So I will sing hymns to Your name forever,as I fulfill my vows day after day.

=== 62 | 62 ===
For the leader; on Jeduthun. A psalm of David.
Truly my soul waits quietly for God,from whom my deliverance comes.
Truly [God] is my rock and deliverance,my haven; I shall never be shaken.
How long will all of you attackaattack Meaning of Heb. uncertain. someone,to crushbcrush Meaning of Heb. uncertain. them, as though they werea leaning wall, a tottering fence?
You lay plans to topple them from their status;you delight in falsehood;you bless with your mouths,while inwardly you curse.cYou…your…you Heb. “They…their…they.”    Selah. 
Truly, wait quietly for God, O my soul,from whom comes my hope.
[God] is my rock and deliverance,my haven; I shall not be shaken.
I rely on God, my deliverance and glory,my rock of strength;in God is my refuge.
Trust in [God] at all times, O people;pour out your hearts before the Holy One;God is our refuge.    Selah. 
Humans are mere breath;mortals, an illusiondHumans are mere breath; / mortals, an illusion Or “The common people are mere breath; / even the notables, an illusion—”; or “Mortals are mere breath; / partisans, an illusion—.”—placed on a scale all together,they weigh even less than a breath.
Do not trust in violence,or put false hopes in robbery;if force bears fruit pay it no mind.
One thing God has spoken;two things have I heard:that might belongs to God,
and faithfulness is Yours, O my Sovereign,to reward everyone according to their deeds.

=== 63 | 63 ===
A psalm of David, when he was in the Wilderness of Judah.
God, You are my God;I search for You,my soul thirsts for You,my body yearns for You,as a parched and thirsty land that has no water.
I shall behold You in the sanctuary,and see Your might and glory,
Truly Your faithfulness is better than life;my lips declare Your praise.
I bless You all my life;I lift up my hands, invoking Your name.
I am sated as with a rich feast,arich feast Lit. “suet and fat.” I sing praises with joyful lips
when I call You to mind upon my bed,when I think of You in the watches of the night—
for You are my help,and in the shadow of Your wingsI shout for joy.
My soul is attached to You;Your right hand supports me.
May those who seek to destroy my lifeenter the depths of the earth.
May they be gutted by the sword;may they be prey to jackals.
But the king shall rejoice in God;all who swear by [God] shall exult,when the mouth of liars is stopped.

=== 64 | 64 ===
For the leader. A psalm of David.
Hear my voice, O God, when I plead;guard my life from the enemy’s terror.
Hide me from a band of evildoers,from a crowd of wrongdoers,
who whet their tongues like swords;they aim their arrows—cruel words—
to shoot from hiding at someone blameless,shooting suddenly and without fear.
They arm themselves with an evil word;when they speak, it is to conceal traps;aThey arm themselves … conceal traps Meaning of Heb. uncertain. they think, “Who will see them?”
bMeaning of verse uncertain. Let the wrongdoings they have concealed,cthey have concealed Reading ṭamnu with some mss. (cf. Minḥat Shai) and Rashi; most printed editions tamnu, traditionally rendered “they have accomplished.” each one’s inner, secret thoughts,be wholly exposed.
God shall shoot them with arrows;they shall be struck down suddenly.
Their tongue shall be their downfall;all who see them shall recoil in horror;
all people shall stand in awe;they shall proclaim the work of Godwhose deed they perceived.
In GOD shall the righteous rejoiceand take refuge;all the upright shall exult.

=== 65 | 65 ===
For the leader. A psalm of David. A song.
Praise befits You in Zion, O God;vows are paid to You;
all humankindahumankind Lit. “flesh.” comes to You,You who hear prayer.
When all manner of sins overwhelm me,it is You who forgive our iniquities.
Happy is the one You choose and bring nearto dwell in Your courts;may we be sated with the blessings of Your house,Your holy temple.
Answer us with victory through awesome deeds,O God, our deliverer,in whom all the ends of the earthand the distant seasput their trust;
who by divine power fixed the mountains firmly,who is girded with might,
who stills the raging seas,the raging waves,and tumultuous peoples.
Those who live at the ends of the earth are awed by Your signs;You make the lands of sunrise and sunset shout for joy.
You take care of the earth and irrigate it;You enrich it greatly,with the channel of God full of water;You provide grain for all;bgrain for all Heb. “their grain.” for so do You prepare it.
Saturating its furrows,leveling its ridges,You soften it with showers,You bless its growth.
You crown the year with Your bounty;fatness is distilled in Your paths—
the pasturelands distill it;the hills are girded with joy.
The meadows are clothed with flocks,the valleys mantled with grain;they raise a shout, they break into song.

=== 66 | 66 ===
For the leader. A song. A psalm.Raise a shout for God, all the earth;
sing the glory of God’s name,make glorious God’s praise.
Say to God,“How awesome are Your deeds,Your enemies cower before Your great strength;
all the earth bows to You,and sings hymns to You;all sing hymns to Your name.”    Selah. 
Come and see the works of God,who is held in awe by mortals for acts divine,
and who turned the sea into dry land:IsraelaIsrael Heb. “they”; cf. Josh. 4.23. crossed the river on foot;we therefore rejoice in [God].
[God] rules forever with divine might,eyes scanning the nations—not letting the rebellious assert themselves.    Selah. 
O peoples, bless our God;celebrate with praises
the One who has granted us life,and has not let our feet slip.
You have tried us, O God,refining us, as one refines silver.
You have caught us in a net,caught us in trammels.bcaught us in trammels Lit. “put a trammel on our loins.” 
You have let people ride over us;we have endured fire and water,and You have brought us through to prosperity.
I enter Your house with burnt offerings,I pay my vows to You,
[vows] that my lips pronounced,that my mouth uttered in my distress.
I offer up fatlings to You,with the odor of burning rams;I sacrifice bulls and he-goats.    Selah. 
Come and hear, all you who fear God,as I tell what was done for me.
I called aloud to [God],glorification on my tongue.
Had I an evil thought in my mind,my Sovereign would not have listened.
But God did listen—paying heed to my prayer.
Blessed is God who has not turned away my prayer,or faithful care, from me.

=== 67 | 67 ===
For the leader; with instrumental music. A psalm. A song.
May God be gracious to us and bless us,showing us favor,    selah 
that Your way be known on earth,Your deliverance among all nations.
Peoples will praise You, O God;all peoples will praise You.
Nations will exult and shout for joy,for You rule the peoples with equity,You guide the nations of the earth.    Selah. 
The peoples will praise You, O God;all peoples will praise You.
May the earth yield its produce;may God, our God, bless us.
May God bless us,and be revered to the ends of the earth.

=== 68 | 68 ===
aThe coherence of this psalm and the meaning of many of its passages are uncertain. For the leader. Of David. A psalm. A song.
God will arise;all opponents shall be scattered,and foes shall flee.
Disperse them as smoke is dispersed;as wax melts at fire,so the wicked shall perish before God.
But the righteous shall rejoice;they shall exult in the presence of God;they shall be exceedingly joyful.
Sing to God, chant hymns to the divine name;extol the One who rides the clouds,the One whose name is Yah.bYah A shortened form of the divine Name; see Isa. 12.2; 26.4. Exult in God’s presence—
the guardian of the fatherless, the champion of widows,God, dwelling in holiness.
God restores the lonely to their homes,sets free the imprisoned, safe and sound,while the rebellious must live in a parched land.
O God, when You went at the head of Your army,when You marched through the desert,    selah 
the earth trembled, the sky rained because of God,yon Sinai, because of God—the God of Israel.
You released a bountiful rain, O God;when Your own land languished, You sustained it.
Your tribe dwells there;O God, in Your goodness You provide for the needy.
My Sovereign gives a command;the women who bring the news are a great host:
“The kings and their armies are in headlong flight;the women at home are sharing in the spoils;
even for those of you who lie among the sheepfoldsthere are wings of a dove sheathed in silver,its pinions in fine gold.”
When Shaddai scattered the kings,it seemed like a snowstorm in Zalmon.
O majestic mountain, Mount Bashan;O jagged mountain, Mount Bashan;
why so hostile, O jagged mountains,toward the mountain God desired as a dwelling? GOD shall abide there forever.
God’s chariots are myriads upon myriads,thousands upon thousands;my Sovereign is among them as in Sinai in holiness.
You went up to the heights, having taken captives,having received tribute of people,even of those who rebelagainst the abiding there of Yah—who is God.
Blessed is my Sovereign,day by day supporting us—God, our deliverance.    Selah. 
God is for us a God of deliverance; GOD my Sovereign provides an escape from death.
God will smash the heads of all opponents,the hairy crown of the one who walks about in guilt.
My Sovereign said, “I will retrieve from Bashan,I will retrieve from the depths of the sea;
that your feet may wade through blood,that the tongue of your dogs may have its portion of your enemies.”
People see Your processions, O God,the processions of my God, my monarch,into the sanctuary.
First come singers, then musicians,amidst maidens playing hand-drums.cmaidens playing hand-drums See note at Exod. 15.20. 
In assemblies bless God, ETERNAL One, O you who are from the fountain of Israel.
There is little Benjamin who rules them,the princes of Judah who command them,the princes of Zebulun and Naphtali.
Your God has ordained strength for you,the strength, O God,that You displayed for us
from Your temple above Jerusalem.The kings bring You tribute.
Blast the beast of the marsh,the herd of bulls among the peoples, the calves,till they come cringing with pieces of silver.Scatter the peoples who delight in wars!
Tribute-bearers shall come from Egypt;Cush shall hasten its gifts to God.
O kingdoms of the earth,sing to God;chant hymns to my Sovereign,    selah 
to the One who rides the ancient highest heavens,who thunders forth with a mighty voice.
Ascribe might to God,whose majesty is over Israel,whose might is in the skies.
You are awesome, O God, in Your holy places;it is the God of Israel who gives might and power to the people.Blessed is God.

=== 69 | 69 ===
For the leader. On shoshannim.ashoshannim Meaning of Heb. uncertain. Of David.
Deliver me, O God,for the waters have reached my neck;
I am sinking into the slimy deepand find no foothold;I have come into the watery depths;the flood sweeps me away.
I am weary with calling;my throat is dry;my eyes failwhile I wait for God.
More numerous than the hairs of my headare those who hate me without reason;many are those who would destroy me,my treacherous enemies.Must I restore what I have not stolen?
God, You know my folly;my guilty deeds are not hidden from You.
Let those who look to You,O my Sovereign, GOD of hosts,not be disappointed on my account;let those who seek You,O God of Israel,not be shamed because of me.
It is for Your sake that I have been reviled,that shame covers my face;
I am a stranger to my kin,an alien to my own siblings.
My zeal for Your house has been my undoing;the reproaches of those who revile You have fallen upon me.
When I wept and fasted,I was reviled for it.
I made sackcloth my garment;I became a byword among them.
Those who sit in the gate talk about me;I am the taunt of drunkards.
As for me, may my prayer come to You, O ETERNAL One,at a favorable moment;O God, in Your abundant faithfulness,answer me with Your sure deliverance.
Rescue me from the mire;let me not sink;let me be rescued from my enemies,and from the watery depths.
Let the floodwaters not sweep me away;let the deep not swallow me;let the mouth of the Pit not close over me.
Answer me, O ETERNAL One,according to Your great steadfastness;in accordance with Your abundant mercyturn to me;
do not hide Your face from Your servant,for I am in distress;answer me quickly.
Come near to me and redeem me;free me from my enemies.
You know my reproach,my shame, my disgrace;You are aware of all my foes.
Reproach breaks my heart,I am in despair;bin despair Meaning of Heb. uncertain. I hope for consolation, but there is none,for comforters, but find none.
They give me gall for food,vinegar to quench my thirst.
May their table be a trap for them,a snare for their allies.
May their eyes grow dim so that they cannot see;may their loins collapse continually.
Pour out Your wrath on them;may Your blazing anger overtake them;
may their encampments be desolate;may their tents stand empty.
For they persecute those You have struck;they talk about the pain of those You have felled.
Add that to their guilt;let them have no share of Your beneficence;
may they be erased from the book of life,and not be inscribed with the righteous.
But I am lowly and in pain;Your help, O God, keeps me safe.
I will extol God’s name with song,exultation, and praise.
That will please GOD more than oxen,than bulls with horns and hoofs.
The lowly will see and rejoice;you who are mindful of God, take heart!
For GOD listens to the needy,and does not spurn those held captive.
Heaven and earth shall sing praise,the seas, and all that moves in them.
For God will deliver Zionand rebuild the cities of Judah;they shall live there and inherit it;
the offspring of God’s servants shall possess it;those who cherish God’s name shall dwell there.

=== 70 | 70 ===
For the leader. Of David. Lehazkir.aLehazkir Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
bCf. Ps. 40.14–18. Hasten, O God, to save me;O ETERNAL One, to aid me!
Let those who seek my lifebe frustrated and disgraced;let those who wish me harm,fall back in shame.
Let those who say, “Aha! Aha!”turn back because of their frustration.
But let all who seek You be glad and rejoice in You;let those who are eager for Your deliverance always say,“Extolled be God!”
But I am poor and needy;O God, hasten to me!You are my help and my rescuer;O ETERNAL One, do not delay.

=== 71 | 71 ===
I seek refuge in You, O ETERNAL One;may I never be disappointed.
As You are beneficent, save me and rescue me;incline Your ear to me and deliver me.
Be a sheltering rock for me to which I may always repair;decree my deliverance,for You are my rock and my fortress.
My God, rescue me from the hand of the wicked,from the grasp of the unjust and the lawless.
For You are my hope,O my Sovereign GOD,my trust from my youth.
While yet unborn, I depended on You;in the womb of my mother, You were my support;asupport Meaning of Heb. uncertain. I sing Your praises always.
I have become an example for many,since You are my mighty refuge.
My mouth is full of praise to You,glorifying You all day long.
Do not cast me off in old age;when my strength fails, do not forsake me!
For my enemies talk against me;those who wait for me are of one mind,
saying, “God has forsaken him;chase him and catch him,for no one will save him!”
O God, be not far from me;my God, hasten to my aid!
Let my accusers perish in frustration;let those who seek my ruin be clothed in reproach and disgrace!
As for me, I will hope always,and add to the many praises of You.
My mouth tells of Your beneficence,of Your deliverance all day long,though I know not how to tell it.
I come with praise of Your mighty acts, O my Sovereign GOD;I celebrate Your beneficence, Yours alone.
You have let me experience it, God, from my youth;until now I have proclaimed Your wondrous deeds,
and even in hoary old age do not forsake me, God,until I proclaim Your strength to the next generation,Your mighty acts, to all who are to come,
Your beneficence, high as the heavens, O God,You who have done great things;O God, who is Your peer!
You who have made me undergo many troubles and misfortuneswill revive me again,and raise me up from the depths of the earth.
You will grant me much greatness,You will turn and comfort me.
Then I will acclaim You to the music of the lyrefor Your faithfulness, O my God;I will sing a hymn to You with a harp,O Holy One of Israel.
My lips shall be jubilant, as I sing a hymn to You,my whole being, which You have redeemed.
All day long my tongue shall recite Your beneficent acts,how those who sought my ruin were frustrated and disgraced.

=== 72 | 72 ===
Of Solomon.O God, endow the king with Your judgments,the king’s son with Your righteousness;
that he may judge Your people rightly,Your lowly ones, justly.
Let the mountains produce well-being for the people,the hills, the reward of justice.
Let him champion the lowly among the people,deliver the needy folk,and crush those who wrong them.
Let them fear You as long as the sun shines,while the moon lasts, generations on end.
Let him be like rain that falls on a mown field,like a downpour of rain on the ground,
that the righteous may flourish in his time,and well-being abound, till the moon is no more.
Let him rule from sea to sea,from the river to the ends of the earth.
Let desert-dwellers kneel before him,and his enemies lick the dust.
Let kings of Tarshish and the islands pay tribute,kings of Sheba and Seba offer gifts.
Let all kings bow to him,and all nations serve him.
For he saves the needy who cry out,the lowly who have no helper.
He cares about the poor and the needy;He brings the needy deliverance.
He redeems them from fraud and lawlessness;the shedding of their blood weighs heavily upon him.athe shedding of their blood weighs heavily upon him Or “their life is precious in his sight.” 
So let him live, and receive gold of Sheba;let prayers for him be said always,blessings on him invoked at all times.
Let abundant grain be in the land, to the tops of the mountains;let his crops thrive like the forest of Lebanon;and let the people sprout up in towns like country grass.
May his name be eternal;while the sun lasts, may his name endure;bLet abundant grain … endure Meaning of some Heb. phrases in these verses uncertain. let peoples invoke his blessedness upon themselves;let all nations count him happy.
Blessed is the ETERNAL God, God of Israel,who alone does wondrous things;
Blessed is God’s glorious name forever;such glory fills the whole world.Amen and Amen.
End of the prayers of David son of Jesse.

=== 73 | 73 ===
A psalm of Asaph.God is truly good to Israel,to those whose heart is pure.
As for me, my feet had almost strayed,my steps were nearly led off course,
for I envied the wanton;I saw the wicked at ease.
Death has no pangs for them;their body is healthy.
They have no part in human travail;they are not afflicted like the rest of humankind.
So pride adorns their necks,lawlessness enwraps them as a mantle.
Fat shuts out their eyes;their fancies are extravagant.aFat … extravagant Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
They scoff and plan evil;from their eminence they plan wrongdoing.
They set their mouths against heaven,and their tongues range over the earth.
bMeaning of verse uncertain. So they pound this people again and again,until they are drained of their very last tear.
Then they say, “How could God know?Is there knowledge with the Most High?”
Such are the wicked;ever tranquil, they amass wealth.
It was for nothing that I kept my heart pureand washed my hands in innocence,
seeing that I have been constantly afflicted,that each morning brings new punishments.
Had I decided to say these things,I should have been false to the circle of Your disciples.
So I applied myself to understand this,but it seemed a hopeless task
till I entered God’s sanctuaryand reflected on their fate.
You surround them with flattery;You make them fall through blandishments.
How suddenly are they ruined,wholly swept away by terrors.
When You are aroused You despise their image,as one does a dream after waking, O my Sovereign.
My mind was stripped of its reason,my feelings were numbed.cmy feelings were numbed Lit. “I was pierced through in my kidneys.” 
I was a dolt, without knowledge;I was brutish toward You.
Yet I was always with You,You held my right hand;
You guided me by Your counseland led me toward honor.dand led me toward honor Meaning of Heb. uncertain; in contrast to others “And afterward receive me with glory.” 
Whom else have I in heaven?And having You, I want no one on earth.
My body and mind fail;but God is the stayestay Lit. “rock.” of my mind, my portion forever.
Those who keep far from You perish;You annihilate all who are untrue to You.
As for me, nearness to God is good;I have made the Sovereign GOD my refuge,that I may recount all Your works.

=== 74 | 74 ===
A maskil of Asaph.Why, O God, do You forever reject us,do You fume in anger at the flock that You tend?
Remember the community You made Yours long ago,Your very own tribe that You redeemed,Mount Zion, where You dwell.
Bestir YourselfaBestir Yourself Lit. “Lift up Your feet.” because of the perpetual tumult,bperpetual tumult Meaning of Heb. uncertain. all the outrages of the enemy in the sanctuary.
Your foes roar inside Your meeting-place;they take their signs for true signs.
It is like those who wield axesagainst a gnarled tree;
with hatchet and pikethey hacked away at its carved work.cIt is like … carved work Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
They made Your sanctuary go up in flames;they brought low in dishonor the dwelling-place of Your presence.
They resolved, “Let us destroy them altogether!”They burned all God’s tabernacles in the land.
No signs appear for us;there is no longer any prophet;no one among us knows for how long.
Till when, O God, will the foe blaspheme,will the enemy forever revile Your name?
Why do You hold back Your hand, Your right hand?Draw it out of Your bosom!dDraw it out of Your bosom Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
O God, my Sovereign from of old,who brings deliverance throughout the land;
it was You who drove back the sea with Your might,who smashed the heads of the monsters in the waters;
it was You who crushed the heads of Leviathan,who left it as food for the denizens of the desert;ethe denizens of the desert Or “seafaring peoples”; meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
it was You who released springs and torrents,who made mighty rivers run dry;
the day is Yours, the night also;it was You who set in place the orb of the sun;
You fixed all the boundaries of the earth;summer and winter—You made them.
Be mindful of how the enemy blasphemes GOD,how base people revile Your name.
Do not deliver Your dove to the wild beast;do not ignore forever the band of Your lowly ones.
Look to the covenant!For the dark places of the land are full of the haunts of lawlessness.
Let not the downtrodden turn away disappointed;let the poor and needy praise Your name.
Rise, O God, champion Your cause;be mindful that You are blasphemed by scoundrels all day long.
Do not ignore the shouts of Your foes,the din of Your adversaries that ascends all the time.

=== 75 | 75 ===
For the leader; al tashḥeth.A psalm of Asaph, a song.
We praise You, O God;we praise You;Your presence is near;people tell of Your wondrous deeds.
“At the time I choose,I will give judgment equitably.
Earth and all its inhabitants dissolve;it is I who keep its pillars firm.    Selah. 
To the wanton I say, ‘Do not be wanton!’to the wicked, ‘Do not lift up your horns!’”
Do not lift your horns up highin vainglorious bluster.ain vainglorious bluster Lit. “with arrogant neck you speak.” 
For exaltation comes not from the eastor from the west or the wilderness;bwilderness Reading midbār (with qamaṣ, not pataḥ), as in many mss. 
for God it is who gives judgment—bringing down one and lifting up another.
There is a cup in GOD’s handwith foaming wine fully mixed;from this [God] pours;all the wicked of the earth drink,draining it to the very dregs.
As for me, I will declare forever,I will sing a hymn to the God of Jacob.
“All the horns of the wicked I will cut;but the horns of the righteous shall be lifted up.”

=== 76 | 76 ===
For the leader; with instrumental music.A psalm of Asaph, a song.
God is known in Judah,God’s name is great in Israel;
Salem became an abode;Zion, the divine den.
There [God] broke the fiery arrows of the bow,the shield and the sword of war.    Selah. 
You were resplendent,glorious, on the mountains of prey.
The stout-hearted were despoiled;they were in a stupor;the bravest of soldiers could not lift a hand.
At Your blast, O God of Jacob,horse and chariot lay stunned.
O You! You are awesome!Who can withstand Youwhen You are enraged?
In heaven You pronounced sentence;the earth was numbed with fright
as God rose to execute judgment,to deliver all the lowly of the earth.    Selah. 
aMeaning of verse uncertain. Even the fiercest among humans shall acknowledge You,when You gird on the last bit of fury.
Make vows and pay them to the ETERNAL your God;those all around shall bring tribute to the Awesome One—ball around … Awesome One Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
who curbs the spirit of princes,inspires awe in the kings of the earth.

=== 77 | 77 ===
For the leader; on Jeduthun.Of Asaph. A psalm.
I cry aloud to God;I cry to God that I may be heard.
In my time of distress I turn to my Sovereign,with my hand [uplifted];[my eyes] flow all night without respite;awith my hand … without respite Meaning of Heb. uncertain. I will not be comforted.
I call God to mind, I moan,I complain, my spirit fails.    Selah. 
You have held my eyelids open;I am overwrought, I cannot speak.
My thoughts turn to days of old,to years long past.
I recall at night their jibes at me;I commune with myself;my spirit inquires,
“Will my Sovereign reject foreverand never again show favor?
Has such faithfulness disappeared forever?Will those promises be unfulfilled for all time?
Has God forgotten how to pity?Has God’s compassion been stifled in anger?”    Selah. 
And I said, “It is my faultthat the right hand of the Most High has changed.”bIt is my fault / … changed Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
I recall the deeds of Yah;cYah See note at 68.5. yes, I recall Your wonders of old;
I recount all Your works;I speak of Your acts.
O God, Your ways are holiness;what god is as great as God?
You are the God who works wonders;You have manifested Your strength among the peoples.
By Your arm You redeemed Your people,the children of Jacob and Joseph.    Selah. 
The waters saw You, O God,the waters saw You and were convulsed;the very deep quaked as well.
Clouds streamed water;the heavens rumbled;Your arrows flew about;
Your thunder rumbled like wheels;lightning lit up the world;the earth quaked and trembled.
Your way was through the sea,Your path, through the mighty waters;Your tracks could not be seen.
You led Your people like a flockin the care of Moses and Aaron.

=== 78 | 78 ===
A maskil of Asaph.Give ear, my people, to my teaching,turn your ear to what I say.
I will expound a theme,hold forth on the lessons of the past—
things we have heard and known,that our ancestors have told us.
We will not withhold them from their children,telling the coming generationthe praises of GOD and of divine might,and the wonders performed.
[God] established a decree in Jacob,ordained a teaching in Israel,charging our ancestorsto make them known to their children,
that a future generation might know—children yet to be born—and in turn tell their children
that they might put their confidence in God,and not forget God’s great deeds,but observe the commandments,
and not be like their ancestors,a wayward and defiant generation,a generation whose heart was inconstant,whose spirit was not true to God.
Like the Ephraimite archerswho played false in the day of battle,
they did not keep God’s covenant,they refused to follow divine instruction;
they forgot what was done for themand the wonders they were shown.
[God] performed marvels in the sight of their ancestors,in the land of Egypt, the plain of Zoan.
[God] split the sea and took them through it—making the waters stand like a wall.
[God] led them with a cloud by day,and throughout the night by the light of fire.
[God] split rocks in the wildernessand gave them drink as if from the great deep.
[God] brought forth streams from a rockand made them flow down like a river.
But they went on sinning,defying the Most High in the parched land.
To test God was in their mindwhen they demanded food for themselves.
They spoke against God, saying,“Can God spread a feast in the wilderness?
True, [God]a[God] I.e., Moses, acting as God’s agent; cf. Exod. 17.5–6. struck the rock and waters flowed,streams gushed forth;but can [God] provide breadand supply meat for this people?”
GOD heard and then raged;fire broke out against Jacob,anger flared up at Israel,
because they did not put their trust in God,did not rely on divine deliverance.
So [God] commanded the skies above,opened the doors of heaven
and rained manna upon them for food,giving them heavenly grain.
Each person ate a hero’s meal;they were sent provision in plenty.
[God] set the east wind moving in heaven,and drove the south wind mightily.
[God] rained meat on them like dust,winged birds like the sands of the sea,
making them come down inside God’s camp,around the divine dwelling-place.
They ate till they were sated;they were given what they craved.
They had not yet wearied of what they craved,the food was still in their mouths
when God’s anger flared up at them.[God] slew their sturdiest,struck down the youth of Israel.
Nonetheless, they went on sinningand had no faith in God’s wonders.
Their days were made to end in futility,their years in sudden death.
When stricken,bstricken Lit. “killed.” they returned,and sought God once again.
They remembered that God was their rock,God Most High, their Redeemer.
Yet they deceived [God] with their speech,and lied with their words.
Their hearts were inconstant;they were untrue to the covenant.
But [God], being merciful, forgave iniquityand would not destroy—restraining wrath time and againand not giving full vent to such fury—
remembering that they were but flesh,a passing breath that does not return.
How often did they act defiantly in the wilderness,then cause grief in the wasteland!
Again and again they tested God,vexedcvexed Or “set a limit to.” the Holy One of Israel.
They did not remember God’s strength,or the day they were redeemed from the foe;
how [God] displayed signs in Egypt,and wonders in the plain of Zoan.
[God first] turned their rivers into blood—making their waters undrinkable;
then inflicted upon them swarms of insects to devour them,frogs to destroy them;
then gave their crops over to grubs,their produce to locusts;
then killed their vines with hail,their sycamores with frost;dwith frost Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
then gave their beasts over to hail,their cattle to lightning bolts;
and inflicted a burning anger upon them—wrath, indignation, trouble,a band of deadly messengers.
[God] cleared a path for that anger,and did not stop short of slaying them,but gave them over to pestilence.
[God] struck every [male] first-born in Egypt,the first fruits of their vigor in the tents of Ham.
God’s own people were set moving like sheep,driven like a flock in the wilderness.
[God] led them in safety; they were unafraid;as for their enemies, the sea covered them.
[God] brought them to the holy realm,erealm Or “hill” with Septuagint and Saadia. the mountain God’s right hand had acquired.
[God] expelled nations before them,settled the tribes of Israel in their tents,allotting them their portion by the line.fsettled the tribes of Israel in their tents, / allotting them their portion by the line Clauses transposed for clarity. 
Yet they defiantly tested God Most High,and did not observe divine decrees.
They fell away, disloyal like their ancestors;they played false like a treacherous bow.
They provoked anger with their high places;they kindled wrath with their idols.
God heard it and was enraged—utterly rejecting Israel.
[God] forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh,the tent that had been set among mortals.
God’s mightgGod’s might I.e., the Ark; cf. Ps. 132.8. was allowed to go into captivity,that glory into the hands of the foe.
This people was given over to the sword;God’s very own the object of rage.
Fire consumed their young men,and their maidens remained unwed.hremained unwed Lit. “had no nuptial song.” 
Their priests fell by the sword,and their widows could not weep.
The Sovereign awoke as from sleep—like a warrior shaking offishaking off Meaning of Heb. uncertain. wine—
and beat back all foes,dealing them lasting disgrace.
[God] rejected the clan of Josephand did not choose the tribe of Ephraim.
[God] did choose the tribe of Judah—Mount Zion, which was beloved—
building the Sanctuary like the heavens,like the earth that [God] established forever.
David, God’s servant, was chosen,and taken from the sheepfolds.
He was brought from minding the nursing ewesto tend the people of Jacob, Israel, God’s very own.
He tended them with blameless heart;with skillful hands he led them.

=== 79 | 79 ===
A psalm of Asaph.O God, heathens have entered Your domain,defiled Your holy temple,and turned Jerusalem into ruins.
They have left Your servants’ corpsesas food for the fowl of heaven,and the flesh of Your faithful for the wild beasts.
Their blood was shed like water around Jerusalem,with none to bury them.
We have become the butt of our neighbors,the scorn and derision of those around us.
How long, O ETERNAL One, will You be angry forever,will Your indignation blaze like fire?
Pour out Your fury on the nations that do not know You,upon the kingdoms that do not invoke Your name,
for they have devoured Jacoband desolated his home.
Do not hold our former iniquities against us;let Your compassion come swiftly toward us,for we have sunk very low.
Help us, O God, our deliverer,for the sake of the glory of Your name.Save us and forgive our sin,for the sake of Your name.
Let the nations not say, “Where is their God?”Before our eyes let it be known among the nationsthat You avenge the spilled blood of Your servants.
Let the groans of the prisoners reach You;reprieve those condemned to death,as befits Your great strength.
Pay back our neighbors sevenfoldfor the abuse they have flung at You, O Sovereign.
Then we, Your people,the flock You shepherd,shall glorify You forever;for all time we shall tell Your praises.

=== 80 | 80 ===
For the leader; on shoshannim, eduth. Of Asaph. A psalm.
Give ear, O shepherd of Israelwho leads Joseph like a flock!Appear, You who are enthroned on the cherubim,
at the head of Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh!Rouse Your might and come to our help!
Restore us, O God;show Your favor that we may be delivered.
O ETERNAL One, God of hosts,how long will You be wrathfultoward the prayers of Your people?
You have fed them tears as their daily bread,made them drink great measures of tears.
You set us at strife with our neighbors;our enemies mock us at will.
O God of hosts, restore us;show Your favor that we may be delivered.
You plucked up a vine from Egypt;You expelled nations and planted it.
You cleared a place for it;it took deep root and filled the land.
The mountains were covered by its shade,mighty cedars by its boughs.
Its branches reached the sea,its shoots, the river.
Why did You breach its wallso that every passerby plucks its fruit,
wild boars gnaw at it,and creatures of the field feed on it?
O God of hosts, turn again,look down from heaven and see;take note of that vine,
the stock planted by Your right hand,the stemastem Lit. “son.” you have taken as Your own.
For it is burned by fire and cut down,perishing before Your angry blast.
Grant Your helpbhelp Lit. “hand.” to the one at Your right hand,the mortal You have taken as Your own.
We will not turn away from You;preserve our life that we may invoke Your name.
O ETERNAL One, God of hosts, restore us;show Your favor that we may be delivered.

=== 81 | 81 ===
For the leader; on the gittith. Of Asaph.
Sing joyously to God, our strength;raise a shout for the God of Jacob.
Take up the song,sound the hand-drum,the melodious lyre and harp.
Blow the horn on the new moon,on the full moon for our feast day.
For it is a law for Israel,a ruling of the God of Jacob—
imposed as a decree upon Josephwhen he went forth fromahe went forth from Or “[God] went forth against.” the land of Egypt;I heard a language that I knew not.
“I relieved his shoulder of the burden,his hands were freed from the basket.
In distress you called and I rescued you;I answered you from the secret place of thunderbsecret place of thunder Meaning of Heb. uncertain. I tested you at the Waters of Meribah.    Selah. 
Hear, My people, and I will admonish you;Israel, if you would but listen to Me!
You shall have no foreign god,you shall not bow to an alien god.
I the ETERNAL am your Godwho brought you out of the land of Egypt;open your mouth wide and I will fill it.
But My people would not listen to Me,Israel would not obey Me.
So I let them go after their willful heartthat they might follow their own devices.
If only My people would listen to Me,if Israel would follow My paths,
then would I subdue their enemies at once,strike their foes again and again.”
Those who hate GOD shall cower;their doom shall be eternal.
[God] fed IsraelcIsrael Heb. “him.” the finest wheat;“I sated you with honey from the rock.”

=== 82 | 82 ===
A psalm of Asaph.God stands in the divine assembly,pronouncing judgment among the divine beings.
How long will you judge perversely,showing favor to the wicked?    Selah. 
Judge the wretched and the orphan,vindicate the lowly and the poor,
rescue the wretched and the needy;save them from the hand of the wicked.
They neither know nor understand,they go about in darkness;all the foundations of the earth totter.
I had taken you for divine beings,attendantsaattendants Lit. “sons.” of the Most High, all of you;
but you shall die as mortals do,fall like any prince.
Arise, O God, judge the earth,for all the nations are Your possession.

=== 83 | 83 ===
A song, a psalm of Asaph.
O God, do not be silent;do not hold aloof;do not be quiet, O God!
For Your enemies rage,Your foes assert themselves.aassert themselves Lit. “lift up the head.” 
They plot craftily against Your people,take counsel against Your treasured ones.
They say, “Let us wipe them out as a nation;Israel’s name will be mentioned no more.”
Unanimous in their counselthey have made an alliance against You—
the clans of Edom and the Ishmaelites,Moab and the Hagrites,
Gebal, Ammon, and Amalek,Philistia with the inhabitants of Tyre;
Assyria too joins forces with them;they give support to the descendants of Lot.bthe descendants of Lot I.e., the Moabites and the Ammonites; cf. Gen. 19.36–38.    Selah. 
Deal with them as You did with Midian,with Sisera, with Jabin,at the brook Kishon—
who were destroyed at En-dor,who became dung for the field.
Treat their nobles like Oreb and Zeeb,all their princes like Zebah and Zalmunna,
who said, “Let us take the meadows of God as our possession.”
O my God, make them like thistledown,like stubble driven by the wind.
As a fire burns a forest,as flames scorch the hills,
pursue them with Your tempest,terrify them with Your storm.
CovercCover Lit. “Fill.” their faces with shameso that they seek Your name, O ETERNAL One.
May they be frustrated and terrified,disgraced and doomed forever.
May they knowthat Your name, Yours alone, is GOD,supreme over all the earth.

=== 84 | 84 ===
For the leader; on the gittith. Of the Korahites. A psalm.
How lovely is Your dwelling-place,O GOD of Hosts.
I long, I yearn for the courts of the ETERNAL One;my body and soul shout for joy to the living God.
Even the sparrow has found a home,and the swallow a nest for herselfin which to set her young,near Your altar, O GOD of Hosts,my monarch and my God.
Happy are those who dwell in Your house;they forever praise You.    Selah. 
Happy are those who find refuge in You,whose mind is on the [pilgrim] highways.
They pass through the Valley of Baca,regarding it as a place of springs,as if the early rain had covered it with blessing.aregarding it … blessing Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
They go from rampart to rampart,brampart to rampart In contrast to others “strength to strength.” appearing before God in Zion.
O ETERNAL God of hosts,hear my prayer;give ear, O God of Jacob.    Selah. 
O God, behold our shield,look upon the face of Your anointed.
Better one day in Your courts than a thousand [anywhere else];I would rather stand at the threshold of God’s housethan dwell in the tents of the wicked.
For the ETERNAL God is suncsun Or “bulwark,” with Targum; cf. Isa. 54.12. and shield; GOD bestows grace and glory,and does not withhold bounty from those who live without blame.
O GOD of Hosts,happy is the one who trusts in You.

=== 85 | 85 ===
For the leader. Of the Korahites. A psalm.
O ETERNAL One, You will favorawill favor Or “have favored.” Your land,restorebrestore Or “have restored.” Jacob’s fortune;
You will forgivecwill forgive Or “have forgiven.” Your people’s iniquity,pardondpardon Or “have pardoned.” all their sins;    selah 
You will withdrawewill withdraw Or “have withdrawn.” all Your anger,turnfturn Or “have turned.” away from Your rage.
Turn again, O God, our helper,revoke Your displeasure with us.
Will You be angry with us forever,prolong Your wrath for all generations?
Surely You will revive us again,so that Your people may rejoice in You.
Show us, O ETERNAL One, Your faithfulness;grant us Your deliverance.
Let me hear what God, the ETERNAL, will speak,as a promise of well-being to the faithful ones—this people;may they not turn to folly.
Help is very near those who show reverence,to make God’s glory dwell in our land.
Faithfulness and truth meet;justice and well-being kiss.
Truth springs up from the earth;justice looks down from heaven.
GOD also bestows bounty;our land yields its produce.
Justice walks in frontas [God] sets out on the way.

=== 86 | 86 ===
A prayer of David.Incline Your ear, O ETERNAL One,answer me,for I am poor and needy.
Preserve my life, for I am steadfast;O You, my God,deliver Your servant who trusts in You.
Have mercy on me, O my Sovereign,for I call to You all day long;
bring joy to Your servant’s life,for on You, my Sovereign, I set my hope.
For You, my Sovereign, are good and forgiving,abounding in steadfast love to all who call on You.
Give ear, O ETERNAL One, to my prayer;heed my plea for mercy.
In my time of trouble I call You,for You will answer me.
There is none like You among the gods, O my Sovereign,and there are no deeds like Yours.
All the nations You have madewill come to bow down before You, O my Sovereign,and they will pay honor to Your name.
For You are great and perform wonders;You alone are God.
Teach me Your way, O ETERNAL One;I will walk in Your truth;let my heart be undivided in reverence for Your name.
I will praise You, O my Sovereign, my God, with all my heartand pay honor to Your name forever.
For Your steadfast love toward me is great;You have saved me from the depths of Sheol.
O God, arrogant people have risen against me;a ruthless band seeks my life;they are not mindful of You.
But You, O my Sovereign, are a Godcompassionate and merciful,slow to anger, abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness.
Turn to me and have mercy on me;grant Your strength to Your servantand deliver the son of Your maidservant.
Show me a sign of Your favor,that my enemies may see and be frustratedbecause You, O ETERNAL One, have given me aid and comfort.

=== 87 | 87 ===
aThe meaning of many passages in this psalm is uncertain. Of the Korahites. A psalm. A song.The temple’sbThe temple’s Heb. “Its.” foundation on the holy mountains—
the gates of Zion—GOD lovesmore than all the dwellings of Jacob.
Glorious things are spoken of you,O city of God.    Selah. 
I mention RahabcRahab A primeval monster; here, a poetic term for Egypt; cf. Isa. 30.7. and Babylon among those who acknowledge Me;Philistia, and Tyre, and Cush—each was born there.
Indeed, it shall be said of Zion,“TheydThey I.e., the nations of v. 4, or their members. were all born there.”It is the Most High who will preserve it.eIt is the Most High who will preserve it Or “[God] will preserve it supreme.” 
GOD will inscribe in the register of peoplesthat each was born there.    Selah. 
Singers and dancers alike [will say]:“All my rootsfroots Lit. “sources.” are in You.”

=== 88 | 88 ===
A song. A psalm of the Korahites. For the leader; maḥalath leannoth.amaḥalath leannoth Meaning of Heb. uncertain. A maskil of Heman the Ezrahite.
O ETERNAL One, God of my deliverance,when I cry out in the nightbwhen I cry out in the night Or “by day I cry out [and] by night.” before You,
let my prayer reach You;incline Your ear to my cry.
For I am sated with misfortune;I am at the brink of Sheol.
I am numbered with those who go down to the Pit;I am like someone helplessclike someone helpless Or “like a virile man who is helpless.” 
abandoneddabandoned Lit. “released.” among the dead,like bodies lying in the graveof whom You are mindful no more,and who are cut off from Your care.
You have put me at the bottom of the Pit,in the darkest places, in the depths.
Your fury lies heavy upon me;You afflict me with all Your breakers.    Selah. 
You make my companions shun me;You make me abhorrent to them;I am shut in and do not go out.
My eyes pine away from affliction;I call to You, O ETERNAL One, each day;I stretch out my hands to You.
Do You work wonders for the dead?Do the shades rise to praise You?    Selah. 
Is Your faithful care recounted in the grave,Your constancy in the place of perdition?
Are Your wonders made known in the netherworld,enetherworld Lit. “darkness.” Your beneficent deeds in the land of oblivion?
As for me, I cry out to You, O ETERNAL One;each morning my prayer greets You.
Why, O ETERNAL One, do You reject me,do You hide Your face from me?
From my youth I have been afflictedand near death;I suffer Your terrors wherever I turn.fwherever I turn Following Saadia; meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
Your fury overwhelms me;Your terrors destroy me.
They swirl about me like water all day long;they encircle me on every side.
You have put friend and neighbor far from meand my companions out of my sight.gout of my sight Lit. “into darkness.” 

=== 89 | 89 ===
A maskil of Ethan the Ezrahite.
I will sing of GOD’s steadfast love forever;to all generations I will proclaim Your faithfulness with my mouth.
I declare, “Your steadfast love is confirmed forever;there in the heavens You establish Your faithfulness.”
“I have made a covenant with My chosen one;I have sworn to My servant David:
I will establish your offspring forever,I will confirm your throne for all generations.”    Selah. 
Your wonders, O ETERNAL One, are praised by the heavens,Your faithfulness, too, in the assembly of holy beings.
For who in the skies can equal GOD,can compare with GOD among the divine beings,
a God greatly dreaded in the council of holy beings,held in awe by those all around?
O ETERNAL One, God of hosts,who is mighty like You, O Yah?aYah See note at 68.5. Your faithfulness surrounds You;
You rule the swelling of the sea;when its waves surge, You still them.
You crushed Rahab; he was like a corpse;with Your powerful arm You scattered Your enemies.
The heaven is Yours,the earth too;the world and all it holds—You established them.
North and south—You created them;Tabor and Hermon sing forth Your name.
Yours is an arm endowed with might;Your hand is strong;Your right hand, exalted.
Righteousness and justice are the base of Your throne;steadfast love and faithfulness stand before You.
Happy is the people who know the joyful shout;O ETERNAL One, they walk in the light of Your presence.
They rejoice in Your name all day long;they are exalted through Your righteousness.
For You are their strength in which they glory;our horn is exalted through Your favor.
Truly our shield is of GOD,our monarch, of the Holy One of Israel.
ThenbThen Referring to vv. 4–5; cf. 2 Sam. 7.1–17. You spoke to Your faithful ones in a visionand said, “I have conferred power upon a warrior;I have exalted one chosen out of the people.
I have found David, My servant;anointed him with My sacred oil.
My hand shall be constantly with him,and My arm shall strengthen him.
No enemy shall oppress him,coppress him Meaning of Heb. uncertain. no one vile afflict him.
I will crush his adversaries before him;I will strike down those who hate him.
My faithfulness and steadfast love shall be with him;his horn shall be exalted through My name.
I will set his hand upon the sea,his right hand upon the rivers.
He shall say to Me,‘You are my father,dfather I.e., with the authority to declare which offspring (= nation’s king) is the favored one. my God, the rock of my deliverance.’
I will appoint him first-born,highest of the kings of the earth.
I will maintain My steadfast love for him always;My covenant with him shall endure.
I will establish his line forever,his throne, as long as the heavens last.
If his sons forsake My Teachingand do not live by My rules;
if they violate My laws,and do not observe My commands,
I will punish their transgression with the rod,their iniquity with plagues.
But I will not take away My steadfast love from him;I will not betray My faithfulness.
I will not violate My covenant,or change what I have uttered.
I have sworn by My holiness, once and for all;I will not be false to David.
His line shall continue forever,his throne, as the sun before Me,
as the moon, established forever,an enduring witness in the sky.”    Selah. 
Yet You have rejected, spurned,and become enraged at Your anointed.
You have repudiated the covenant with Your servant;You have dragged his dignity in the dust.
You have breached all his defenses,shattered his strongholds.
All who pass by plunder him;he has become the butt of his neighbors.
You have exalted the right hand of his adversaries,and made all his enemies rejoice.
You have turned back the blade of his sword,and have not sustained him in battle.
You have brought his splendorehis splendor Meaning of Heb. uncertain. to an endand have hurled his throne to the ground.
You have cut short the days of his youth;You have covered him with shame.    Selah. 
How long, O ETERNAL One; will You forever hide Your face,will Your fury blaze like fire?
O remember how short my life is;fhow short my life is Meaning of Heb. uncertain. why should You have created every person in vain?
WhogWho Or “What virile man.” can live and not see death,can escape the clutches of Sheol?    Selah. 
O my Sovereign, where is Your steadfast love of oldthat You swore to David in Your faithfulness?
Remember, O my Sovereign, the abuse flung at Your servantsthat I have borne in my bosom [from] many peoples,hthat I have borne in my bosom [from] many peoples Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
how Your enemies, O ETERNAL One, have flung abuse,abuse at Your anointed at every step.
Blessed is GOD forever;Amen and Amen.

=== 90 | 90 ===
A prayer of Moses, the agent of God.O my Sovereign, You have been our refuge in every generation.
Before the mountains came into being,before You brought forth the earth and the world,from eternity to eternity You are God.
You return humans to dust;adust Or “contrition.” You decreed, “Return, you mortals!”
For in Your sight a thousand yearsare like yesterday that has passed,like a watch of the night.
You engulf mortalsbmortals Heb. “them.” in sleep;cFor in Your sight … sleep Meaning of Heb. uncertain. at daybreak they are like grass that renews itself;
at daybreak it flourishes anew;by dusk it withers and dries up.
So we are consumed by Your anger,terror-struck by Your fury.
You have set our iniquities before You,our hidden sins in the light of Your face.
All our days pass away in Your wrath;we spend our years like a sigh.
The span of our life is seventy years,or, given the strength, eighty years;but the best of themdbest of them Meaning of Heb. uncertain. are trouble and sorrow.They pass by speedily, and we are in darkness.eare in darkness Or “fly away.” 
Who can know Your furious anger?Your wrath matches the fear of You.
Teach us to count our days rightly,that we may obtain a wise heart.
Turn, O ETERNAL One!How long?Show mercy to Your servants.
Satisfy us at daybreak with Your steadfast lovethat we may sing for joy all our days.
Give us joy for as long as You have afflicted us,for the years we have suffered misfortune.
Let Your deeds be seen by Your servants,Your glory by their children.
May the favor of my Sovereign, our God, be upon us;let the work of our hands prosper,O prosper the work of our hands!

=== 91 | 91 ===
O you who dwell in the shelter of the Most Highand abide in the protection of Shaddai—
I say of GOD, my refuge and stronghold,my God in whom I trust,
that you will be saved from the fowler’s trap,from the destructive plague.
With pinions you will be covered;you will find refuge under God’s wings—whose fidelity is an encircling shield.
You need not fear the terror by night,or the arrow that flies by day,
the plague that stalks in the darkness,or the scourge that ravages at noon.
A thousand may fall at your left side,ten thousand at your right,but it shall not reach you.
You will see it with your eyes,you will witness the punishment of the wicked.
Because you took GOD—my refuge,the Most High—as your haven,
no harm will befall you,no disease touch your tent.
For God’s angels will be orderedto guard you wherever you go.
They will carry you in their handslest you hurt your foot on a stone.
You will tread on cubs and vipers;you will trample lions and asps.
“Because such people are devoted to Me, I will deliver them;I will keep them safe, for they know My name.
When they call on Me, I will answer them;I will be with them in distress;I will rescue them and make them honored;
I will let them live to a ripe old age,and show them My salvation.”

=== 92 | 92 ===
A psalm. A song; for the sabbath day.
It is good to praise GOD,to sing hymns to Your name, O Most High,
To proclaim Your steadfast love at daybreak,Your faithfulness each night
With a ten-stringed harp,with voice and lyre together.
You have gladdened me by Your deeds, O ETERNAL One;I shout for joy at Your handiwork.
How great are Your works, O ETERNAL One,how very subtleasubtle Or “profound.” Your designs!
A brute cannot know,a fool cannot understand this:
though the wicked sprout like grass,though all evildoers blossom,it is only that they may be destroyed forever.
But You are exalted, O ETERNAL One, for all time.
Surely, Your enemies, O ETERNAL One,surely, Your enemies perish;all evildoers are scattered.
You raise my horn high like that of a wild ox;I am soaked in freshening oil.
I shall see the defeat of my watchful foes,hear of the downfall of the wicked who beset me.
The righteous bloom like a date-palm;they thrive like a cedar in Lebanon;
planted in the house of GOD,they flourish in the courts of our God.
In old age they still produce fruit;they are full of sap and freshness—
attesting that GOD is upright,my rock, in whom there is no wrong.

=== 93 | 93 ===
GOD is sovereign,and robed in grandeur; GOD is robed,and girded with strength.The world stands firm;it cannot be shaken.
Your throne stands firm from of old;from eternity You have existed.
The ocean sounds, O ETERNAL One,the ocean sounds its thunder,the ocean sounds its pounding.
Above the thunder of the mighty waters,more majestic than the breakers of the seais GOD, majestic on high.
Your decrees are indeed enduring;holiness befits Your house,O ETERNAL One, for all times.

=== 94 | 94 ===
God of retribution, ETERNAL One,God of retribution, appear!
Rise up, judge of the earth,give the arrogant their deserts!
How long shall the wicked, O ETERNAL One,how long shall the wicked exult,
shall they utter insolent speech,shall all evildoers vaunt themselves?
They crush Your people, O ETERNAL One,they afflict Your very own;
they kill the widow and the stranger;they murder the fatherless,
thinking, “YahaYah See note at 68.5. does not see it,the God of Jacob does not pay heed.”
Take heed, you most brutish people;fools, when will you get wisdom?
Shall the One who implants the ear not hear,the One who forms the eye not see?
Shall the One who disciplines nations not punish,the One who instructs humankind in knowledge?
GOD knows human designs to be futile.
Happy are thosebare those Or “is the virile man.” whom You discipline, O Yah,whom You instruct in Your teaching,
whom You give tranquility in times of misfortune,until a pit be dug for the wicked.
For GOD will not forsake this people;God’s very own will not be abandoned.
Judgment shall again accord with justiceand all the upright shall rally to it.
Who will take my part against evildoers?Who will stand up for me against wrongdoers?
Were not GOD my help,I should soon dwell in silence.
When I think my foot has given way,Your faithfulness, O ETERNAL One, supports me.
When I am filled with cares,Your assurance soothes my soul.
Shall the seat of injustice be Your partner,that frames mischief by statute?
They band together to do away with the righteous;they condemn the innocent to death.
But GOD is my haven;my God is my sheltering rock.
Their evil will be made to recoil upon them,through their own wickedness they will be annihilated; the ETERNAL our God will annihilate them.

=== 95 | 95 ===
Come, let us sing joyously to GOD,raise a shout for our rock and deliverer;
let us come into the divine presence with praise;let us shout out in song!
For the ETERNAL is a great God,the great ruler of all divine beings.
In God’s hand are the depths of the earth;the peaks of the mountains are God’s.
The sea is God’s—the One who made it;and the land, fashioned by God’s hands.
Come, let us bow down and kneel,bend the knee before the ETERNAL our maker,
for this One is our God,and we are the people being cared for—the tended flock.O, if you would but heed God’s charge this day:
Do not be stubborn as at Meribah,as on the day of Massah, in the wilderness,
when your ancestors put Me to the test,tried Me, though they had seen My deeds.
Forty years I was provoked by that generation;I thought, “They are a senseless people;they would not know My ways.”
Concerning them I swore in anger,“They shall never come to My resting-place!”

=== 96 | 96 ===
aCf. 1 Chron. 16.23–33. Sing to GOD a new song,sing to GOD, all the earth.
Sing to GOD, bless this name,proclaim God’s victory day after day.
Tell of this glory among the nations,God’s wondrous deeds, among all peoples.
For GOD is great and much acclaimed,and is held in awe by all divine beings.
All the gods of the peoples are mere idols,but the ETERNAL made the heavens.
Glory and majesty are present;strength and splendor are in the holy temple.
Ascribe to GOD, O families of the peoples,ascribe to GOD glory and strength.
Ascribe to GOD the glory of this name,bring tribute and enter the temple’sbthe temple’s Heb. “its.” courts.
Bow down to GOD, majestic in holiness;tremble in the divine presence, all the earth!
Declare among the nations, “GOD is sovereign!”The world stands firm; it cannot be shaken;the peoples will be judged with equity.
Let the heavens rejoice and the earth exult;let the sea and all within it thunder,
the fields and everything in them exult;then shall all the trees of the forest shout for joy
at the presence of GOD, who is coming,coming to rule the earth—to rule the world justly,and its peoples in faithfulness.

=== 97 | 97 ===
GOD is sovereign!Let the earth exult,the many islands rejoice!
Surrounded by dense clouds—righteousness and justice are the base of the heavenly throne.
Fire is the vanguard,burning up foes on every side.
God’s lightnings light up the world;the earth is convulsed at the sight;
mountains melt like wax at GOD’s presence,at the presence of the Sovereign of all the earth.
The heavens proclaim God’s righteousnessand all peoples see God’s glory.
All who worship images,who vaunt their idols,are dismayed;all divine beings bow down in homage.
Zion, hearing it, rejoices,the townsatowns Or “women.” of Judah exult,because of Your judgments, O ETERNAL One.
For You, ETERNAL One, are supreme over all the earth;You are exalted high above all divine beings.
O you who love GOD, hate evil!For the lives of the loyal are guarded;they are saved from the hand of the wicked.
Light is sown for the righteous,radiancebradiance In contrast to others “joy.” for the upright.
O you righteous, rejoice in GOD and acclaim God’s holy name!

=== 98 | 98 ===
A psalm.Sing to GOD a new song,who has worked wonders—who with right hand, and holy arm,has won victory.
GOD has manifested victory,and displayed triumph in the sight of the nations—
mindful of God’s steadfast love and faithfulness toward the house of Israel.All the ends of the earth beheld the victory of our God.
Raise a shout to GOD, all the earth,break into joyous songs of praise!
Sing praise to GOD with the lyre,with the lyre and melodious song.
With trumpets and the blast of the hornraise a shout before GOD, the King.aKing I.e., the One who leads the celestial army to victory. 
Let the sea and all within it thunder,the world and its inhabitants;
let the rivers clap their hands,the mountains sing joyously together
at the presence of GOD—who is coming to rule the earth:[God] will rule the world justly,and its peoples with equity.

=== 99 | 99 ===
GOD, enthroned on cherubim, is sovereign,peoples tremble,aGOD, enthroned on cherubim, is sovereign, / peoples tremble Clauses transposed for clarity. the earth quakes.
GOD is great in Zion,and exalted above all peoples.
They praise Your name as great and awesome;[God] is holy!
Mighty rulerbMighty ruler Meaning of Heb. uncertain. who loves justice,it was You who established equity,You who worked righteous judgment in Jacob.
Exalt the ETERNAL our Godand bow down to the divine footstool;[God] is holy!
Moses and Aaron among God’s priests,Samuel, among those who call on the divine name—when they called to GOD,they were answered.
[God] spoke to them in a pillar of cloud;they obeyed those decrees,the law given to them.
Our ETERNAL God, You answered them;You were a forgiving God for them,but You exacted retribution for their misdeeds.
Exalt the ETERNAL our God,and bow toward God’s holy hill,for the ETERNAL our God is holy.

=== 100 | 100 ===
A psalm for praise.afor praise Traditionally “for the thanksgiving offering.” Raise a shout for GOD, all the earth;
worship GOD in gladness;come into the divine presence with shouts of joy.
Acknowledge that the ETERNAL is God,who made us and to whom we belong,bto whom we belong So qere; kethib and some ancient versions “not we ourselves.” a covenanted people, the flock whom [God] tends.
Enter the temple’s gates with praise,its courts with acclamation.Give praise!Bless the divine name!
For GOD—whose steadfast love is eternal,and whose faithfulness is for all generations—is good.

=== 101 | 101 ===
Of David. A psalm.I will sing of faithfulness and justice;I will chant a hymn to You, O ETERNAL One.
I will study the way of the blameless;when shall I attain it?I will live without blame within my house.
I will not set before my eyes anything base;I hate crooked dealing;I will have none of it.
Perverse thoughts will be far from me;I will know nothing of evil.
One who slanders a friend in secret I will destroy;I cannot endure anyone haughty and proud.
My eyes are on the trustworthy ones of the land,to have them at my side.One who follows the way of the blamelessshall be in my service.
One who deals deceitfullyshall not live in my house;one who speaks untruthshall not stand before my eyes.
Each morning I will destroyall the wicked of the land,to rid GOD’s cityof all evildoers.

=== 102 | 102 ===
A prayer of one who is lowly and faint, pouring forth a plea before GOD.
O ETERNAL One, hear my prayer;let my cry come before You.
Do not hide Your face from mein my time of trouble;turn Your ear to me;when I cry, answer me speedily.
For my days have vanished like smokeand my bones are charred like a hearth.
My body is stricken and withered like grass;too wastedatoo wasted In contrast to others “I forget.” to eat my food;
on account of my vehement groaningmy bones show through my skin.bshow through my skin Lit. “cling to my flesh.” 
I am like a great owl in the wilderness,an owl among the ruins.
I lie awake; I am likea lone bird upon a roof.
All day long my enemies revile me;my deriders use my name to curse.
For I have eaten ashes like breadand mixed my drink with tears,
because of Your wrath and Your fury;for You have cast me far away.
My days are like a lengthening shadow;I wither like grass.
But You, O ETERNAL One, are enthroned forever;Your fame endures throughout the ages.
You will surely arise and take pity on Zion,for it is time to be gracious to her;the appointed time has come.
Your servants take delight in its stones,and cherish its dust.
The nations will fear the name of GOD,all the kings of the earth, Your glory.
For GOD has built Zion,appearing in divine glory—
turning to the prayer of the destitutecof the destitute Meaning of Heb. uncertain. and not spurning their prayer.
May this be written down for a coming generation,that people yet to be created may praise Yah.dYah See note at 68.5. 
Looking down from the holy heights, GOD beholds the earth from heaven
to hear the groans of the prisoner,to release those condemned to death;
that GOD’s fame may be recounted in Zion,with praises offered in Jerusalem,
when the nations gather together,the kingdoms, to serve GOD.
My strength was drained in mid-course,my days shortened.
I say, “O my God, do not take me awayin the midst of my days,You whose years go on for generations on end.
Of old You established the earth;the heavens are the work of Your hands.
They shall perish, but You shall endure;they shall all wear out like a garment;You change them like clothing and they pass away.
But You are the same, and Your years never end.
May the children of Your servants dwell securelyand their offspring endure in Your presence.”

=== 103 | 103 ===
Of David.Bless GOD, O my soul,all my being, that holy name.
Bless the ETERNAL One, O my soul,and do not forget all God’s bounties.
All your sins are forgiven,all your diseases healed.
Your life is redeemed from the Pit,you are surrounded with steadfast love and mercy.
You are satisfied with good things in the prime of life,athe prime of life Meaning of Heb. uncertain. so that your youth is renewed like the eagle’s.
GOD executes righteous actsand judgments for all who are wronged—
making known to Moses the divine ways,and to the children of Israel, holy deeds.
GOD is compassionate and gracious,slow to anger, abounding in steadfast love.
[God] will not contend forever,or nurse anger for all time.
[God] has not dealt with us according to our sins,nor requited us according to our iniquities.
For as the heavens are high above the earth,so great is divine steadfast love toward those who show reverence.
As east is far from west,so far have our sins been removed from us.
As a father has compassion for his children,so GOD has compassion for those who show reverence.
For [God] knows how we are formed,and is mindful that we are dust.
Mortals, their days are like those of grass;they bloom like a flower of the field;
a wind passes by and it is no more,its own place no longer knows it.
But GOD’s steadfast love is for all eternitytoward those who show reverence,and God’s beneficence is for the children’s children
of those who keep the covenantand remember to observe the divine precepts.
GOD has established the heavenly throne,with a sovereign rule over all.
Bless the ETERNAL One, O angels,mighty creatures who do God’s bidding,ever obedient to that bidding;
bless the ETERNAL One, all youbyou Heb. “His.” hosts,youcyou See preceding note. servants who do God’s will;
bless the ETERNAL One, all God’s works,through the length and breadth of God’s realm;bless the ETERNAL One, O my soul.

=== 104 | 104 ===
Bless the ETERNAL One, O my soul;O ETERNAL One, my God, You are very great;You are clothed in glory and majesty,
wrapped in a robe of light;You spread the heavens like a tent cloth.
YouaYou Heb. 3rd person; so also in vv. 4 and 5. set the rafters of the heavenly lofts in the waters—making the clouds a chariot,moving on the wings of the wind.
You make messengers of the winds,servants of fiery flames.
You established the earth on its foundations,so that it shall never totter.
You made the deep cover it as a garment;the waters stood above the mountains.
They fled at Your blast,rushed away at the sound of Your thunder—
mountains rising, valleys sinking—to the place You established for them.
You set bounds they must not passso that they never again cover the earth.
You make springs gush forth in torrents;they make their way between the hills,
giving drink to all the wild beasts;the wild asses slake their thirst.
The birds of the sky dwell beside themand sing among the foliage.
You water the mountains from YourbYour Heb. 3rd person. lofts;the earth is sated from the fruit of Your work.
You make the grass grow for the cattle,and herbage for humans’ laborthat they may get food out of the earth—
wine that cheers human hearts,oil that makes the face shine,coil that makes the face shine Lit. “to make the face shine from oil.” and bread that sustains human life.
The trees of the ETERNAL drink their fill,the cedars of Lebanon, God’s own planting,
where birds make their nests;the stork has her home in the junipers.
The high mountains are for wild goats;the crags are a refuge for rock-badgers.
[God] made the moon to mark the seasons;the sun knows when to set.
You bring on darkness and it is night,when all the beasts of the forests stir.
The lions roar for prey,seeking their food from God.
When the sun rises, they come homeand couch in their dens.
People then go out to their work,to their labor until the evening.
How many are the things You have made, O ETERNAL One;You have made them all with wisdom;the earth is full of Your creations.
There is the sea, vast and wide,with its creatures beyond number,living things, small and great.
There go the ships,and Leviathan that You formed to sport with.
All of them look to Youto give them their food when it is due.
Give it to them, they gather it up;open Your hand, they are well satisfied;
hide Your face, they are terrified;take away their breath, they perishand turn again into dust;
send back Your breath, they are created,and You renew the face of the earth.
May GOD’s glory endure forever;may GOD rejoice in these works!
—The One who looks at the earth and it trembles,touches the mountains and they smoke.
I will sing to the ETERNAL as long as I live;all my life I will chant hymns to my God.
May my prayer be found pleasing;I will rejoice in GOD.
May sinners disappear from the earth,and the wicked be no more.Bless Yah,dYah See note at 68.5. O my soul.Hallelujah.

=== 105 | 105 ===
Praise GOD;call on this name;proclaim God’s deeds among the peoples.
Sing out praises;speak of all those wondrous acts.
Exult in this holy name;let all who seek GOD rejoice.
Turn to GOD, to divine might;adivine might I.e., the Ark; cf. Ps. 78.61; 132.8. seek God’s presence constantly.
Remember the wonders that have been done,the portents, and judgments pronounced,
O offspring of Abraham, God’s servant,O descendants of Jacob, the chosen ones.
The ETERNAL is our God,whose judgments are throughout the earth.
[God] is ever mindful of the covenant,the promise given for a thousand generations,
that was made with Abraham,sworn to Isaac,
and confirmed in a decree for Jacob,for Israel, as an eternal covenant,
saying, “To you I will give the land of Canaanas your allotted heritage.”
They were then few in number,a mere handful, sojourning there,
wandering from nation to nation,from one kingdom to another.
None were allowed to oppress them;kings were reproved on their account,
“Do not touch My anointed ones;do not harm My prophets.”
A famine was called down on the land,destroying every staff of bread.
[God] sent ahead of them an agent—Joseph, sold into slavery.
His feet were subjected to fetters;an iron collar was put on his neck.
Until his prediction came true GOD’s decree purged him.
The king sent to have him freed;the ruler of nations released him.
He made him the lord of his household,empowered him over all his possessions,
to discipline his princes at will,to teach his elders wisdom.
Then Israel came to Egypt;Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.
[God] made that people very fruitful,more numerous than their foes,
then changed the heartbchanged the heart Or “Their heart changed.” [of the Egyptians] to hate this people,to plot against God’s servants.
Moses—God’s servant—was sent,and Aaron, who had been chosen.
They performed God’s signs among them,and wonders, against the land of Ham.
[God] sent darkness; it was very dark;did they not defy God’s word?cdid they not defy God’s word Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
Their waters were turned into bloodand their fish were killed.
Their land teemed with frogs,even the rooms of their king.
Swarms of insects came at God’s command,lice, throughout their country.
They were given hail for rain,and flaming fire in their land.
Their vines and fig trees were struck,the trees of their country broken down.
Locusts came at God’s command,grasshoppers without number.
They devoured every green thing in the land;they consumed the produce of the soil.
[God] struck down every [male] first-born in the land,the first fruit of their vigor.
IsraeldIsrael Heb. “them.” was led out with silver and gold;none among their tribes faltered.
Egypt rejoiced when they left,for dread of IsraeleIsrael Heb. “them.” had fallen upon them.
[God] spread a cloud for a cover,and fire to light up the night.
They asked, and were brought quail,and were satisfied with food from heaven.
[God] opened a rock so that water gushed forth;it flowed as a stream in the parched land.
Mindful of the sacred promiseto Abraham—God’s servant,
The people were led out in gladness,God’s chosen ones with joyous song.
They were given the lands of nations;they inherited the wealth of peoples,
that they might keep God’s lawsand observe God’s teachings.Hallelujah.

=== 106 | 106 ===
Hallelujah.Praise GOD, who is good—whose steadfast love is eternal.
Who can tell GOD’s mighty acts,proclaim all due praises?
Happy are those who act justly,who do right at all times.
Be mindful of me, O ETERNAL One, when You favor Your people;take note of me when You deliver them,
that I may enjoy the prosperity of Your chosen ones,share the joy of Your nation,glory in Your very own people.
We have sinned like our ancestors;we have gone astray, done evil.
Our ancestors in Egypt did not perceive Your wonders;they did not remember Your abundant love,but rebelled at the sea, at the Sea of Reeds.
Yet they were saved, as befits God’s name,to make known God’s might.
A blast was sent against the Sea of Reeds;it became dry;they were led through the deep as through a wilderness.
They were delivered from the foe,redeemed from the enemy.
Water covered their adversaries;not one of them was left.
Then they believed God’s promise,and sang God’s praises.
But they soon forgot those deeds;they would not wait to learn the divine plan.
They were seized with craving in the wilderness,and put God to the test in the wasteland.
They were given what they asked for,then made to waste away.
There was envy of Moses in the camp,and of Aaron, GOD’s holy one.
The earth opened up and swallowed Dathan,closed over the party of Abiram.
A fire blazed among their party,a flame that consumed the wicked.
They made a calf at Horeband bowed down to a molten image.
They exchanged their gloryfor the image of a bull that feeds on grass.
They forgot God who saved them,who performed great deeds in Egypt,
wondrous deeds in the land of Ham,awesome deeds at the Sea of Reeds.
They would have been destroyedhad not Moses, God’s chosen one,stood in the breachto avert God’s destructive wrath.
They rejected the desirable land,and put no faith in the divine promise.
They grumbled in their tentsand disobeyed GOD.
So a divine hand was raised in oathto make them fall in the wilderness,
to disperseadisperse Cf. Targum, Kimhi. their offspring among the nationsand scatter them through the lands.
They attached themselves to Baal Peor,ate sacrifices offered to the dead.
They provoked anger by their deeds,and a plague broke out among them.
Phinehas stepped forth and intervened,and the plague ceased.
It was reckoned to his meritfor all generations, to eternity.
They provoked wrath at the waters of Meribahand Moses suffered on their account,
because they rebelled against [God]and he spoke rashly.
They did not destroy the nationsas GOD had commanded them,
but mingled with the nationsand learned their ways.
They worshiped their idols,which became a snare for them.
Their own sons and daughtersthey sacrificed to demons.
They shed innocent blood,the blood of their sons and daughters,whom they sacrificed to the idols of Canaan;so the land was polluted with bloodguilt.
Thus they became defiled by their acts,debauched through their deeds.
GOD was angry with this peopleand abhorred them as an inheritance.
They were handed over to the nations;their foes ruled them.
Their enemies oppressed themand they were subject to their power.
They were saved time and again,but they were deliberately rebellious,and so they were brought low by their iniquity.
Upon seeing that they were in distress,and hearing their cry,
[God] was mindful of the covenantand in great faithfulness relented.
Their captors were made to be kindly disposed toward them.
Deliver us, our ETERNAL God,and gather us from among the nations,to acclaim Your holy name,to glory in Your praise.
Blessed is the ETERNAL, God of Israel,From eternity to eternity.Let all the people say, “Amen.”Hallelujah.

=== 107 | 107 ===
“Praise GOD, who is good—whose steadfast love is eternal!”
Thus let GOD’s redeemed say,those redeemed from adversity,
who have been gathered in from the lands,from east and west,from the north and from the sea.
Some lost their way in the wilderness,in the wasteland;they found no settled place.
Hungry and thirsty,their spirit failed.
In their adversity they cried to GOD,and they were rescued from their troubles.
They were shown a direct wayto reach a settled place.
Let them give praise for GOD’s steadfast loveand wondrous deeds for humankind—
for satisfying the thirsty,and filling the hungry with all good things.
Some lived in deepest darkness,bound in cruel irons,
because they defied the word of God,spurned the counsel of the Most High.
Their hearts were humbled through suffering;they stumbled with no one to help.
In their adversity they cried to GOD,and were rescued from their troubles.
They were brought out of deepest darkness,their bonds broken asunder.
Let them give praise for GOD’s steadfast loveand wondrous deeds for humankind—
shattering gates of bronze,breaking their iron bars.
There were fools who suffered for their sinful way,and for their iniquities.
All food was loathsome to them;they reached the gates of death.
In their adversity they cried to GOD and they were saved from their troubles.
[God] gave an order and healed them—delivering them from the pits.athe pits Of death. 
Let them give praise for GOD’s steadfast loveand wondrous deeds for humankind.
Let them offer thanksgiving sacrifices,and tell those deeds in joyful song.
Others go down to the sea in ships,ply their trade in the mighty waters;
they have seen GOD’s worksand such wonders in the deep.
God’s word raised a storm windthat made the waves surge.
Mounting up to the heaven,plunging down to the depths,disgorging in their misery,
they reeled and staggered like a drunk,all their skill to no avail.
In their adversity they cried to GOD,and were saved from their troubles.
The storm was reduced to a whisper;the waves were stilled.
They rejoiced when all was quiet,and were brought to the port they desired.
Let them give praise for GOD’s steadfast love,and wondrous deeds for humankind.
Let them exalt in the congregation of the people,acclaim in the assembly of the elders.
The rivers are turned into a wilderness,springs of water into thirsty land,
fruitful land into a salt marsh,because of the wickedness of its inhabitants.
The wilderness is turned into pools,parched land into springs of water.
There the hungry are settled;they build a place to settle in.
They sow fields and plant vineyardsthat yield a fruitful harvest.
They are blessed and they increase greatly—their cattle do not decrease,
after they had been few and crushedby oppression, misery, and sorrow.
[God] pours contempt on noblesand makes them lose their way in trackless deserts;
but the needy are secured from suffering,their families increased like flocks.
The upright see it and rejoice;the mouth of all wrongdoers is stopped.
One who is wise will take note of these thingsand consider GOD’s steadfast love.

=== 108 | 108 ===
A song. A psalm of David.
aCf. Ps. 57.8–12. My heart is firm, O God;I will sing and chant a hymn with all my soul.
Awake, O harp and lyre!I will wake the dawn.
I will praise You among the peoples, O ETERNAL One,sing a hymn to You among the nations;
for Your faithfulness is higher than the heavens;Your steadfastness reaches to the sky.
Exalt Yourself over the heavens, O God;let Your glory be over all the earth!
bCf. Ps. 60.7–14. That those whom You love may be rescued,deliver with Your right hand and answer me.
God promised in the sanctuarycin the sanctuary Or “by God’s holiness.” that I would exultingly divide up Shechem,and measure the Valley of Sukkoth;
Gilead and Manasseh would be mine,Ephraim my chief stronghold,Judah my scepter;
Moab would be my washbasin;on Edom I would cast my shoe;I would raise a shout over Philistia.
Would that I were brought to the bastion!Would that I were led to Edom!
But You have rejected us, O God;God, You do not march with our armies.
Grant us Your aid against the foe,for human help is worthless.
We shall triumph with God,who will trample our foes.

=== 109 | 109 ===
For the leader. Of David. A psalm.O God of my praise,do not keep aloof,
for the wicked and the deceitfulopen their mouth against me;they speak to me with lying tongue.
They encircle me with words of hate;they attack me without cause.
They answer my love with accusationand I must stand judgmentaand I must stand judgment Or “but I am all prayer”; meaning of Heb. uncertain, but see v. 7. 
They repay me with evil for good,with hatred for my love.
Appoint someone wicked over him;may an accuser stand at his right side;
may he be tried and convicted;may he be judged and found guilty.
May his days be few;may another take over his position.bhis position Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
May his children be orphans,his wife a widow.
May his children wander from their hovels,begging in search of [bread].
May his creditor seize all his possessions;may strangers plunder his wealth.
May no one show him mercy;may none pity his orphans;
may his posterity be cut off;may their names be blotted out in the next generation.
May God be ever mindful of his father’s iniquity,and may the sin of his mother not be blotted out.
May GOD be aware of them alwaysand cause their names to be cut off from the earth,
because he was not minded to act kindly,and hounded to death the poor and needy man,cthe poor and needy man The psalmist himself; cf. vv. 22, 31. one crushed in spirit.
He loved to curse—may a curse come upon him!He would not bless—may blessing be far from him!
May he be clothed in a curse like a garment,may it enter his body like water,his bones like oil.
Let it be like the cloak he wraps around him,like the belt he always wears.
May GOD thus repay my accusers,all those who speak evil against me.
Now You, O GOD, my Sovereign,act in my behalf as befits Your name.Good and faithful as You are, save me.
For I am poor and needy,and my heart is pierced within me.
I fade away like a lengthening shadow;I am shaken off like locusts.
My knees give way from fasting;my flesh is lean, has lost its fat.
I am the object of their scorn;when they see me, they shake their head.
Help me, O my ETERNAL God;save me in accord with Your faithfulness—
that all may know that it is Your hand,that You, O ETERNAL One, have done it.
Let them curse, but You bless;let them rise up, but come to grief,while Your servant rejoices.
My accusers shall be clothed in shame,wrapped in their disgrace as in a robe.
My mouth shall sing much praise to GOD;I will acclaim in the midst of a throng,
because [God] stands at the right hand of the needy,to save them from those who would condemn them.

=== 110 | 110 ===
Of David. A psalm. GOD said to my lord,amy lord I.e., the king, who leads his army on campaigns. “Sit at My right handwhile I make your enemies your footstool.”
GOD will stretch forth from Zion your mighty scepter;hold sway over your enemies!
bMeaning of verse uncertain. Your people come forward willingly on your day of battle.In majestic holiness, from the womb,from the dawn, yours was the dew of youth.
GOD has sworn and will not relent,“You are a priest forever, a rightful king by My decree.”ca rightful king by My decree Or “after the manner of Melchizedek.” 
My Sovereign is at your right hand—crushing kings in the day of divine anger.
[God] works judgment upon the nations,heaping up bodies,crushing heads far and wide.
My lorddMy lord Heb. “He”; cf. v. 1. drinks from the stream on his way;therefore he holds his head high.eholds his head high A sign of victory; cf. 3.4; 27.6. 

=== 111 | 111 ===
Hallelujah.אI praise GOD with all my heartבin the assembled congregation of the upright.
גGOD’s works are great,דwithin reach of all who desire them.awithin reach of all who desire them Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
הSplendid and glorious are God’s deeds;וGod’s beneficence is everlasting;
זrenowned are God’s wonders.חGOD is gracious and compassionate—
טgiving food to those who show reverence,יand ever mindful of the covenant—
כrevealing powerful works to this people,לand giving them the heritage of nations.
מTruth and justice are God’s handiwork—נwhose precepts are enduring,
סwell-founded for all eternity,עעwrought of truth and equity.
פRedeeming this people,צ[God] ordained the covenant for all time;קholy and awesome is God’s name.
רThe beginningbbeginning Or “chief part.” of wisdom is reverence toward GOD;שall who practice it gain sound understanding.תPraise of [God] is everlasting.

=== 112 | 112 ===
Hallelujah. א Happy are those who fear GOD,who are ardently devoted to God’s commandments.
ג Their descendants will be mighty in the land,ד a blessed generation of the upright.
ה Wealth and riches are in their house,ו and their beneficence lasts forever.
ז A light shinesaA light shines Or “[God] shines as a light.” for the upright in the darkness;bthey are Or “[God] is.” gracious, compassionate, and beneficent.
ח ט All goes well with those who lend generously,יwho conduct affairs with equity.
כ They shall never be shaken;לthe beneficent will be remembered forever.
מ They are not afraid of evil tidings;נtheir heart is firm, they trust in GOD.
ס Their heart is resolute, they are unafraid;עin the end they will see the fall of their foes.
פ They give freely to the poor;צtheir beneficence lasts forever; קtheir horn is exalted in honor.
ר The wicked shall see it and be vexed;שthey shall gnash their teeth; their courage shall fail.תThe desire of the wicked shall come to nothing.

=== 113 | 113 ===
ש ת Hallelujah.O servants of GOD, give praise;praise the name of GOD.
Let GOD’s name be blessednow and forever.
From east to west GOD’s name is praised.
GOD is exalted above all nations;God’s glory is above the heavens.
Who is like the ETERNAL our God—the One who, enthroned on high,
sees what is below,in heaven and on earth?
[God] raises the poor from the dust,lifts up the needy from the refuse heap
to set them with the nobles,with the nobles of God’s people,
and sets the childless woman among her householdas a happy mother of children.Hallelujah.

=== 114 | 114 ===
When Israel went forth from Egypt,the house of Jacob from a people of strange speech,
Judah became God’s holy one,aholy one Or “sanctuary.” Israel, God’s dominion.
The sea saw them and fled,Jordan ran backward,
mountains skipped like rams,hills like sheep.
What alarmed you, O sea, that you fled,Jordan, that you ran backward,
mountains, that you skipped like rams,hills, like sheep?
Tremble, O earth, at the presence of the Sovereign,at the presence of the God of Jacob,
who turned the rock into a pool of water,the flinty rock into a fountain.

=== 115 | 115 ===
Not to us, O ETERNAL One, not to usbut to Your name bring gloryfor the sake of Your love and Your faithfulness.
Let the nations not say,“Where, now, is their God?”
when our God is in heavenand whatever [God] wants is accomplished.
aCf. Ps. 135.15–20. Their idols are silver and gold,the work of human hands.
They have mouths, but cannot speak,eyes, but cannot see;
they have ears, but cannot hear,noses, but cannot smell;
they have hands, but cannot touch,feet, but cannot walk;they can make no sound in their throats.
Those who fashion them,all who trust in them,shall become like them.
O Israel, trust in GOD—who is yourbyour Heb. “their.” help and shield.
O house of Aaron, trust in GOD—who is yourcyour See note at v. 9. help and shield.
O you who fear GOD, trust in GOD—who is yourdyour See note at v. 9. help and shield.
GOD, mindful of us, will bless us— blessing the house of Israel,blessing the house of Aaron,
and blessing those who revere GOD,small and great alike.
May GOD increase your numbers,yours and your children’s also.
May you be blessed by GOD,Maker of heaven and earth.
The heavens belong to GOD,but the earth was given over to humankind.
The dead cannot praise Yah,eYah See note at 68.5. nor any who go down into silence.
But we will bless Yahnow and forever.Hallelujah.

=== 116 | 116 ===
I love the ETERNAL One for hearing my voice, my pleas;aI love the ETERNAL ONE / for hearing my voice, my pleas Heb. transposed for clarity; in contrast to others “I would love that the LORD hear,” etc. 
for turning an ear to mewhenever I call.
The bonds of death encompassed me;the torments of Sheol overtook me.I came upon trouble and sorrow
and I invoked GOD’s name,“O ETERNAL One, save my life!”
GOD is gracious and beneficent;our God is compassionate.
GOD protects the simple;I was saved, after having been brought low.
Be at rest, once again, O my soul,for GOD has been good to you.
YoubYou I.e., God. have delivered me from death,my eyes from tears,my feet from stumbling.
I shall walk before GOD in the lands of the living.
I trust [in GOD];out of great suffering I spokecI trust … I spoke Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
and said rashly,“All people are false.”
How can I repay GOD for all the bounties given to me?
I raise the cup of deliveranceand invoke GOD’s name.
I will pay my vows to GOD in the presence of all those assembled.
The death of God’s faithful onesis grievous in GOD’s sight.
O ETERNAL One,I am Your servant,Your servant, the child of Your maidservant;You have undone the cords that bound me.
I will sacrifice a thank offering to Youand invoke GOD’s name.
I will pay my vows to GOD in the presence of all those assembled,
in the courts of GOD’s house,in the midst ofdof In contrast to others “of you.” Jerusalem.Hallelujah.

=== 117 | 117 ===
Praise GOD, all you nations;extol [God], all you peoples,
for great is this steadfast love toward us; GOD’s faithfulness endures forever.Hallelujah.

=== 118 | 118 ===
Praise GOD, who is good—whose steadfast love is eternal.
Let Israel declare,“God’s steadfast love is eternal.”
Let the house of Aaron declare,“God’s steadfast love is eternal.”
Let those who fear GOD declare,“God’s steadfast love is eternal.”
In distress I called on Yah;aYah See note at 68.5. Yah answered me and brought me relief.
GOD is on my side,I have no fear;what can mortals do to me?
With GOD on my side as my helper,I will see the downfall of my foes.
It is better to take refuge in GOD than to trust in mortals;
it is better to take refuge in GOD than to trust in the great.
All nations have beset me;by GOD’s name I will surely cut them down.bcut them down Meaning of ʼamilam in this and the following two verses uncertain. 
They beset me, they surround me;by GOD’s name I will surely cut them down.
They have beset me like bees;they shall be extinguished like burning thorns;by GOD’s name I will surely cut them down.
YoucYou I.e., the enemy. pressed me hard,I nearly fell;but GOD helped me.
Yah is my strength and might,and has become my deliverance.
The tents of the victoriousdvictorious Or “righteous.” resound with joyous shouts of deliverance,“GOD’s right hand is triumphant!
GOD’s right hand is exalted! GOD’s right hand is triumphant!”
I shall not die but liveand proclaim the works of Yah.
Yah punished me severely,but did not hand me over to death.
Open the gates of victoryevictory Or “righteousness.” for methat I may enter them and praise Yah.
This is the gateway to GOD—the victoriousfvictorious Or “righteous.” shall enter through it.
I praise You, for You have answered me,and have become my deliverance.
The stone that the builders rejectedhas become the chief cornerstone.
This is GOD’s doing;it is marvelous in our sight.
This is the day that GOD has made—let us exult and rejoice on it.
O ETERNAL One, deliver us!O ETERNAL One, let us prosper!
May everyone who enters be blessed in the name of GOD;we bless you from the House of GOD.
The ETERNAL is God,who has given us light;bind the festal offering to the horns of the altar with cords.gbind … with cords Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
You are my God and I will praise You;You are my God and I will extol You.
Praise GOD, who is good—whose steadfast love is eternal.

=== 119 | 119 ===
א Happy are those whose way is blameless,who follow GOD’s teaching.
Happy are those who observe God’s decrees,who turn to the divine wholeheartedly.
They have done no wrong,but have followed God’s ways.
You have commanded that Your preceptsbe kept diligently.
Would that my ways were firmin keeping Your laws;
then I would not be ashamedwhen I regard all Your commandments.
I will praise You with a sincere heartas I learn Your just rules.
I will keep Your laws;do not utterly forsake me.
ב How can youths keep their way pure?—by holding to Your word.
I have turned to You with all my heart;do not let me stray from Your commandments.
In my heart I treasure Your promise;therefore I do not sin against You.
Blessed are You, O ETERNAL One;train me in Your laws.
With my lips I rehearseall the rules You proclaimed.
I rejoice over the way of Your decreesas over all riches.
I study Your precepts;I regard Your ways;
I take delight in Your laws;I will not neglect Your word.
ג Deal kindly with Your servant,that I may live to keep Your word.
Open my eyes, that I may perceivethe wonders of Your teaching.
I am only a sojourner in the land;do not hide Your commandments from me.
My soul is consumed with longingfor Your rules at all times.
You blast the accursed insolent oneswho stray from Your commandments.
Take away from me taunt and abuse,because I observe Your decrees.
Though princes meet and speak against me,Your servant studies Your laws.
For Your decrees are my delight,my intimate companions.
ד My soul clings to the dust;revive me in accordance with Your word.
I have declared my way, and You have answered me;train me in Your laws.
Make me understand the way of Your precepts,that I may study Your wondrous acts.
I am racked with grief;sustain me in accordance with Your word.
Remove all false ways from me;favor me with Your teaching.
I have chosen the way of faithfulness;I have set Your rules before me.
I cling to Your decrees;O ETERNAL One, do not put me to shame.
I eagerly pursue Your commandments,for You broaden my understanding.
ה Teach me, O ETERNAL One, the way of Your laws;I will observe them to the utmost.ato the utmost Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
Give me understanding, that I may observe Your teachingand keep it wholeheartedly.
Lead me in the path of Your commandments,for that is my concern.
Turn my heart to Your decreesand not to love of gain.
Avert my eyes from seeing falsehood;by Your ways preserve me.
Fulfill Your promise to Your servant,which is for those who worship You.
Remove the taunt that I dread,for Your rules are good.
See, I have longed for Your precepts;by Your righteousness preserve me.
ו May Your steadfast love reach me, O ETERNAL One,Your deliverance, as You have promised.
I shall have an answer for those who taunt me,for I have put my trust in Your word.
Do not utterly take the truth away from my mouth,for I have put my hope in Your rules.
I will always obey Your teaching,forever and ever.
I will walk about at ease,for I have turned to Your precepts.
I will speak of Your decrees,and not be ashamed in the presence of kings.
I will delight in Your commandments,which I love.
I reach out for Your commandments, which I love;I study Your laws.
ז Remember Your word to Your servantthrough which You have given me hope.
This is my comfort in my affliction,that Your promise has preserved me.
Though the arrogant have cruelly mocked me,I have not swerved from Your teaching.
I remember Your rules of old, O ETERNAL One,and find comfort in them.
I am seized with ragebecause of the wicked who forsake Your teaching.
Your laws are a source of strength to meba source of strength to me Or “songs for me.” wherever I may dwell.
I remember Your name at night, O ETERNAL One,and obey Your teaching.
This has been my lot,for I have observed Your precepts.
ח GOD is my portion;I have resolved to keep Your words.
I have implored You with all my heart;have mercy on me, in accordance with Your promise.
I have considered my ways,and have turned back to Your decrees.
I have hurried and not delayedto keep Your commandments.
Though the bonds of the wicked are coiled round me,I have not neglected Your teaching.
I arise at midnight to praise Youfor Your just rules.
I am a companion to all who fear You,to those who keep Your precepts.
Your steadfast love, O ETERNAL One, fills the earth;teach me Your laws.
ט You have treated Your servant well,according to Your word, O ETERNAL One.
Teach me good sense and knowledge,for I have put my trust in Your commandments.
Before I was humbled I went astray,but now I keep Your word.
You are good and beneficent;teach me Your laws.
Though the arrogant have accused me falsely,I observe Your precepts wholeheartedly.
Their minds are thick like fat;as for me, Your teaching is my delight.
It was good for me that I was humbled,so that I might learn Your laws.
I prefer the teaching You proclaimedto thousands of gold and silver pieces.
י Your hands made me and fashioned me;give me understanding that I may learn Your commandments.
Those who fear You will see me and rejoice,for I have put my hope in Your word.
I know, O ETERNAL One, that Your rulings are just;rightly have You humbled me.
May Your steadfast love comfort mein accordance with Your promise to Your servant.
May Your mercy reach me, that I might live,for Your teaching is my delight.
Let the insolent be dismayed, for they have wronged me without cause;I will study Your precepts.
May those who fear You,those who know Your decrees,turn again to me.
May I wholeheartedly follow Your lawsso that I do not come to grief.
כ I long for Your deliverance;I hope for Your word.
My eyes pine away for Your promise;I say, “When will You comfort me?”
Though I have become like a water-skin dried in smoke,I have not neglected Your laws.
How long has Your servant to live?when will You bring my persecutors to judgment?
The insolent have dug pits for me,flouting Your teaching.
All Your commandments are enduring;I am persecuted without cause; help me!
Though they almost wiped me off the earth,I did not abandon Your precepts.
As befits Your steadfast love, preserve me,so that I may keep the decree You proclaimed.
ל GOD exists forever;Your word stands firm in heaven.
Your faithfulness is for all generations;You have established the earth, and it stands.
They stand this day to [carry out] Your rulings,for all are Your servants.
Were not Your teaching my delightI would have perished in my affliction.
I will never neglect Your precepts,for You have preserved my life through them.
I am Yours; save me!For I have turned to Your precepts.
The wicked hope to destroy me,but I ponder Your decrees.
I have seen that all things have their limit,but Your commandment is broad beyond measure.
מ O how I love Your teaching!It is my study all day long.
Your commandments make me wiser than my enemies;they always stand by me.
I have gained more insight than all my teachers,for Your decrees are my study.
I have gained more understanding than my elders,for I observe Your precepts.
I have avoided every evil wayso that I may keep Your word.
I have not departed from Your rules,for You have instructed me.
How pleasing is Your word to my palate,sweeter than honey.
I ponder Your precepts;therefore I hate every false way.
נ Your word is a lamp to my feet,a light for my path.
I have firmly swornto keep Your just rules.
I am very much afflicted;O ETERNAL One, preserve me in accordance with Your word.
Accept, O ETERNAL One, my freewill offerings;teach me Your rules.
Though my life is always in danger,I do not neglect Your teaching.
Though the wicked have set a trap for me,I have not strayed from Your precepts.
Your decrees are my eternal heritage;they are my heart’s delight.
I am resolved to follow Your lawsto the utmostcto the utmost Meaning of Heb. uncertain. forever.
ס I hate the double-minded,but I love Your teaching.
You are my protection and my shield;I hope for Your word.
Keep away from me, you evildoers,that I may observe the commandments of my God.
Support me as You promised, so that I may live;do not thwart my expectation.
Sustain me that I may be saved,and I will always muse upon Your laws.
You reject all who stray from Your laws,for they are false and deceitful.
You do away with the wicked as if they were dross;rightly do I love Your decrees.
My flesh creeps from fear of You;I am in awe of Your rulings.
ע I have done what is just and right;do not abandon me to those who would wrong me.
Guarantee Your servant’s well-being;do not let the arrogant wrong me.
My eyes pine away for Your deliverance,for Your promise of victory.
Deal with Your servant as befits Your steadfast love;teach me Your laws.
I am Your servant;give me understanding,that I might know Your decrees.
It is a time to act for GOD,for they have violated Your teaching.
Rightly do I love Your commandmentsmore than gold, even fine gold.
Truly by all [Your] precepts I walk straight;dby all [Your] precepts I walk straight Or “I declare all [Your] precepts to be just.” I hate every false way.
פ Your decrees are wondrous;rightly do I observe them.
The words You inscribed giveeThe words You inscribed give With Targum; or “The exposition of Your words gives”; meaning of Heb. uncertain. light,and grant understanding to the simple.
I open my mouth wide, I pant,longing for Your commandments.
Turn to me and be gracious to me,as is Your rule with those who love Your name.
Make my feet firm through Your promise;do not let iniquity dominate me.
Redeem me from being wronged by others,that I may keep Your precepts.
Show favor to Your servant,and teach me Your laws.
My eyes shed streams of waterbecause others do not obey Your teaching.
צ You are righteous, O ETERNAL One;Your rulings are just.
You have ordained righteous decrees;they are firmly enduring.
I am consumed with rageover my foes’ neglect of Your words.
Your word is exceedingly pure,and Your servant loves it.
Though I am belittled and despised,I have not neglected Your precepts.
Your righteousness is eternal;Your teaching is true.
Though anguish and distress come upon me,Your commandments are my delight.
Your righteous decrees are eternal;give me understanding, that I might live.
ק I call with all my heart;answer me, O ETERNAL One,that I may observe Your laws.
I call upon You; save me,that I may keep Your decrees.
I rise before dawn and cry for help;I hope for Your word.
My eyes greet each watch of the night,as I meditate on Your promise.
Hear my voice as befits Your steadfast love;O ETERNAL One, preserve me, as is Your rule.
Those who pursue intrigue draw near;they are far from Your teaching.
You, O ETERNAL One, are near,and all Your commandments are true.
I know from Your decrees of oldthat You have established them forever.
ר See my affliction and rescue me,for I have not neglected Your teaching.
Champion my cause and redeem me;preserve me according to Your promise.
Deliverance is far from the wicked,for they have not turned to Your laws.
Your mercies are great, O ETERNAL One;as is Your rule, preserve me.
Many are my persecutors and foes;I have not swerved from Your decrees.
I have seen traitors and loathedfloathed Or “have contended with.” them,because they did not keep Your word in mind.
See that I have loved Your precepts;O ETERNAL One, preserve me, as befits Your steadfast love.
Truth is the essence of Your word;Your just rules are eternal.
ש Princes have persecuted me without reason;my heart thrills at Your word.
I rejoice over Your promiseas one who obtains great spoil.
I hate and abhor falsehood;I love Your teaching.
I praise You seven times each dayfor Your just rules.
Those who love Your teaching enjoy well-being;they encounter no adversity.
I hope for Your deliverance, O ETERNAL One;I observe Your commandments.
I obey Your decreesand love them greatly.
I obey Your precepts and decrees;all my ways are before You.
ת May my plea reach You, O ETERNAL One;grant me understanding according to Your word.
May my petition come before You;save me in accordance with Your promise.
My lips shall pour forth praise,for You teach me Your laws.
My tongue shall declare Your promise,for all Your commandments are just.
Lend Your hand to help me,for I have chosen Your precepts.
I have longed for Your deliverance, O ETERNAL One;Your teaching is my delight.
Let me live, that I may praise You;may Your rules be my help;
I have strayed like a lost sheep;search for Your servant,for I have not neglected Your commandments.

=== 120 | 120 ===
A song of ascents.aascents A term of uncertain meaning. In my distress I called to GOD—who answered me.
O ETERNAL One, save me from treacherous lips,from a deceitful tongue!
What can you profit,what can you gain,O deceitful tongue?
A warrior’s sharp arrows,with hot coals of broom-wood.
Woe is me, that I live with Meshech,that I dwell among the clans of Kedar.
Too long have I dwelt with those who hate peace.
I am all peace;but when I speak,they are for war.

=== 121 | 121 ===
A song for ascents.I turn my eyes to the mountains;from where will my help come?
My help comes from GOD,maker of heaven and earth.
[God] will not let your foot give way;your guardian will not slumber.
See, the guardian of Israelneither slumbers nor sleeps!
GOD is your guardian, GOD is your protectionat your right hand.
By day the sun will not strike you,nor the moon by night.
GOD will guard you from all harm,and will guard your life.
GOD will guard your going and comingnow and forever.

=== 122 | 122 ===
A song of ascents. Of David.I rejoiced when they said to me,“We are going to the House of GOD.”
Our feet stood inside your gates, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem built up, a city knit together,
to which tribes would make pilgrimage,the tribes of Yah,aYah See note at 68.5. as was enjoined upon Israel—to praise GOD’s name.
There the thrones of judgment stood,thrones of the house of David.
Pray for the well-being of Jerusalem;“May those who love you be at peace.
May there be well-being within your ramparts,peace in your citadels.”
For the sake of my kin and friends,I pray for your well-being;
for the sake of the house of the ETERNAL our God,I seek your good.

=== 123 | 123 ===
A song of ascents.To You, enthroned in heaven,I turn my eyes.
As the eyes of servants follow their master’s hand,as the eyes of a maid follow the hand of her mistress,so our eyes are toward the ETERNAL our God,awaiting divine favor.
Show us favor, O ETERNAL One,show us favor!We have had more than enough of contempt.
Long enough have we enduredthe scorn of the complacent,the contempt of the haughty.

=== 124 | 124 ===
A song of ascents. Of David.Were it not for GOD, who was on our side,let Israel now declare,
were it not for GOD, who was on our sidewhen others assailed us,
they would have swallowed us alivein their burning rage against us;
the waters would have carried us off,the torrent would have swept over us;
over us would have sweptthe seething waters.
Blessed is GOD, who did not let usbe ripped apart by their teeth.
We are like a bird escaped from the fowler’s trap;the trap broke and we escaped.
Our help is the name of GOD,maker of heaven and earth.

=== 125 | 125 ===
A song of ascents.Those who trust in GOD are like Mount Zionthat cannot be moved,enduring forever.
Jerusalem, hills enfold it,and GOD enfolds this peoplenow and forever.
aMeaning of verse uncertain. The scepter of the wicked shall never restupon the land allotted to the righteous,that the righteous not set their hand to wrongdoing.
Do good, O ETERNAL One, to the good,to the upright in heart.
But those who in their crookedness act corruptly,bBut those who in their crookedness act corruptly Meaning of Heb. uncertain. let GOD make them go the way of evildoers.May it be well with Israel!

=== 126 | 126 ===
A song of ascents.When GOD restores the fortunes of Zion—we see it as in a dreamawe see it as in a dream Lit. “we are veritable dreamers.”—
our mouths shall be filled with laughter,our tongues, with songs of joy.Then shall they say among the nations,“GOD has done great things for them!”
GOD will do great things for usand we shall rejoice.
Restore our fortunes, O ETERNAL One,like watercourses in the Negeb.
They who sow in tearsshall reap with songs of joy.
One who goes along weeping,carrying the seed-bag,shall come back with songs of joy,carrying the sheaves.

=== 127 | 127 ===
A song of ascents. Of Solomon.Unless GOD builds the house,its builders labor in vain on it;unless GOD watches over the city,the guard keeps vigil in vain.
In vain do you rise earlyand stay up late,you who toil for the bread you eat;God’s loved ones are provided for while they sleep.aGod’s loved ones … they sleep Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
Sons are the provisionbprovision Lit. “heritage.” of GOD;the fruit of the womb, divine reward.
Like arrows in the hand of a warriorare sons born to a man in his youth.
Happy is the man who fills his quiver with them;they shall not be put to shamewhen they contend with the enemy in the gate.

=== 128 | 128 ===
A song of ascents.Happy is any manaman Moved up from v. 4 for clarity. who fears GOD,who follows godly ways.
You shall enjoy the fruit of your labors;you shall be happy and you shall prosper.
Your wife shall be like a fruitful vine within your house;your children, like olive saplings around your table.
So shall allball Moved down from v. 1 for clarity there. who fear GOD be blessed.
May GOD bless you from Zion;may you share the prosperity of Jerusalemall the days of your life,
and live to see your children’s children.May all be well with Israel!

=== 129 | 129 ===
A song of ascents.Since my youth they have often assailed me,let Israel now declare,
since my youth they have often assailed me,but they have never overcome me.
Plowers plowed across my back;they made long furrows.
GOD, the righteous one,has snapped the cords of the wicked.
Let all who hate Zionfall back in disgrace.
Let them be like grass on roofsthat fades before it can be pulled up,
that affords no handful for the reaper,no armful for the gatherer of sheaves,
no exchange with passersby:“GOD’s blessing be upon you.”“We bless you by GOD’s name.”

=== 130 | 130 ===
A song of ascents.Out of the depths I call You, O ETERNAL One.
O my Sovereign, listen to my cry;let Your ears be attentiveto my plea for mercy.
If You keep account of sins, O Yah,aYah See note at 68.5. my Sovereign, who will survive?
Yours is the power to forgiveso that You may be held in awe.
I look to GOD;my whole being is looking;I await God’s word.
I am more eager for my Sovereignthan guards for the morning,guards for the morning.
O Israel, wait for GOD;for with GOD is steadfast loveand great power to redeem.
It is this One who will redeem Israel from all their iniquities.

=== 131 | 131 ===
A song of ascents. Of David.O ETERNAL One, my heart is not proudnor my look haughty;I do not aspire to great thingsor to what is beyond me;
aMeaning of verse uncertain. but I have taught myself to be contentedlike a weaned child with its mother;like a weaned child am I in my mind.
O Israel, wait for GOD now and forever.

=== 132 | 132 ===
A song of ascents.O ETERNAL One, remember in David’s favorhis extreme self-denial,
how he swore to GOD,vowed to the Mighty One of Jacob,
“I will not enter my house,nor will I mount my bed,
I will not give sleep to my eyes,or slumber to my eyelidsaeyelids Lit. “eyes.” 
until I find a place for GOD,an abode for the Mighty One of Jacob.”
We heard it was in Ephrath;we came upon it in the region of Jaar.bregion of Jaar Cf. 1 Sam. 7.1–2; 1 Chron. 13.5–6. 
Let us enter God’s abode,bow at the divine footstool.
Advance, O ETERNAL One, to Your resting-place,You and Your mighty Ark!
Your priests are clothed in triumph;Your loyal ones sing for joy.
For the sake of Your servant Daviddo not reject Your anointed one.
GOD swore to Davida firm oath that will not be renounced,“One of your own issue I will set upon your throne.
If your sons keep My covenantand My decrees that I teach them,then their sons also,to the end of time,shall sit upon your throne.”
For GOD has chosen Zion,desiring it for a seat.
“This is my resting-place for all time;here I will dwell, for I desire it.
I will amply bless its store of food,give its needy their fill of bread.
I will clothe its priests in victory,its loyal ones shall sing for joy.
There I will make a horn sprout for David;I have prepared a lamp for My anointed one.
I will clothe his enemies in disgrace,while on him his crown shall sparkle.”

=== 133 | 133 ===
A song of ascents. Of David.How good and how pleasant it isthat kindredakindred Heb. “brothers,” i.e., Jerusalem’s pilgrims, or the Israelite tribes. dwell together.
It is like fine oil on the headrunning down onto the beard,the beard of Aaron,that comes down over the collar of his robe;
like the dew of Hermonthat falls upon the mountains of Zion.There GOD ordained blessing,everlasting life.

=== 134 | 134 ===
A song of ascents.Now bless GOD,all you servants of GOD who stand nightlyin GOD’s house.
Lift your hands toward the sanctuaryand bless GOD.
May GOD,maker of heaven and earth,bless you from Zion.

=== 135 | 135 ===
Hallelujah.Praise the name of GOD;give praise, you servants of GOD 
who stand in the house of GOD,in the courts of the house of our God.
Praise Yah,aYah See note at 68.5. for GOD is good;sing hymns to this name, for it is pleasant.
For Yah has chosen to keep Jacob close,[treating] Israel as a treasured possession.
For I know that GOD is great,that our Sovereign is greater than all gods.
Whatever GOD desires is donein heaven and earth,in the seas and all the depths.
This is who makes clouds rise from the end of the earth;who makes lightning for the rain;who releases the wind from divine vaults.
[God] struck down the first-born of Egypt,human and animal alike—
sending signs and portents againstbagainst In contrast to others “against you.” Egypt,against Pharaoh and all his servants,
striking down many nationsand slaying numerous kings—
Sihon, king of the Amorites,Og, king of Bashan,and all the royalty of Canaan—
and giving their lands as a heritage,as a heritage to Israel—God’s people.
O ETERNAL One, Your name endures forever,Your fame, O ETERNAL One, through all generations;
for GOD will champion this people,and obtain satisfaction for their service.ctheir service Lit. “His servants.” 
dCf. Ps. 115.4–11. The idols of the nations are silver and gold,the work of human hands.
They have mouths, but cannot speak;they have eyes, but cannot see;
they have ears, but cannot hear,nor is there breath in their mouths.
Those who fashion them,all who trust in them,shall become like them.
O house of Israel, bless GOD;O house of Aaron, bless GOD;
O house of Levi, bless GOD;you who fear GOD, bless GOD.
Blessed is GOD from Zion,the One who dwells in Jerusalem.Hallelujah.

=== 136 | 136 ===
Praise GOD, who is good,—whose steadfast love is eternal.
Praise the God of gods,—whose steadfast love is eternal.
Praise the Sovereign of sovereigns,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
Who alone works great marvels,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
Who made the heavens with wisdom,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
Who spread the earth over the water,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
Who made the great lights,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
the sun to dominate the day,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
the moon and the stars to dominate the night,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
Who struck Egypt through their first-born,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
and brought Israel out of their midst,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
with a strong hand and outstretched arm,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
Who split apart the Sea of Reeds,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
and made Israel pass through it,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
Who hurled Pharaoh and his army into the Sea of Reeds,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
Who led this people through the wilderness,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
Who struck down great kings,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
and slew mighty kings,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
Sihon, king of the Amorites,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
Og, king of Bashan,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
and gave their land as a heritage,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
a heritage to Israel—God’s servant,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
Who took note of us in our degradation,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
and rescued us from our enemies,—whose steadfast love is eternal;
Who gives food to all flesh,—whose steadfast love is eternal.
Praise the God of heaven,—whose steadfast love is eternal.

=== 137 | 137 ===
By the rivers of Babylon,there we sat,sat and wept,as we thought of Zion.
There on the poplarswe hung up our lyres,
for our captors asked us there for songs,our tormentors,atormentors Meaning of Heb. uncertain. for amusement:“Sing us one of the songs of Zion.”
How can we sing a song of GOD on alien soil?
If I forget you, O Jerusalem,let my right hand wither;bwither In contrast to others “forget its cunning.” 
let my tongue stick to my palateif I cease to think of you,if I do not keep Jerusalem in memoryeven at my happiest hour.
Remember, O ETERNAL One, against the Edomitesthe day of Jerusalem’s fall;how they cried, “Strip her, strip herto her very foundations!”
Fair Babylon, you predator,cpredator With Targum; in contrast to others “who are to be destroyed.” a blessing on the one who repays you in kindwhat you have inflicted on us;
a blessing on the one who seizes your babiesand dashes them against the rocks!

=== 138 | 138 ===
Of David.I praise You with all my heart,sing a hymn to You before the divine beings;
I bow toward Your holy templeand praise Your name for Your steadfast love and faithfulness,because You have exalted Your name, Your word, above all.aYour name, Your word, above all Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
When I called, You answered me,You inspired me with courage.bYou inspired me with courage Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
All the kings of the earth shall praise You, O ETERNAL One,for they have heard the words You spoke.
They shall sing of GOD’s ways,“Great is GOD’s majesty!”
From way up high GOD sees the lowly;aloft, yet perceiving from afar.
Though I walk among enemies,You preserve me in the face of my foes;You extend Your hand;with Your right hand You deliver me.
GOD will settle accounts for me.O ETERNAL One, Your steadfast love is eternal;do not forsake the work of Your hands.

=== 139 | 139 ===
For the leader. Of David. A psalm.O ETERNAL One, You have examined me and know me.
When I sit down or stand up You know it;You discern my thoughts from afar.
You observeaYou observe Meaning of Heb. uncertain. my walking and reclining,and are familiar with all my ways.
There is not a word on my tonguebut that You, O ETERNAL One, know it well.
You hedge me before and behind;You lay Your hand upon me.
It is beyond my knowledge;it is a mystery; I cannot fathom it.
Where can I escape from Your spirit?Where can I flee from Your presence?
If I ascend to heaven, You are there;if I descend to Sheol, You are there too.
If I take wing with the dawnto come to rest on the western horizon,
even there Your hand will be guiding me,Your right hand will be holding me fast.
If I say, “Surely darkness will conceal me,night will provide me with cover,”bwill conceal me, / night will provide me with cover Cf. Rashi, Ibn Ezra; meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
darkness is not dark for You;night is as light as day;darkness and light are the same.
It was You who created my conscience;cconscience Lit. “kidneys.” You fashioned me in my mother’s womb.
I praise You,for I am awesomely, wondrously made;Your work is wonderful;I know it very well.
My frame was not concealed from Youwhen I was shaped in a hidden place,knit together in the recesses of the earth.
Your eyes saw my unformed limbs;they were all recorded in Your book;in due time they were formed,to the very last one of them.dto the very last one of them Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
How weighty Your thoughts seem to me, O God,how great their number!
I count them—they exceed the grains of sand;I end—but am still with You.
O God, if You would only slay the wicked—you murderers, away from me!—
who invoke You for intrigue,Your enemies who swear by You falsely.ewho invoke You … falsely Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
O ETERNAL One, You know I hate those who hate You,and loathe Your adversaries.
I feel a perfect hatred toward them;I count them my enemies.
Examine me, O God, and know my mind;probe me and know my thoughts.
See if I have vexatious ways,and guide me in ways everlasting.

=== 140 | 140 ===
For the leader. A psalm of David.
Rescue me, O ETERNAL One, from evildoers;save me from lawless opponents,
whose minds are full of evil schemes,who plot war every day.
They sharpen their tongues like serpents;spiders’ poison is on their lips.    Selah. 
O ETERNAL One, keep me out of the clutches of the wicked;save me from lawless opponentswho scheme to make me fall.amake me fall Lit. “push my feet.” 
Arrogant ones laid traps with ropes for me;they spread out a net along the way;they set snares for me.    Selah. 
I said to GOD: You are my God;give ear, O ETERNAL One, to my pleas for mercy.
O GOD, my Sovereign, the strength of my deliverance,You protected my head on the day of battle.bbattle Lit. “arms.” 
O ETERNAL One, do not grant the desires of the wicked;do not let their plan succeed,else they be exalted.    Selah. 
May the heads of those who beset mebe covered with the mischief of their lips.celse they … lips Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
May coals of fire drop down upon them,and they be cast into pits, never to rise again.
Let slanderers have no place in the land;let the evil of the lawless drive them into corrals.
I know that GOD will championthe cause of the poor, the right of the needy.
The righteous shall surely praise Your name;the upright shall dwell in Your presence.

=== 141 | 141 ===
A psalm of David.I call You, O ETERNAL One, hasten to me;give ear to my cry when I call You.
Take my prayer as an offering of incense,my upraised hands as an evening sacrifice.
O ETERNAL One, set a guard over my mouth,a watch at the door of my lips;
let my mind not turn to an evil thing,to practice deeds of wickednesswith those evildoers;athose evildoers Or “grandees who do evil”; force of Heb. uncertain. let me not feast on their dainties.
bMeaning of verses uncertain. Let someone righteous strike me in loyaltyand reprove me;let my head not refuse such choice oil.My prayers are still against theirctheir I.e., the evildoers of v. 4. evil deeds.
May their judges slip on the rock,but let my words be heard, for they are sweet.
As when the earth is cleft and broken upour bones are scattered at the mouth of Sheol.
My eyes are fixed upon You, O GOD my Sovereign;I seek refuge in You, do not put me in jeopardy.
Keep me from the trap laid for me,and from the snares of evildoers.
Let the wicked fall into their netswhile I alone come through.

=== 142 | 142 ===
A maskil of David, while he was in the cave.aCf. 1 Sam. 24.3–4. A prayer.
I cry aloud to GOD;I appeal to GOD loudly for mercy.
I pour out my complaint directly;I recount my tale of trouble
when my spirit fails within me.You know my course;they have laid a trap in the path I walk.
Look at my right and see—I have no friend;there is nowhere I can flee,no one cares about me.
So I cry to You, O ETERNAL One;I say, “You are my refuge,all I have in the land of the living.”
Listen to my cry, for I have been brought very low;save me from my pursuers,for they are too strong for me.
Free me from prison,that I may praise Your name.The righteous shall glory in mebshall glory in me Meaning of Heb. uncertain. for Your gracious dealings with me.

=== 143 | 143 ===
A psalm of David.O ETERNAL One, hear my prayer;give ear to my plea, as You are faithful;answer me, as You are beneficent.
Do not enter into judgment with Your servant,for before You no creature is in the right.
My foe hounded me;he crushed me to the ground;he made me dwell in darknesslike those long dead.
My spirit failed within me;my mind was numbed with horror.
Then I thought of the days of old;I rehearsed all Your deeds,recounted the work of Your hands.
I stretched out my hands to You,longing for You like thirsty earth.    Selah. 
Answer me quickly, O ETERNAL One;my spirit can endure no more.Do not hide Your face from me,or I shall become like those who descend into the Pit.
Let me learn of Your faithfulness by daybreak,for in You I trust;let me know the road I must take,for on You I have set my hope.
Save me from my foes, O ETERNAL One;to You I look for cover.ato You I look for cover Meaning of Heb. uncertain. 
Teach me to do Your will,for You are my God.Let Your gracious spirit lead meon level ground.
For the sake of Your name, O ETERNAL One, preserve me;as You are beneficent, free me from distress.
As You are faithful, put an end to my foes;destroy all my mortal enemies,for I am Your servant.

=== 144 | 144 ===
Of David.Blessed is GOD, my rock,who trains my hands for battle,my fingers for warfare;
my faithful one, my fortress,my haven and my deliverer,my shield, in whom I take shelter,who makes peoplesapeoples So Targum, Saadia; in contrast to others “my people.” subject to me.
O ETERNAL One, what are mortals that You should care about them,human beings, that You should think of them?
They are like a breath;their days are like a passing shadow.
O ETERNAL One, bend Your sky and come down;touch the mountains and they will smoke.
Make lightning flash and scatter them;shoot Your arrows and rout them.
Reach Your hand down from on high;rescue me, save me from the mighty waters,from the hands of foreigners,
whose mouths speak lies,and whose oathsboaths With Rashi; lit. “right hand.” are false.
O God, I will sing You a new song,sing a hymn to You with a ten-stringed harp—
to the One who gives victory to kings,who rescues David—God’s servant—from the deadly sword.
Rescue me, save me from the hands of foreigners,whose mouths speak lies,and whose oathscoaths See note at v. 8. are false.
dThe meaning of several phrases in these verses is uncertain. For our sons are like saplings,well-tended in their youth;our daughters are like cornerstonestrimmed to give shape to a palace.
Our storehouses are full,supplying produce of all kinds;our flocks number thousands,even myriads, in our fields;
our cattle are well cared for.There is no breaching and no sortie,and no wailing in our streets.
Happy the people who have it so;happy the people whose God is the ETERNAL.

=== 145 | 145 ===
A song of praise. Of David. א I will extol You, my God and sovereign,and bless Your name forever and ever.
ב Every day will I bless Youand praise Your name forever and ever.
ג Great is GOD and much acclaimed;such greatness cannot be fathomed.
ד One generation shall laud Your works to anotherand declare Your mighty acts.
ה The glorious majesty of Your splendorand Your wondrous actsasplendor / and Your wondrous acts A Qumran Psalms scroll reads: “splendor they will speak of / and Your wonders.” will I recite.
ו All shall talk of the might of Your awesome deeds,and I will recount Your greatness.
ז They shall celebrate Your abundant goodness,and sing joyously of Your beneficence.
ח GOD is gracious and compassionate,slow to anger and abounding in kindness.
ט GOD is good to all,and divine mercy is upon all God’s works.
י All Your works shall praise You, O ETERNAL One,and Your faithful ones shall bless You.
כ They shall talk of the majesty of Your sovereignty,and speak of Your might,
ל to make known to all humankind YourbYour Heb. 3rd person. mighty actsand YourcYour See previous note. sovereignty’s majestic glory.
מ Your rule is an eternal rule;Your dominion is for all generations.
ס GOD supports all who stumble,and makes all who are bent stand straight.
ע The eyes of all look to You expectantly,and You give them their food when it is due.
פ You give it openhandedly,feeding every creature to its heart’s content.
צ GOD is beneficent in all waysand faithful in all works.
ק GOD is near to all who call,to all who call with sincerity.
ר Fulfilling the wishes of those who show reverence,[God] hears their cry and delivers them.
ש GOD watches over all who show their love,but all the wicked are destroyed.
ת My mouth shall utter the praise of GOD,whose holy name all creaturesdcreatures Lit. “flesh.” shall bless forever and ever.

=== 146 | 146 ===
Hallelujah.Praise GOD, O my soul!
I will praise GOD all my life,sing hymns to my God while I exist.
Put not your trust in the great,in mortals who cannot save.
Their breath departs;they return to the dust;on that day their plans come to nothing.
Happy are those whose help is the God of Jacob,whose hope is in the ETERNAL their God,
maker of heaven and earth,the sea and all that is in them;who keeps faith forever;
who secures justice for those who are wronged,gives food to the hungry. GOD sets prisoners free;
GOD restores sight to the blind; GOD makes those who are bent stand straight; GOD loves the righteous;
GOD watches over the strangerand gives courage to the orphan and widow,but makes the path of the wicked tortuous.
GOD shall reign forever,your God, O Zion, for all generations.Hallelujah.

=== 147 | 147 ===
Hallelujah.It is good to chant hymns to our God;it is pleasant to sing glorious praise.
GOD rebuilds Jerusalem,gathering in the exiles of Israel—
healing their broken hearts,and binding up their wounds.
[God] reckoned the number of the starsand gave each its name.
Great and full of power is our Sovereign—whose wisdom is beyond reckoning.
GOD gives courage to the lowly,and brings the wicked down to the dust.
Sing to GOD a song of praise,chant a hymn with a lyre to our God,
who covers the heavens with clouds,provides rain for the earth,makes mountains put forth grass;
who gives the beasts their food,to the raven’s brood what they cry for.
[God] does not prize the strength of horses,nor value the warrior’s fleetness;afleetness Or “prowess”; lit. “thighs.” 
but GOD values those who show reverence,those who depend on God’s faithful care.
O Jerusalem, glorify GOD;praise your God, O Zion!
For the bars of your gates have been made strong,and your children have been blessed within you.
Your realm has been endowed with well-being,and you have been satisfied with choice wheat.
[God] sends forth words to the earthwith swift commands.
[God] lays down snow like fleece,scatters frost like ashes.
[God] tosses down hail like crumbs—who can endure such icy cold?
[God] issues a command—it melts them;breathes, and the waters flow.
Divine commands were issued to Jacob,God’s statutes and rules to Israel.
This was not done for any other nation;of such rules they know nothing.Hallelujah.

=== 148 | 148 ===
Hallelujah.Praise GOD from the heavens;give praise on high.
Give praise, all you angels,give praise, all divine hosts.
Give praise, sun and moon,give praise, all bright stars.
Give praise, highest heavens,and you waters that are above the heavens.
Let them praise the name of GOD—who commanded that they be created,
and who made them endure forever,establishing an order that shall never change.
Praise GOD, O you who are on earth,all sea monsters and ocean depths,
fire and hail, snow and smoke,storm wind that executes God’s command,
all mountains and hills,all fruit trees and cedars,
all wild and tamed animals,creeping things and winged birds,
all kings and peoples of the earth,all princes of the earth and its judges,
youths and maidens alike,old and young together.
Let them praise GOD’s name—for sublime is this name alone—of the One whose splendor covers heaven and earth.
[God] has exalted the horn of this peoplefor the glory of all faithful ones,Israel, the people brought close.Hallelujah.

=== 149 | 149 ===
Hallelujah.Sing to GOD a new song,sing praises in the congregation of the faithful.
Let Israel rejoice in its maker;let the children of Zion exult in their monarch.
Let them praise God’s name in dance;with hand-drum and lyre let them chant such praises.
For GOD delights in this people,and adorns the lowly with victory.
Let the faithful exult in glory;let them shout for joy upon their couches,
with paeans to God in their throatsand two-edged swords in their hands,
to impose retribution upon the nations,punishment upon the peoples,
binding their kings with shackles,their nobles with chains of iron,
executing the doom decreed against them.This is the glory of all the faithful.Hallelujah.

=== 150 | 150 ===
Hallelujah.Give praise in the divine sanctuary;give praise in the sky, the divine stronghold.
Give praise for mighty acts;give praise forafor Or “as befits.” exceeding greatness.
Give praise with blasts of the horn;give praise with harp and lyre.
Give praise with hand-drum and dance;give praise with lute and pipe.
Give praise with resounding cymbals;give praise with loud-clashing cymbals.
Let all that breathes praise Yah.bYah See note at 68.5. Hallelujah.
