=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
שמאי אומר כל הנשים דיין שעתן – All the women who see [menstral] blood know their hour to defile what is pure that they came in contact with from the time of their seeing [blood] and onward. And we don’t say that before this also, that there was blood in the walls of her womb that had been established and that she was impure even before this, for all women defile in with their vagina, and even though blood had not exited outside. And the reason of Shammai is that he did not suspect that perhaps, before this there had been blood, for if you say this, the heart of a man smites him (i.e., he has no clear conscience) all the time of intercourse and he separates himself from his wife, and it is found that the daughters of Israel would refrain from engaging in [the Mitzvah] of “being fruitful and multiplying.”
מפקידה לפקידה – She checked today and found herself to be pure, and checked at the end of the week and found herself to be impure. We are suspicious of her physical contact from the first examination and onwards, lest with the removal of her hand, she saw that the walls of her womb established her presumptive condition [of cleanness], and we do not worry about refraining from “being fruitful and multiplying”, for specifically, for purity that we defile them from one examination to the next examination, and not to her husband, for Shammai says: if we make her defiled from her purity, the heart of man smites him (i.e., he has no clear conscience) and he would separate also from sexual intercourse.
לא כדברי זה ולא כדברי זה – not according to the words of Shammai who is more lenient and does not make a tence for his words, and not according to the words of Hillel, who went beyond his measures (i.e., extended the restrictions of the law too far – see Talmud Niddah 4b) who was too strict, for certainly, all these “many days” (according to Hillel) do not establish that the walls of the womb are [filled with] blood.
מעת לעת ממעטת על יד מפקידה לפקידה – two times were mentioned with regard to the woman to defile that which is pure retroactively, and he went after the liberal of both opinions. For if “from one (i.e., the present) examination” to the [last] examination is greater than from one term of twenty-four hours (of retrospective uncleanness) [reduces the term of the interval from one examination to the other], we go after one from twenty-four hour period to the previous one, and we don’t defile other than those pure things that she came in contact with from yesterday at that hour. But if the period “from one term of twenty-four hours is greater than from one examination to the one that preceded it, such as when she checked herself in the morning and found herself to be pure, and in the evening, found herself to be impure, we don’t defile anything other than those pure things that were from the examination in the morning and beyond. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
על יד – of another, like “Next to him” in the Book of Ezra (actually – it is Nehemiah 3:8, which is like (verse 16): “And after him.”
וסת – fixed (i.e., regular time of menstruation), for it was established for her the time of menstruation three times, and she checked at the time of her regular time of menstruation and found herself to be impure, she knows her time, and we don’t worry that perhaps before this it occurred, for certainly, her time of menstruation comes on time.
והמשמשת בעדים הרי זו כפקידה – Two things are taught and this is how it should be understood: She who uses evidences – a piece of cloth used by women for ascertaining their condition of cleanness or uncleanness that is to say, it is Mitzvah upon each and every woman to use two pieces of evidence which she checks with them, one before sexual intercourse and once after sexual intercourse.
הרי זו כפקידה – the evidence that is after sexual intercourse is considered like an examination.
ממעטת על יד מעת לעת ועל יד מפקידה לפקידה – for you might have thought lest she sees a drop of blood like a mustard seed and ends up takes a handful of semen and that it would not be considered an examination, our Mishnah comes to tell us, that until after sexual intercourse, it is considered like an examination, but the evidence used before sexual intercourse is not like an examination, and because she is restless, that is she is anxious to have sex, she does not bring it into the holes and fissures [of her vagina].

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
רבי חנינא סגן הכהנים העיד. מלשרוף את הבשר שנטמא בולד הטומאה – the offspring of the offspring is stated. The meat which is third [level of impurity] which was defiled with something of the offspring of an offspring,, that is to say, it came in contact with something of second-level impurity, and it became third-level of impurity, they did not prevent from burning with meat that that was defiled with something of a direct cause of Levitical uncleanness, which is the first level of impurity. And when this meat that was at first third-level of impurity comes in contact with that which was defiled with a direct cause of impurity, it returns to be second-degree of impurity, for it came in contact with first-level of impurity and became second, and it is found they added one level of ritual impurity upon its impurity, for initially it was third-level and now is second, and even though that they didn’t prevent from burning with something more severe than it, for since even that which is the lesser for burning stands, they did not suspect if they would make it more impure than it already was. And even though, according to the Torah, no food can make another food impure, as it states regarding something the defiling of food (Deuteronomy 14:8, 14): “It is impure [for you.” It is ritually impure but it does defile food or something similar. Nevertheless, the Rabbis decreed that foods can make other foods impure.
השמן – of Priest’s due/Terumah that was defiled by someone who had bathed [in a Mikveh] but must wait for sunset to be perfectly clean, which is third-level of impurity, for a person who had bathed [in a Mikveh] but is waiting for sunset to be perfectly clean defiles Terumah from the Torah and makes it third-level of impurity.
בנר שנטמא בטמא מת – this is a metallic candle and not of earthenware, for all utensils outside of earthenware utensils that came in contact with the defilement of the dead person become like it, it is principal level of impurity, it is a principle level of impurity, if it is a first level of impurity, it is a first level of impurity, as it is written (Numbers 19:16): “[And in the open, anyone who touches a person] who was killed [or died naturally, or human bone, or a grave, shall be impure seven days].” And they (i.e., the Rabbis) expound upon “who was killed” he is like someone who was slain, for the sword that had come in contact with the dead became like one of the original causes of Levitical uncleanness like the dead person himself. And when it had come in contact with something defiled by contact with the dead, which is a primary [cause of Levitical uncleanness], the sword also became a primary [cause of Levitical uncleanness], and all utensils are like a sword in the law, except for earthenware vessels. It is found that the metallic candle when it came in contact with something defiled by a dead person, it too became a primary [cause of Levitical] uncleanness. And now Rabbi Akiva adds on to the words of Rabbi Hanina the Assistant Priest, for Rabbi Hanina did not permit other than to restore something that had been third-level uncleanness to something second-level uncleanness. But Rabbi Akiva permitted restoring something that was third-level uncleanness to first level, for the oil that had been defiled by contact with a person who has ritually bathed but must wait for sunset to be perfectly clean, who is third-degree level of impurity, when they kindle it with a candle that had been defiled by contact with the dead, the candle itself becomes a primary form of Levitical uncleanness as we have stated and third-level [of impurity] returns to be first-level of impurity. And even though they did not prevent it, for since the title of impurity is upon it, we do not suspect him and it is permitted to add with his hands.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
כל המטמאין באוהל – such as the dead, and the decayed matter (i..e., liquid and coagulated portions of a corpse – see Tractate Ohalot, Chapter 2, Mishnah 1) and a spoonful of dust [of earth from a grave of decaying human body], and all those that are taught at the beginning of the second chapter of Tractate Ohalot.
שנחלקו – their measures in halves.
שהכניסן – when they are divided.
לתוך הבית – that is inside one tent.
רבי דוסא בן הרכינס מטהר – that he holds that they do not combine to the appropriate measurement.
הנוגע בכשני חצאי זיתים מן הנבילה – he started about tent impurity and continued with impurity of a carrion, to tell you that just as Rabbi Dosa holds that they do not combine for the defilement of a tent, so too, he holds that they defilement of contact and carrying do not combine, whether with the dead person or a carrion.
הנוגע בחצי זית ומאהיל על חצי זית – When one overshadows on a dead person, he is impure as if he had been with the dead person in the tent. And all of these where he is overshadowing in the first part of the Mishnah, we are speaking of squeezed defilement, for there is no difference between the defilement and the tent that is open a hand-breadth, and because of this, the Sages defile, for a tent like this, it is contact, and at the end of the Mishnah it is taught that if one is in contact with half-olive’s bulk and another thing, it overshadows upon him, etc., and the Rabbis admit that he is pure, when speaking where there is a hand-breadth’s opening whether between the defilement and the tent. And in this, the Rabbis admit that they don’t combine, for contact and tent are two different modes of contamination and whatever is from two different modes does not combine. But Rabbi Dosa holds that even with pressed defilement, they don’t combine.
רבי מאיר וכו' – Rabbi Meir disputes the first Tanna who said that when there is a hand-breadth’s opening between the defilement and the tent, the Rabbis admit that he is pure, and it doesn’t combine. And he said that even in this, the Rabbis dispute on Rabbi Dosa and hold that contact and the tent category. Therefore, they combine regarding the measurement and defile, but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.
חוץ מן המגע עם המשא – such as the case where he came in contact with one-half an olive’s bulk and shook one-half an olive’s bulk.
והמשא עם האוהל – that he shook one-half an olive’s bulk and overshadowed on the other one-half.
משם אחד – such one type of contact and another kind, one kind of carrying and another, one tent and another tent.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
ביצה שנולדה ביום טוב – we are dealing with the Holy Day [that occurs] right after Shabbat, and the reason for the School of Hillel is that they say that a person should not eat it (i.e., an egg) because every egg that is born/hatched today, it was completed the day before and it is found that Shabbat is preparing for the Holy Day. And the Torah states (Exodus 16:5): “But on the sixth day, when they apportion [what they have brought in, it shall prove to be double the amount they gather each day].” But a regular “Friday” is a secular/non-holy day. One can prepare on a non-sacred day for Shabbat, and one can prepare on a non-sacred day for the Holy Day and the Holy Day is called “Shabbat,” but on a Holy Day, one cannot prepare for the Shabbat, nor can one prepare on the Sabbath for a Holy Day, and the preparation of an egg, even though it is in the hands of Heaven, is called “preparation.”
שאור בכזית – in regards to eating, the whole world doesn’t disagrees that both {the Schools of Hillel and Shammai) agree that the minimum [prohibited amount of leaven] is an olive’s bulk, since the Biblical verse begins with leaven (Exodus 12:19): “No leaven shall be found in your houses [for seven days]…” and it (i.e., the verse) concludes (ibid.): “For whoever eats what is leavened,” to inform you that leaven is equivalent to Hametz, just as the one, so is the other. But they dispute regarding getting rid of it. The School of Shammai holds that since the All-Merciful wrote concerning both “leaven and Hametz,” we learn from it that the measure of one is not the same as the measure of the other, and we don’t derive getting rid of it from [the prohibition of] eating of it. But the School of Hillel holds that we do derive getting rid of [Hametz] from [the prohibition of] eating of it.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
רבי יהודה אומר. דם נבילות ב"שש מטהרין – it is not considered as something that died of itself.
ביצת נבלה – such as the case where it became ritually forbidden by unskillful slaughtering, and eggs were found in it after the slaughtering.
אם כיוצא בה נמכרת בשוק – for its shell is hard, and it is completed like the rest of the eggs sold in the marketplace.
ואם לאו – and if it is not completed
אסורה – for it is considered like its intestines.
דם נכרית ב"ש מטהרים (this section of the Mishnah is also taught in Tractate Niddah, Chapter 4, Mishnah 3) as it is written in the portion of a person with a flux (Leviticus 15;2): “Speak (in the plural) to the Israelite people and say to them;” the Israelite people become defiled by flux but the gentiles do not become defiled through flux. But the Rabbis decreed upon them that they would be like those with a flux for all of their words. The School of Shammai holds that when the Rabbis decreed on the spittle and urine, which are found frequently, but the blood of a woman with flux which is not found all that much, the Rabbis did not make a decree regarding it. The Rabbis made this thing recognizable, but did not defile the blood of a heathen woman with flux, in order that they would know that the defilement of a heathen is according to the Rabbis, just as the priest’s due and holy things are not burned on it.
ודם טהרה של מצורעת – the pure blood that the leprous woman saw when she gave birth after seven days for a son and two weeks for a daughter.
כרוקה וכמימי רגליה – the blood of the heathen woman defiles like her spittle and her urine, that is moist, but not dry. And this is for recognition alone that they did it, for it had been defilement from the Torah, the blood would defile moist and dry. Now that it defiles only when moist, we recognize that it is defilement of the Rabbis.
בטובה – that the person who eats attaches favor to the owner of the fruits that he fed him from his produce.
ושלא בטובה – who does not attach favor to him.
אין אוכלים בטובה – that it is forbidden to attach favor to the honors for the All- Merciful made them ownerless.
החמת – like a leather skin/bottle that was pierced and tied up.
צרורה עומדת – which does not receive defilement other than if it is tied up, that is to say, that it the leather was tied and bound, and it is not stiff at the point of the tie, for since they tied it and strengthened it and it receives defilement.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
רבי יהודה בן בבא העיד. שממאנים את הקטנות – such as the case of two brothers who are married to two orphan sisters, one older and one younger. The husband of the older one died and she is now found in need of a levir, the husband of the younger, and we override her interdependence of a childless widow [the younger] and her late husband’s brother, the levirate relation, and prohibit her upon him for the marriage of the younger woman is seen as valueless. We teach the younger woman that she should refuse him for the her refusal uproots her first marriage, and then he is permitted to marry the older wife of the brother who died without issue, and similarly if there is another, in a similar manner, in Tractate Yevamot, Chapter “The House of Shammai” (Chapter 13, Mishnah 7).
ומשיאין את האשה – whose husband went to abroad and only one witnesses came and said trhat he died, we allow her to [re]marry on his word.
ושנסקל תרנגול שהרג את הנפש – that perorated the brain of a baby and even though it is written (Exodus 22:28): “When an ox gores [a man or a woman...],” both an ox and cattle, beasts and birds are included, for every place where it says, “ox,” we learn (Deuteronomy 5:14): “[but the seventh day is a sabbath of the LORD your God; you shall not do any work] – you, your son, or your daughter, your male or female slave, your ox or your ass, or any of your cattle…” from [the law of] Shabbat. Just as further on, the same law applies to all cattle, beasts and birds, even here the same law applies to all cattle, beasts and birds.
ועל יין בן ארבעים יום – but prior to this, it is invalid, for it is wine from its vat.
שקרב בארבע שעות – that one time during the days of the Grecian kingdom, they did not have lambs to sacrifice the daily whole burnt offering until the Holy One, blessed be He enlightened their eyes and they found two lambs which passed examination in the chamber of the lambs, and they offered the daily whole burnt offering of the morning at the fourth hour of the day.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
העיד רבי יהושע. פדיון פטר חמור שמת– a lamb which was set aside/dedicated for the redemption of the first-born of an ass and it died.
כחמש סלעים – [like the five Sela’im] of the redemption of the first-born son [if lost] is liable to make it up.
כפדיון מעשר שני – for if it was lost, he is not liable to make it for that money the All-Merciful obligated to teat in Jerusalem, but surely it was lost to him, and the reason of Rabbi Eliezer for we have surely found that the Biblical verse made a comparison by juxtaposition between the first born of the ass and the first born of a human being, as it states (Exodus 34:20): “But the firstling of an ass you shall redeem with a sheep; [if you do not redeem it, you must break its neck.] And you must redeem every first-born among your sons.”
וחכמים אומרים – The Biblical verse states (Numbers 18:15): “…but you shall have the first-born of man redeemed, and you shall also have the firstling of impure animals redeemed.” To redemption the Torah made a comparison [by juxtaposition] but not to anything else.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
העיד רבי יהושע על דם נבילות שהוא טהור – from being made impure like a carrion in an olive’s bulk, and it defiles with a quarter [of a log]. For you do not have anything whose blood will become defiled like its skin other than for a reptile alone. And above [at the beginning of Chapter 5 of Tractate Eduyot] where it is taught in the Mishnah: that the blood of carrion – the School of Shammai declares clean and the School of Hillel declares unclean, but not like the carrion which defiles through an olive’s bulk, but through a quarter [of a log].
שנגע טמא במקצתו שטימא את כולו – they made a preference with Holy things and with the ashes of the sin-offering, for even thouh they themselves are divided if we place them within one utensil and comes in contact with something that defiles holy things in part, all were defiled, for the utensil combines them to be considered as if they are one body, and support is brought for it from the Biblical verse, as it is written (Numbers 7:14,20,26,32,38,44,50,56,62,68,74,80): “One gold ladle of 10 shekels, filled with incense,” as the Biblical verse made all of what is in one ladle.
הוסיף ר' עקיבא – for whereas from the testimony of Rabbi Shimon ben Beterah, we did not hear other than on that which is impure, and Rabbi Akiva came and added that even one who immersed himself on that day – but is not completely pure until sunset which does not defile but is invalid alone, if it came comes in contact with part of it, it invalidates all of it. And Maimonides explained, that from the testimony of Rabbi Shimon, we did not hear that it combines other than a utensil that has an inside [receptacle] but a vessel that does not have an inside [receptacle], we did not hear that it combines, but Rabbi Akiva came and added that even sifted fine flour and incense and frankincense and coals that are not within the utensil, but are collected and placed on a board or plank which has no inside [receptacle], they are considered as if placed within the utensil, and are made as if they are one substance.
והגחלים – those that the High Priest on Yom Kippur takes out in a pan, if a person who immersed himself on that day – but is not completely pure until sunset touched part of them, all of them are made in valid, and a preference was made with them, for the coals are not receptacles for defilement.
