=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
It is a positive commandment for all the sacrifices to be unblemished and of choice quality,1See the conclusion of these halachot (Chapter 7, Halachah 11). as [Leviticus 22:21] states: "unblemished to arouse favor."2The Sifra explains that the phrase should be understood, not only as a description. This is a positive commandment.3Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 61) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 286) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.
[Conversely,] anyone who consecrates a blemished animal for the altar violates a negative commandment4Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 91) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 285) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. One is liable for merely consecrating such an animal even if it is never actually offered on the altar (Sefer HaChinuch). and is liable for lashes5The Sefer HaChinuch questions why lashes should be given, because the transgression does not involve a deed, but explains that it can be considered comparable to temurah, exchanging an animal for a sacred animal. There too the exchange/consecration of the animal is considered as significant enough to warrant lashes. for consecrating it, as [ibid.:20] states: "Whatever has a blemish should not be sacrificed." According to the Oral Tradition, we learned that this is a warning against consecrating a blemished animal. Even one who consecrates such an animal for the money to pay for libations6And thus the animal will be sold, rather than offered on the altar itself. is liable for lashes, for this represents a disgrace to the sacrifices.7For as above, the sacrifices should be associated only with perfect and unblemished animals. Anything less is an insult to He to Whom they are offered.
[When a person consecrates an animal and] intends to say [that it is consecrated as] a peace offering, but actually says "as a burnt offering," or [intended to consecrate it] as a burnt offering, but said, "a peace offering," his statements are of no consequence unless his mouth and his heart are identical.8See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 14:12; Hilchot Nizirut 9:8. This is a general principle: Whenever a person wants to take a vow, consecrate an article, or set it aside as holy, his statements must reflect the will of his heart. Therefore if one intended to consecrate a blemished animal as a burnt offering, but consecrated it as peace offering or intended to consecrate it as a peace offering, but consecrated it as burnt offering, he is not liable for lashes even though he intended to perform a transgression.If someone thought that it was permitted to consecrate a blemished animal for the altar and did so, the consecration is effective and he is not liable for lashes.9Since he did not know of the prohibition involved, his act does not minimize the holiness of the sacrifices. Hence the consecration is effective. And since, he did not act intentionally. He is not liable for lashes. The Ra'avad takes issue with the Rambam on this point, based on his understanding of Temurah 17a. The commentaries elaborate on this difference of opinion.
One who slaughters a blemished animal for the sake of a sacrifice10The Kessef Mishneh emphasizes that he must slaughter the animal for the sake of a sacrifice to be liable. is liable for lashes,11Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 92) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 288) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. for [ibid.:22] states: "Do not offer these12The verse speaks of animals with physical blemishes. to God." According to the Oral Tradition, we learned that this is a warning to one who slaughters.Similarly, one who pours the blood of blemished animals on the altar is liable for lashes,13Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 93) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 289) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. for, with regard to them,14The verse speaks of animals with physical blemishes. [ibid.:24] states: "Do not offer to God." According to the Oral Tradition, we learned that this is a warning to one who pours the blood of blemished animals on the altar.And also one who sets afire the selected portions of blemished sacrifices on the altar is liable for lashes,15Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 94) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 290) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. for, with regard to them,16Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 92) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 288) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. [ibid.:22] states: "Do not place them as a fire offering on the altar." This refers to the fats. Thus we can deduce that one who consecrates a blemished animal, slaughtered it, poured its blood [on the altar], and set afire its selected portions is worthy of four sets of lashes.
One transgresses the above commandments whether the animal has a permanent blemish or a temporary blemish, he violates all of these commandments, as [Deuteronomy 17:1] states: "Do not sacrifice to God your Lord an ox or a sheep that has a blemish." According to the Oral Tradition, we learned that this is a warning [against offering] an animal with a temporary blemish,17Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 95) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 494) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. In his hasagot to Sefer HaMitzvot, the Ramban differs and maintains that this should not be considered as a separate commandment, but rather as an element of the above commandments. Even according to the Rambam, this one negative commandment includes all of the three prohibitions mentioned above. for example, an animal had a moist skin eruption or a boil.18See Chapter 2, Halachah 7, where these blemishes are listed. If he sacrificed, it, he is liable for lashes.
[The above applies], not only to sacrifices of the Jewish people, but also to the sacrifices brought by gentiles.19See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 3:2-3 for a description of these sacrifices. If [a priest] offered [such sacrifices] and the animals were blemished, he is liable for lashes,20Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 96) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 292) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as [Leviticus 22:25] states: "From the hands of foreigners, you may not offer the food of your God from all of these."21The verse speaks of animals with physical blemishes.
One who brings about a blemish in a sacrificial animal, e.g., he blinded its eye or cut off its hand,22The examples the Rambam gives are permanent blemishes. Generally, temporary blemishes cannot be brought about by human acts. Moreover, even if a person does cause a temporary blemish, he does not violate this prohibition. There is a logical basis for this conclusion, because as long as the animal is not permanently blemished, it is not disqualified as an offering (Radbaz; Minchat Chinuch, mitzvah 287). is liable for lashes.23Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 97) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 287) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. For with regard to a sacrifice, [Leviticus 22:21] states: "It shall not have any blemish." According to the Oral Tradition, we learned that this is a warning not to cause a blemish."Lashes are given [for the violation of this prohibition] only when the Temple was standing, for then [the animal] was fit to be offered as a sacrifice and [the person] disqualified it. In the present age, by contrast, even though one transgressed a negative commandment, he is not liable for lashes.24The Radbaz explains that this concept can be derived from the prooftext cited in Halachah 1: "unblemished to arouse favor." Implied is that when a sacrificial animal can arouse favor, i.e., when there is a Temple where it can be offered, it must be unblemished. If that is not the case, there is no penalty for causing such a blemish.The Kessef Mishneh and other commentaries have noted that the Rambam's ruling appears to be in contradiction with Avodah Zarah 13b which implies that there is no prohibition at all in causing a blemish in the present era, because there is no Temple where the sacrifices can be offered. The Minchat Chinuch (loc. cit.) and others explain that the difference can be resolved on the basis of the Rambam's ruling (Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:15) that if the altar is constructed on the Temple Mount, sacrifices may be brought even if the entire Temple has not been rebuilt.
If a person brought about a blemish25From Chapter 2, Halachah 15, it would appear that if the first merely brought about a temporary blemish, the second would be liable. in a sacrificial animal and another person came and brought about a second blemish, the second person is not liable for lashes.26For the animal was already disqualified due to the actions of the first person. Although the second person is not liable for lashes, he is still considered to have violated a Scriptural prohibition.
[This prohibition applies] both with regard to one who causes a blemish in sacrificial animals themselves or in animals to which their holiness was transferred27Although it is forbidden to transfer the holiness of a sacrificial animal to another animal, once that act has been performed, the second animal is consecrated and the prohibitions associated with a sacrifice apply to it. with the exception of a firstborn or a tithed animal. In those instances, one who causes a blemish in an animal to which their holiness was transferred is not liable for lashes, for they are not fit to be sacrificed, as will be explained in the appropriate place.28Hilchot Temurah 3:1. Similarly, one who causes a blemish in the ninth animal which was mistakenly called the tenth,29As explained in Hilchot Bechorot 8:1-2, when a person is tithing his flocks and he mistakenly calls the ninth animal to emerge, the tenth. In such an instance, a certain measure of holiness is conveyed upon that animal and it cannot be eaten until it becomes blemished. It should not, however, be offered on the altar. Since it is not fit to be offered, causing a blemish in it does not make one liable for lashes. is not liable for lashes.
Although one who consecrates a blemished animal30This is speaking about an animal with a permanent blemish. The laws that apply if it has merely a temporary blemish are mentioned in the following halachah. [for the sacrifices of] the altar is liable for lashes,31As stated in Halachah 1. [the animal] becomes consecrated. It must be redeemed [after] evaluation by a priest.32As indicated by the sources cited by the Rambam at the conclusion of this halachah, the evaluation of the animal's worth must be made by a priest and not by any other person. It then reverts to the status of an ordinary [animal]33Once such an animal has been redeemed, it may be shorn or used for labor (Hilchot Me'ilah 1:9). and its money should be used to purchase [an animal for the same type of] sacrifice. This law also applies when a consecrated animal contracts a disqualifying blemish.34I.e., they should be redeemed and a sacrifice brought with the money, as stated in Hilchot Arachin 5:11.It is a positive commandment to redeem sacrificial animals that contracted disqualifying blemishes and cause them to revert to the status of an ordinary animal so that one may partake of them,35Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 86) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 441) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as [Deuteronomy 12:15] states: "Nevertheless, whenever your heart desires, you may slaughter and partake of meat." According to the Oral Tradition, we learned that the verse is speaking about consecrated animals that must be redeemed.36I.e., the new concept taught by the verse is not that one may slaughter ordinary animals and partake of their meat, for there is no need for a verse to teach us that. Instead, the new idea is that consecrated animals can be redeemed and then used as food. It is, however, forbidden to shear them and perform work with them even after they have been redeemed (Hilchot Me'ilah, loc. cit.). We already explained in [Hilchot] Arachin37Hilchot Arachin, loc. cit. that [Leviticus 27:11] states: "With regard to any impure animal38Bechorot 37b explains that the intent is not an animal from an impure species, but rather an animal from a kosher species that became disqualified because of a blemish, for there is a second verse (27:27) that speaks about evaluating non-kosher animals. of which a sacrifice should not be brought as an offering to God, [you shall have the animal stand before the priest...]",39To be evaluated and then it may be redeemed. is speaking about blemished animals that have been redeemed.
What are the differences between [the laws pertaining to an animal] with a permanent blemish and one with a temporary blemish? If an animal with a permanent blemish40It had a permanent blemish before it was consecrated. gives birth while it is consecrated,41I.e., before it was redeemed. the offspring must be redeemed; it then receives the status of an ordinary animal even if it is unblemished.42This represents a departure from the usual practice, because generally, unblemished animals are not redeemed, but are offered as sacrifices; see Teumrah 33b. [The rationale is that] a secondary entity should not be treated with greater severity than the primary entity.43I.e., it would not be appropriate for the animal that was consecrated not to be offered as a sacrifice and its offspring, which was never directly consecrated, to be used for that purpose. If it became pregnant before it was redeemed and it gave birth after it was redeemed, the offspring has the status of an ordinary animal.44For it was redeemed together with its mother. If [the consecrated animal that was blemished] died before it was redeemed, it should be redeemed after it died.45And then its meat can be used even as food for animals, and certainly for humans. Moreover, a formal process of evaluation by a court is not required before its redemption. [The rationale is that] holiness never encompassed its actual body, only its worth, because it had a permanent blemish.46The Rambam is explaining why leniency is granted to redeem it after it died although generally we do not redeem a consecrated animal to feed its meat to the dogs (Chapter 2, Halachah 10; based on Temurah 6:5). In this instance, however, because the animal was blemished permanently, the consecration never affected its actual body, only its worth (i.e., it was not destined to be sacrificed itself, but rather to be sold and the proceeds used to purchase a sacrifice). Hence, after it dies, it can still be sold after it is redeemed.If, by contrast, one consecrates an animal that possesses a temporary blemish or he consecrates an unblemished animal and after he consecrated it, it contracted a permanent blemish [different laws apply]. If it died before it was redeemed, it should be buried like other unblemished consecrated animals,47Rather than redeemed. See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 19:11. because it must be stood before the court and evaluated,48And this process of evaluation must be performed while the animal is alive. as we explained in [Hilchot] Arachin.49Hilchot Arachin 5:12. If it was slaughtered before it was redeemed, it may be redeemed as long as it is making convulsive motions.50For as long as it is making convulsive motions, it is considered alive and the process of evaluation can take place (ibid.:13). Afterwards, one may partake of it. If it gave birth, its offspring may be sacrificed.51See Hilchot Temurah 4:9. If it became pregnant before it was redeemed52But after it contracted a permanent blemish. and it gave birth before it was redeemed, the offspring is forbidden.53To be used for ordinary purposes by Rabbinic decree. Although according to Scriptural Law, its holiness has departed, our Sages forbade its use, lest many such animals be maintained and flocks of them raised (Bechorot 15b). It may not be redeemed. What should be done? Before the mother is redeemed, the offspring should be dedicated to the same [type of] sacrifice as its mother,54It then receives holiness on its own accord, independent of its mother. because it may not be offered because of [the sanctification of] its mother, because its [holiness] comes from sanctification that was suspended.55Since the mother was unfit to be sacrificed because of its blemish, its holiness is considered to be suspended. Because the holiness of the mother was suspended, the offspring is not considered to be consecrated to the complete extent. Hence it must be consecrated again.(It must be noted that the commentaries have questioned this ruling, because in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 15:4, the Rambam writes that the holiness of consecrated animals is never suspended. It can, however, be explained that a suspension stemming from a permanent blemish is different, because the animal can never be fit for sacrifice again. See a parallel in Hilchot Temurah 3:4.)
Whenever a consecrated animal that was disqualified56Because of a blemish or similar reason. is redeemed, it may be slaughtered in a butchers' market and sold there, [after] being weighed with a scale like ordinary meat.57I.e., we do not say that since the animal was originally consecrated, it is disrespectful to treat it in this manner after it was redeemed. The Radbaz adds that the purchaser need not be notified that the meat came from a sacrifice that was disqualified. [The only] exceptions are the firstborn animals and the tithes.58See Hilchot Bechorot 1:18; 6:5-7 which mentions the restrictions against selling such meat.[The rationale for the distinction is that] selling the animal in the market causes its price to rise. Therefore other sacrifices whose value remains consecrated - for they are sold and the proceeds of the sale are used to bring another animal as a sacrifice - it should be sold in the market like an ordinary animal.59So that the best price could be received for it. In contrast, with regard to a first born animal and a tithed animal - since the proceeds of their sale do not remain consecrated, instead, the animals may be eaten [as ordinary meat,] because of the blemish, as will be explained60Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 6:18; Hilchot Bechorot 1:3; 6:4; Hilchot Temurah 3:1-2. - they may not be slaughtered in a butchers' market or sold there.61For this represents disdain for consecrated property. Even if [the value of] the firstborn animal was consecrated,62By the priest who received it after it was blemished. it should not be weighed on a scale and sold in a market.63One might think that since its value will be given to the Temple treasury, one would be allowed to sell it like normal meat to increase its price, as explained above. [The rationale is that] one may consecrate only an article that he has acquired in a complete and total manner.64In this instance, the priest cannot sell this animal in the market as private property. Hence he does not have the right to give this privilege to the Temple treasury (Rashi, Zevachim 75b).

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
There are a total of 50 blemishes that disqualify both a man1I.e., a priest from serving in the Temple. and an animal.2From being offered as a sacrifice. They have already been listed.3See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash, ch. 7.
There are other blemishes that are unique to animals and are not appropriate to be found in humans at all.4See the gloss of the Radbaz who explains that it appears that the Rambam's intent is not that if these conditions are found in men, they do not disqualify a priest. Instead, the intent is that it is extremely uncommon to find such a condition in a human. Hence they are "not appropriate." Nevertheless, if a priest does have such a condition, it is considered as a blemish and he is disqualified. There are 23 of these; they are: a) the animal's eyeball's are round like humans; b) one eye is large like a calf's and the other is small like a duck's;5If, however, both are small or both are large, this is not considered a blemish. Note the contrast to the blemishes for humans mentioned in Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 8:6 (Kessef Mishneh). if, however, one ear is large and one ear is small, even if it is small as a bean, it is acceptable; c) if there is an eruption in the white of the eye that has a hair growing from it;6If, however, it does not have a hair, it is not considered as a blemish (Bechorot 40b). d) if the cartilage between its two nostrils was perforated in a place which can be seen;7Compare to Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 7:6. e) its mouth resembles that of a swine; i.e., its upper jaw overlapped its lower jaw, even though it is not pointed like a spit.
f) If its outer tonsils8Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 6:4). There he also suggests an alternate meaning, the animal's teeth. were perforated; g) their substance was reduced, even though a portion of them remained; h) they shriveled; i) its inner tonsils were removed;9If, however, their substance was merely reduced, this is not considered as a disqualifying blemish. See Halachah 8 and notes. [this is considered a blemish],10I.e., this explanation is necessary because usually, the inner tonsils are not seen. because when it opens its mouths and shriek, it will be seen that they are missing.
j) If its horns and their inner fibrous tissue was removed and nothing of it remained;11Compare to Halachah 8. a female animal that has horns is acceptable;12Similarly, if a male was born without horns, their absence is not considered as a blemish (Ma'aseh Rokeach). k) if the substance of the skin which covers the male organ of an animal was blemished; l) if the substance of the female organ of an animal was blemished;13I.e., the portion of the female organ that projects outside the body [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 6:5)]. m) if the substance of the tail is blemished from its bone; [if its substance is blemished] from its joint, it is not [a blemish];14Rashi (Bechorot 39b) explains that the tail of an animal is made up of several vertebrae. If it is severed in the midst of a vertebra, it is considered as a blemish. If, however, if is severed at the joint between one vertebra and another, it is not considered as a blemish. n) if the tip of the tail was split into two with two separate bones; o) if there was a finger's breadth of flesh between every joint on the tail; p) if the tail was [overly] short.To what extent? For a kid, one vertebra is a blemish, but two are not. For a lamb, a length of two vertebrae is a blemish, but three is acceptable. q) if the tail of a kid was soft and hanging loosely like that of a pig; r) if one of the tail bones was broken.15The commentaries refer to Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 7:11 which states: "Whenever there is a groove made in any bone that is apparent, it is considered a blemish. It is included in the category charutz mentioned in the Torah." The tail is considered such a limb; the ribs are not. If, however, one of the ribs are broken, it is acceptable, because [the blemish] is not visible.
A five-legged animal; t) a three-legged animal;16See the parallel to Hilchot Shechitah 8:11. u) the hooves of one of its hindlegs or forelegs was round like that of a donkey even if has split hooves; v) if the hooves of one of its hindlegs or forelegs was not split like that of a donkey. This is the meaning of the term kalut mentioned in the Torah;17Leviticus 22:23. w) if its hoofs and the fibrous substance inside has shriveled, even though there remains some of that fibrous substance next to the flesh,
All of the 73 blemishes18The 23 mentioned here and the 50 mentioned in Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash, ch. 7. listed disqualify an animal from being offered as a sacrifice. If an animal that is consecrated contracts one of these blemishes, it should be redeemed and it becomes like an ordinary animal with the exception of an animal that is old, sick, or foul-smelling.19These blemishes are mentioned in Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 7:12-13. Although such animals are unfit for sacrifice, they may not be redeemed.20Rashi (Bechorot 41b) states: "Because these are not absolute blemishes." Instead, they should be maintained until they contract another permanent blemish.21Which would disqualify it in its own right. Then it should be redeemed. Similarly, a consecrated animal that contracts a temporary blemish should neither be redeemed,22Because as of yet, it is not permanently disqualified as a sacrifice. nor sacrificed.23Because in its present state, it is not fit for sacrifice.
There are four temporary blemishes [that disqualify] both a man and an animal:24In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 2:2), the Rambam also mentions a dislocated or broken limb that can be healed. a) a moist skin eruption;25See Chapter 1, Halachah 5, and Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 6:4. b) a boil that does not resemble those of Egypt;26Unlike the boils visited upon the Egyptians in the Ten Plagues (see Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 7:10), these boils are moist inside and can possibly heal. c) water that descends in the eyes that is not a permanent condition;27And thus prevents the animal or the person from seeing. As the Rambam explains in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 6:3), there are times when this blemish will heal and the water will cease descending. Then the sight of the person or animal will return. See Halachot 13-15 which describe the process through which it is determined whether the water in an animal's eyes is permanent or not. d) a degeneration of nerves in the eye that is not permanent.28See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.).
The are four other ailments that if found in an animal [prevent] it from being sacrificed. [The rationale is that such an animal] is not from the "choice," and Scripture [Deuteronomy 12:11] states [that sacrifices must come] "from the chosen of your vows."29The commentaries note that the Hebrew wording is not quoted exactly. See also Chapter 7, Halachah 11.They are: a) an animal with an eruption in the white of its eye, but it does not have hair growing from it;30If hair is growing from it, it is considered as a permanent blemish, as stated in Halachah 2. b) the substance of the horns of an animal was reduced, but their inner fibrous tissue remained;31Compare to Halachah 4. c) the substance of its inner tonsils were reduced; or d) its inner tonsils shriveled.32Compare to Halachah 3. Since its inner tonsils are seen only when it shrieks, as long as something of their substance remains, it is not considered a disqualifying blemish. Nevertheless, the animal is not sacrificed.If a consecrated animal had one of these blemishes, it is neither sacrificed not redeemed.33For an animal is redeemed only when it has a disqualifying blemish. Instead, it should be allowed to pasture until it contracts a [disqualifying] blemish.34At which point, it can be redeemed. If it was sacrificed, it appears to me that it is acceptable.35For its blemish did not disqualify it.
Similarly, when a transgression was performed with a consecrated animal36It was sodomized, used for relations with a woman, worshiped as a false deity, or consecrated for that purpose, as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 6. or it killed a person, but [was observed] only by one witness or by the owner,37Were it to have been observed by two witnesses, Torah Law would require it to be executed. This punishment is not given when the murder was observed only by one witness or the owner. See Chapter 4, Halachah 2. it is neither sacrificed not redeemed until it contracts a permanent blemish.
When an animal contracts one of the conditions that render it treifah38An animal that will die within twelve months and is hence, forbidden to be eaten. and cause it to be forbidden to be eaten, it is forbidden [to be sacrificed on] the altar.39See the Kessef Mishneh who debates whether the disqualification is Scriptural or Rabbinic in origin. For behold it is written [Malachi 1:8]: "Present it please to your governor. Would he be pleased with you or show you favor?"40The passage in Malachi speaks of bringing blemished animals for sacrifice. The prophet asks whether a mortal governor would appreciate being given such offerings. Certainly, they are inappropriate to be offered to God. Although it is not fit to be sacrificed, it is not redeemed.41For there would be no purpose in its redemption, since it is inappropriate to use it as food for animals as the Rambam continues to explain. [The rationale is that] we do not redeem sacrificial animals to feed [their meat] to the dogs. Instead, it should pasture until it dies and then be buried.42See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashin 19:11.
If it was slaughtered and discovered to be tereifah, it should be taken out to the place of burning.43I.e., the place where impure sacrifices are burnt not as offerings. See ibid.:1.If the animal was known to be tereifah and slaughtered, it should be buried rather than burnt (Radbaz). [This law also applies] if it is discovered that one of its internal organs is lacking even if this does not cause it to be deemed a tereifah, for example, it has [only] one kidney or its spleen has been removed.44See Hilchot Shechitah 8:25; 6:20 which states that these conditions do not render an animal as tereifah. Such [an animal] is forbidden [to be offered] on the altar and must be burnt. [The rationale is] not because it is blemished, because an internal flaw is not considered as a disqualifying blemish.45See Halachah 4; Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 7:11. Instead, the rationale is that an animal that is lacking [an organ] should never be offered [as a sacrifice], as [Numbers 28:31] states: "They shall be perfect for you." [An animal] with an extra [organ] is considered as if it was lacking one.46And is hence disqualified as a sacrifice. This is a general principle in Torah Law. See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 7:5; Hilchot Shechitah 8:4, 11, et al. Therefore if three kidneys or two spleens are found in [an animal], it is unacceptable.
What is meant by a permanent degeneration of nerves in the eye?47Which disqualifies an animal as a sacrifice, as stated in Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 7:5; see also Halachah 7 of this chapter. An animal which [was observed] for eighty days and it did not see. We inspect it three times: on the twenty-seventh day from the time when its difficulty was sensed, on the fifty-fourth day, and on the eightieth day. If its sight [returned and then was lost again],48In the midst of the above period. we count from the time it stopped seeing.
How is it known that the water [in its eyes] are permanent?49Which disqualifies an animal as a sacrifice, as stated in Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 7:5; see also Halachah 7 of this chapter. When it ate fresh grass from Rosh Chodesh Adar until the first half of Nisan50In Eretz Yisrael, these months are directly after the rainy season and the grasses are still fresh. and then51I.e., the grasses were eaten in this order. ate dried grass during Elul and the first half of Tishrei52In these months, rain has not descended for more than half a year and the grasses have dried. and was not healed.53Eating these grasses is a natural cure for this malady. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 6:3). This indicates that the water is permanent.
How much of the fresh grass must be eaten in the season for fresh grass and the dried grass in the season for dried grass? At least54Needless to say, eating more increases the therapeutic value. an amount the size of a fig before its first meal in these three months.55I.e., the two month and a half periods. They must be eaten each day after drinking and it must be free [to roam] in the field while eating. It should not be alone, but with another animal for company. If all of this was done for it and it still was not healed, the water is definitely permanent. If one of these factors was lacking, there is a doubt concerning the matter56All of these aspects of the animal's treatment are discussed by our Sages (Bechorot 39a). If the treatment was not administered correctly, it is possible that the blemish is not permanent and could be healed through proper treatment. and [the animal] should be neither offered,57For even if the blemish is merely temporary, it is, nevertheless, unfit to be sacrificed. nor redeemed.58For until it is established that the blemish is permanent, the animal cannot be redeemed.
What is implied? It ate fresh grass as prescribed throughout Adar and during the first half of Nisan. Then it ate dried grass as prescribed during the second half of Nisan and the month of Iyar thus it ate the grasses for three months in the proper order.59But not at the appropriate time of year. Or it ate a fig-sized amount of grass after eating or before drinking, or it was tied, alone, or located in a garden near a city. If it was not healed after all these treatments, there is an unresolved doubt whether [the blemish is considered] as permanent or temporary. Hence, if one blemished it in another manner, he is not liable for lashes.60It is forbidden to cause a consecrated animal to incur a disqualifying blemish. Nevertheless, if the animal is already blemished, one who causes such a blemish is not liable for lashes, as stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 8. Since we are unsure of this animal's status, we cannot hold the one who causes the blemish liable. If it partook [of the grasses] in the prescribed manner during the prescribed times for eating and it was not healed, it is considered as permanently blemished.
There is an unresolved doubt whether it is considered as permanently blemished from the time it contracted the condition or from the time they despaired of its recovery. Therefore if someone redeems it before they despaired of its recovery and then derived benefit from the object used to redeem the animal61Thus if the redemption was valid, the article used to redeem the animal is consecrated and the person who benefited from it transgressed. If, however, the redemption was not valid, the article is not given that status and hence, there is no transgression involved. after they despaired of its recovery,62I.e., even if the benefit was derived after they despaired of its recovery in which instance, it was definitely permanently blemished, since it was redeemed before that time, the situation is still questionable as explained. there is an unresolved doubt whether he derived unauthorized benefit from consecrated animals. Therefore63I.e., because the matter is unresolved. he does not bring a sacrifice to atone for this transgression, as will be explained in the appropriate place.64See Hilchot Me'ilah 1:5; Hilchot Shegagot 9:11. As will be explained in the notes to those halachot, it is not necessary to bring a sacrifice conditionally, stipulating: "If I transgressed, this will serve as atonement for my transgression, and if I did not transgress, it will be considered a free-will offering" (Radbaz).

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
Blemishes1I.e., those outlined in the previous chapter. do not disqualify a fowl [as a sacrifice]. This applies both with regard to a male and to a female in the instance of a fowl, for the expression [Leviticus 22:18] "a perfect male" was stated only with regard to an animal.2I.e., with regard to an animal, there are sacrifices which require a male and others which require a female. Such distinctions are not made with regard to sacrifices brought from fowl. All sacrifices are acceptable whether one brings a male or a female. See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 1:8.When does the above apply? With regard to small blemishes. Nevertheless, if the wing of a fowl became dried out, its eye was lost,3The commentaries explain that the fact that the fowl lost its sight is not enough to disqualify it. It must be as if the eye has been removed. or its foot was cut off, it is forbidden to [be offered on] the altar, for an animal that is lacking a limb is never offered.4See Chapter 2, Halachah 11. Similarly, if it incurred one of the factors that cause it to be deemed tereifah and forbidden to be eaten, it is disqualified as a sacrifice.5See ibid.:10.
Small6I.e., young, underdeveloped birds. They are considered as "lacking in age" (Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 18:8). turtle-doves and large ordinary doves are unacceptable as [can be inferred from Leviticus 1:14]: "from the turtle doves and the children of the doves."7We have translated the verse literally so that the source for the concept derived is clear. None of the other animals prescribed for sacrifices are described as b'nai, "the children of." By using that term, the Torah sought to imply that the birds must be young and underdeveloped. When it begins to sprout yellow feathers,8An intermediate stage of development. it is unacceptable for both species.9It is unacceptable for turtle-doves, because such a fowl is still considered in its preliminary stages of development. It is not mature yet. Yet it is unacceptable for ordinary doves, because such a fowl has developed beyond its initial stages.Until when are young ordinary doves acceptable? As long as when one pulls out [a feather from] the wing, the place from which it was pulled out will fill with blood. Turtledoves are acceptable when [their feathers all] are of a golden hue.
Although there are no blemishes greater than that of a tumtum10An animal whose sexual organs were covered by a mass of flesh and thus its gender cannot be determined. or an androgynus,11An animal with both a male and female sexual organ. they are not acceptable for the altar for another reason. Since there is an unresolved doubt whether they are males or females, they are considered of another type, and with regard to the sacrifices, it is said: "a perfect male" and "a perfect female." [Implied is that] they must be definitely male or definitely female. Therefore even a fowl12Which could be offered if it possessed a blemish. which is a tumtum or an androgynus is unacceptable for the altar.13Even though it makes no difference if a fowl is male or female, it must be definitely a male or definitely a female.
Similarly, a hybrid animal, one born through Caesarian section, and one that is lacking in age are unacceptable even if they are unblemished. [These are all excluded through the exegesis of Leviticus 22:27]: "An ox, a lamb, and a goat..." - [this implies] each of the species must be separate; an animal should not be a hybrid between a lamb and a goat. "When it gives birth..." - this excludes one born through Caesarian section.14For Caesarian section is not considered as "birth." "It will be seven days..." - This excludes one that it is lacking in age.15See Halachah 8. "Together with its mother" - This excludes an "orphan," i.e., an animal born after its mother was slaughtered.16I.e., the mother was pregnant. It was slaughtered and the fetus was removed alive from its womb and then consecrated as a sacrifice. The Radbaz explains that since this animal is also born through Caesarian section, it is not mentioned as a separate category in the first clause of this halachah and in Halachah 11.
An animal which looks like a different species is unacceptable [as a sacrifice] for the altar even though it is not a hybrid. What is implied? A ewe gave birth to an animal that resembled a goat or a she-goat gave birth to an animal that resembled a lamb. Even though it has some of the signs of its own species, it is unacceptable like an animal that has a permanent blemish. For there is no blemish greater than a change [in appearance].
Similarly, an animal that had relations with a person,17Either a male or a female. See Chapter 4, Halachah 3. which was sodomized,18In Chapter 4, Halachah 2, and in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 8:1), the Rambam explains that this is referring to a situation where the forbidden sexual act was observed by only one witness, by the owners, or the animal was consecrated before being brought to court, or the forbidden sexual act was performed by a gentile. If, however, the forbidden sexual act was performed by a Jew and observed by two witnesses, once the matter was ruled upon by the court, the animal must be executed and is certainly unacceptable as a sacrifice. See also Chapter 4, Halachah 3,5 for more details regarding the disqualification of such an animal. which was set aside for pagan worship,19Even if it had not been used for such worship as of yet. See Chapter 4, Halachah 4, which explains when such an animal is disqualified. As the Radbaz explains in his gloss to that halachah, this is speaking about both an animal which is itself going to be worshipped, and also an animal that will be used for the service of a pagan deity. or which was worshipped,20See Chapter 4, Halachah 6. even though it is permitted to be eaten,21This refers even to an animal that was worshipped or set aside for pagan worship, as stated in Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 8:1. is unacceptable as a sacrifice for the altar. [This is derived as follows: When describing animals unfit for sacrifices, Leviticus 22:25] states: "For their perversion is in them." [Implied is that] any [animal] characterized by perversion is forbidden. With regard to forbidden [sexual behavior, Genesis 6:12] states: "For all flesh has perverted [its path]."22The commentaries to that verse explain that its intent is that even animals were mating with partners from different species. It is, however, unlikely that this is the Rambam's intent in citing that prooftext. Most probably, the intent is that only animals that shared relations with humans are forbidden. With regard to pagan worship, [Exodus 32:7] states: "For your nation has perverted itself." Similarly, an animal or fowl which killed a person are considered equivalent to one that had relations with a person or which was sodomized and they are unacceptable for the altar.23See Chapter 4, Halachah 3, for more particulars concerning this category.
It appears to me that even though all of these types of animals are unfit to be brought as a sacrifice, if one transgressed and offered them as a sacrifice, he is not worthy of lashes according to Scriptural Law, because the prohibition [against using these animals as sacrifices] is not explicitly stated in the Torah. An animal given as a present to a harlot or exchanged for a dog are forbidden [as sacrifices] for the altar. One who offers a sacrifice from either of them or from both together is liable for one set of lashes, 24Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 100) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 571) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. Although the prohibition involves two subjects, not one, it is still considered as only one prohibition. See the Introduction to Sefer HaMitzvot, General Principle 9, for more details on why the two prohibitions are considered as one mitzvah. as [Deuteronomy 23:19] states: "Do not bring a present to a harlot or the exchange of a dog [to the house of God]." Why is one liable for only one set of lashes for them both? Because they are both mentioned in one prohibition.
It is a positive commandment25Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 60) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 293) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. to offer all of the sacrifices26Rabbi Akiva Eiger postulates that this mitzvah applies only with regard to animals. Young doves, by contrast, may be offered even before their eighth day of life. This conclusion can be derived from the Rambam's wording in the following halachah and in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 18:8. See also Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 3:10 which allows a chick to be slaughtered for food even on the day of its birth. from the eighth day [of their lives] and onward, as [Leviticus 22:27] states: "It will be together with its mother for seven days and on the eighth day and onward, it will be desirable." Throughout these seven days, it is called lacking in age.27See ibid. 1:11-12 for more particulars. There the Rambam states that it is preferable to offer a sacrifice after it is at least one month old.Although an animal that is lacking in age is unacceptable as a sacrifice, if one transgressed and offered one, he is not liable for lashes,28The Rambam adds this explanation, because in contrast to the disqualifying factors mentioned in Halachah 7, this factor is mentioned explicitly in the Torah (Radbaz). because the negative commandment comes as a result of a positive commandment. The sacrifice, [however,] is not acceptable.29As can be inferred from the prooftext cited.
Turtle-doves that have not reached the stage of development when they are fit for sacrifice30See Halachah 2 which explains when these doves are fit to be offered. and young doves that matured beyond the appropriate stage31That same halachah explains when these doves become unacceptable. are all considered as blemished [animals].32See also Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 18:7-9 which mentions other time factors that render an animal unfit to be sacrificed. One who offers them is not liable for lashes,33There is no specific prohibition forbidding such offerings. Instead, the manner in which the positive commandment is stated in the Torah makes it clear that a younger fowl is prohibited, as stated in the previous halachah. even though the sacrifice is invalid and is not acceptable.
One who consecrates an animal which is a tumtum, androgynus, tereifah, a hybrid, or born through Caesarian section to the altar is like one who consecrated stones or wood,34Since these types of animals are not acceptable as sacrifices as explained in the previous halachot, the consecration is not effective. for the holiness does not take effect with regard to its physical substance. It is considered as ordinary property in all contexts. It should be sold35Immediately; there is no need that one wait until the animal is blemished. and the proceeds of the sale used to purchase any sacrifice one desires.36The Ra'avad emphasizes that the person's words are not entirely of no consequence. Instead, the animal must be sold and the proceeds used to purchase a sacrifice. This, he explains, applies only when the person states: "This animal is consecrated to the altar." If he states: "This animal is a sacrifice," his words are of no consequence and no holiness is attached to it at all. It is not considered like a blemished animal,37I.e., if an animal with a blemish is consecrated, the animal itself becomes holy. Also, the one who consecrates it is liable for lashes (Radbaz).See also Hilchot Temurah 1:14, 3:5, when one desires to transfer the holiness of a consecrated animal to a blemished animal, the transfer is effective and the blemished animal is considered as consecrated. This does not apply with regard to these animals. for a sacrifice may be brought from the species of a blemished animal.38Were it to be unblemished. Therefore even when it is blemished, the holiness of an animal can be transferred to it.When, by contrast, one consecrates an animal that had relations with a person, which was sodomized, which was set aside for pagan worship, which was worshipped, which was given to a harlot, or which was exchanged for a dog,39Which are all unacceptable, as explained in the previous halachot. it is considered as if he consecrated an animal with a temporary blemish. They should be left to pasture until they contract a permanent blemish for which they could be redeemed. Similarly, one who consecrates an animal that is lacking in age is considered as one who consecrates an animal with a temporary blemish.40For ultimately, it will come of age, and then be acceptable for sacrifice. Nevertheless, he is not liable for lashes, as we explained.41In Halachah 8. There the Rambam states that one who offers such a fowl is not liable. From that, we can infer that one who consecrates it is also exempt.
Thus there are fourteen types of animals that are forbidden [as sacrifices] for the altar: a blemished animal, one that is not choice,42As explained in Chapter 2, Halachah 8. one that is lacking an internal organ,43As explained ibid.:11. a tereifah, a hybrid, one born from Caesarian section, one that had relations with a person, one that was sodomized, one that killed a person, one that was worshipped, one set aside for pagan worship, one given to a harlot as her fee, one exchanged for a dog, one which is lacking in age.
All of the animals which are forbidden [as sacrifices] for the altar are forbidden regardless of the proportion in which they are intermingled. Even if one of them becomes mixed together with ten thousand,44And the forbidden animal cannot be identified. Note the parallels in Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 6:2. they are all disqualified and unacceptable for the altar.45Zevachim 73a,b states that the rationale is that animals are important and therefore are never nullified in a mixture. The Sages then ask: Let us have the herd in which the animal is mixed moved and then we will follow the principle: Whenever one is separated, we consider it to have separated from the majority (which in this instance is permitted). They reply that this is not done because of a Rabbinical decree, lest an animal be removed from the mixture while it is at rest.In all instances, the offspring [of these unacceptable animals] are acceptable [as sacrifices] for the altar, with the exception of the offspring of an animal that was sodomized, worshipped, set aside for worship, or which killed a person. The offspring of these animals are forbidden for the altar as they are.46Temurah 30b states that it is disrespectful to offer an animal that has been associated with such a transgression as a sacrifice. From the following halachah, it appears that the rationale is that it is considered to have actually taken part in the transgression.
When does the above47The disqualification of the offspring in those four instances. apply? When the transgression was performed with it or it killed the person while it was pregnant, in which instance, the offspring was together with it when it became disqualified and was considered as one of its limbs.48In keeping with the principle (Hilchot Nizkei Mammon 11:12; Temurah, loc. cit.): "A fetus is considered like the thigh of its mother." If, however, it became pregnant after the transgression was performed with it or it killed the person, its offspring is acceptable for the altar.49For in that instance, the animal was brought into being by two factors, one of which is associated with a source forbidden as a sacrifice (the mother) and another (the father) which was not (ibid.). Even if an animal was sodomized while it was consecrated and then it became pregnant, [the offspring is acceptable]. Needless to say, the offspring is acceptable if [the mother] was sodomized while it was of ordinary status and then it was consecrated and became pregnant. Similarly, a chick born from an egg from a tereifah is acceptable [as a sacrifice] for the altar.50For a chick is an entirely new entity that was not directly associated with the forbidden animal (ibid. 31a).
When a person bows down to standing grain, its kernels are permitted to be used for meal offerings, for their [form] has changed. They resemble the offspring of animals forbidden [as sacrifices] for the altar.51As mentioned in the previous halachot. I.e., just as the offspring is the product of the forbidden animal, the flour is the product of the grain. See Avodah Zarah 46b-47a. Similarly, an animal that was fattened with vetch from a false deity is permitted [as a sacrifice] for the altar, for the [form of the vetch] has changed.52In this instance, it is not even remotely connected to the forbidden entity. See Temurah, loc. cit.
[Animals for] any of the sacrifices may be purchased from gentiles.53Similarly, an animal brought by a gentile to sacrifice as a burnt offering is acceptable (see Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 3:2). We do not suspect that [the animal] had relations with a person, had been sodomized, set aside for pagan worship, or worshipped unless it is known that it was disqualified. [Support for this concept can be brought from I Samuel 15:16:] "From the Amalekites, they were brought, for the people had mercy on the prime quality sheep and cattle, to sacrifice [them] to God your Lord."54King Saul gave this explanation to the prophet Samuel after failing to destroy the herds of the Amalekites. Although that excuse was rejected, it was rejected only because God had explicitly stated that the Amalekites' herds must be destroyed. Had there not been such a command, presumably they - and by extension, animals belonging to any other gentile nation - would have been acceptable.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
An animal or a fowl that was sodomized,1The Rambam does not mention an animal that had relations with a person, for that is not possible with regard to a fowl. which killed a person, which was set aside for pagan worship, or which was worshipped, are all unacceptable [as sacrifices] for the altar.2The Rambam mentioned this concept in the previous chapter. In this chapter, he outlines the details of these restrictions. The point of this halachah is that the restrictions apply to a fowl as well as to an animal.
When an animal or a fowl had relations with a person, was sodomized, or killed a person, it should be executed by stoning if [the act was observed] by two witnesses.3See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 1:16; Hilchot Nizkei Mammon 10:1. It is forbidden to benefit from their flesh.4Even if slaughtered according to Jewish Law (Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 4:22; Hilchot Nizkei Mammon 11:9). Needless to say, such animals are forbidden [as sacrifices] for the altar.With regard to which situations was it said that they are forbidden [as sacrifices] for the altar? When [the animals] were permitted to ordinary individuals, e.g., there was only one witness [who observed the transgression] and the owner remained silent5In matters of financial law, the testimony of one witness is of consequence only that it can require an oath to be taken. or the owner testified [concerning the transgression] although no witnesses were present.6Similarly, the testimony of a person regarding his own property is of no consequence.In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 8:1), the Rambam mentions two other instances where this law applies: the animal was consecrated before being brought to court or the forbidden sexual act was performed by a gentile. If there was one witness who observed the transgression and the owner contradicts him, the animals are permitted, even [as sacrifices] for the altar.
When sport was made with an animal and it was trained to gore until it killed a person, it is acceptable [as a sacrifice] for the altar, because it is considered as having been compelled against its will.7See Hilchot Nizkei Mammon 6:5 which explains that such an animal is not executed, because Exodus 21:28 requires such a punishment: "When an ox gores...," i.e., that it does so on its own initiative, and not when it was prompted to gore.See the gloss of the Radbaz to Chapter 3, Halachah 5, where he states that such an animal should be forbidden to the altar under all circumstances just like a sodomized animal is.An animal is not disqualified because it had relations with a person or because it was sodomized unless the male who sodomized it was nine years old.8For relations with a male are not significant until that age (Hilchot Ishut 11:3; Hilchot Yibbum VeChalitzah 1:16; et al). Whether it was sodomized by a Jew, a gentile,9See Hilchot Melachim 9:5-6 which states that although a gentile is liable to be executed for engaging in sexual relations with an animal, the animal itself is not executed. Nevertheless, involvement in the transgression disqualifies it as a sacrifice. or a servant, since it was sodomized by a human, it is disqualified. If a human was the recipient of sex from an animal, [the animal] is not disqualified unless the female with whom it had relations was three years old10See Hilchot Na'arah Betulah 1:8, et al, where it is explained that until a girl is three years old, sexual relations with her are not significant. or the male with whom it had relations was nine years old.11The Ra'avad takes issue with the Rambam on the latter point, noting that the ages the Rambam mentions are relevant with regard to the punishment of execution by stoning. Nevertheless, he argues that since the animal is disqualified from being offered as a sacrifice, because it becomes offensive to offer it after it engaged in forbidden relations, that concept would seemingly apply regardless of the age of the human with whom it engaged in those relations. Moreover, since the animal derived pleasure, the sexual activity should be considered significant. The Kessef Mishneh justifies the Rambam's ruling, explaining that what is significant here is the halachic definition of sexual relations, not the pleasure the animal experiences. Since halachicly, the act is not considered as sex, the animal is not forbidden.
When is an animal or a fowl disqualified because it was set aside for pagan worship?12The Radbaz explains that this is speaking about both an animal which is itself going to be worshipped, and also an animal that will be used for the service of a pagan deity. When the priests perform a deed with it, e.g., they shear it or work with it for the sake of pagan worship. With words alone, by contrast, it is not considered as set aside for pagan worship, for an entity cannot be consecrated to a false deity.13The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that if one designated an animal as a false deity, that is sufficient to cause the animal to become repugnant and forbidden as a sacrifice, even if a deed is not performed. The Radbaz brings support for the Ra'avad's ruling from Isaiah 30:22 which when speaking about making the covering of idol's impure uses the expression: "Tell it: 'Be gone,'" implying that "telling it," i.e., speaking is sufficient to cause an article to be considered as an idol.The difference between the Rambam's view and that of the Ra'avad results from a variation in the text of Temurah 29a. According to the Rambam, the passage is speaking about an animal dedicated to the service of a false deity, while according to the Ra'avad, it refers to an animal intended to be worshiped as a false deity. (The standard printed text supports the Rambam's version, although Rashi mentions the other version as well.). The Radbaz explains that according to the Rambam an animal is forbidden as a sacrifice only when it is forbidden to benefit from it. As the Rambam states in Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 8:1, whether an animal is designated to be worshipped or as a sacrifice to a false deity, it does not become forbidden until a deed is performed. The Ra'avad differs and maintains that the prohibition against benefiting from the animal is different from the prohibition against offering the animal as a sacrifice. More stringent rules apply in the latter context.
An animal that had relations with a person or that was sodomized becomes forbidden [as a sacrifice] for the altar whether it belongs to the person with whom it shared relations or it belongs to a colleague14The Radbaz states that in an instance where two witnesses did not observe the transgression (as stated in Halachah 2), the person who engaged in relations with the animal is not at all liable to its owner financially, for he is not prohibited against benefiting from the animal. and regardless of whether those relations were carried out under compulsion or voluntarily, whether they were willful or inadvertent, or whether they were performed before [the animal was] consecrated or afterwards.15In contrast to an animal which kills, which is not disqualified if it was goaded into killing (see Halachah 3), an animal that engaged in relations with a human is disqualified in all instances. Since the act causes it to be considered loathsome, the circumstances under which the act was performed are of no consequence.When, by contrast, an animal is set aside for pagan worship, it becomes disqualified if it belonged to the person who set it aside and he set it aside for pagan worship before he consecrated it as a sacrifice. If, however, one set aside an animal belonging to a colleague16This applies even (as stated in the previous halachah), he performed a deed indicating that the animal was set aside for pagan worship (Radbaz). or [even] his own animal after he consecrated it as a sacrifice,17For once he consecrated it as a sacrifice, it is as if it no longer belongs to him. it is permitted [to be offered as a sacrifice].18Since a transgression has not been performed with it as of yet, it is not considered as loathsome (Radbaz). [The rationale is that] a person cannot set aside an entity that does not belong to him [for pagan worship].19As the Rambam states in Hilchot Avodat Kochavim (and in many other sources) a person cannot cause an article that does not belong to him to become forbidden.
[When an animal] has been worshipped as a false deity, it is forbidden [as a sacrifice] whether one served his own animal or one belonging to a colleague,20The Ra'avad quotes Avodah Zarah 54a which states that the above restriction applies only when one performs a deed with the article he worshipped. From the Rambam's statements in Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 8:1, it is apparent that he maintains that the principle that a person cannot cause property that does not belong to him to be forbidden to be used applies even if he actually worships the article as a false deity and even when he performs a deed. The Rambam here is speaking about causing the article to be forbidden as a sacrifice to the altar and for that, a deed is not necessary. whether he acted under compulsion or voluntarily, willfullly or inadvertently, whether he did so before the animal was consecrated or afterwards. [In the latter instance,] it should be left to pasture until it becomes permanently blemished and then it should be redeemed, as we stated.21Chapter 3, Halachah 10. Since the animal was consecrated, it cannot be used for ordinary purposes until it is redeemed and it cannot be redeemed until it is blemished.When an animal is worshipped, it and everything upon it22Any garments or ornaments used to adorn the false deity. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Teumrah 6:1), the Rambam explains the reason for this restriction is that the ornaments were worshipped together with the false deity. are forbidden [as sacrifices] for the altar. For it is forbidden to benefit from all coverings of entities worshipped as false deities.23See Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 8:7. If, however, [an animal has merely been] set aside for pagan worship, it is forbidden, but the entities on it are permitted [as sacrifices for the altar].24Since they have not been worshipped, one is permitted to benefit from them and they may even be used as sacrifices [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.)].
When a person bows down to a mountain, although he may benefit from it,25See Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 8:1 which states that "Any article that was not touched by human hands or made by man will is permitted to be used even though it was worshipped as a false deity." its stones are forbidden to [be used as part of] the altar.26Or any other part of the Temple building (Radbaz). As stated in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 2:16, the altar was made with whole stones, both large and small over which is poured a liquid with lime, pitch, and molten lead. In the above instance, since the stones were taken from a mountain that was worshipped, it is inappropriate for them to be used for the altar. Similarly, when one bows down to a flowing stream in his land,27Implied is that if the water is not his own, it may be used even as a libation even though it was worshipped (Rav Yosef Corcus). The Radbaz notes that no such leniency is granted with regard to the stones mentioned in the previous clause. He differentiates between the two as follows: The water of a spring is constantly flowing. Thus the water that was worshipped is not the same water that will be used for the libation. The stones of the mountain, by contrast, were worshipped themselves. Hence even though they are not a person's private property, they may not be used for the Temple. its water is invalid28In this instance as well, an ordinary person is permitted to use the water, but it is inappropriate to be used for the altar. for use as a libation.29I.e., the water libation offered during the Sukkot holiday. See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 10:6-10.[Even though] an asherah30A tree that is worshipped. See Exodus 34:13; Deuteronomy 7:5, 12:3, Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 8:3; et al. has been nullified,31In Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 8:8, the Rambam writes that once a gentile nullifies the connection of a worshipped entity to paganism, it is permitted to benefit from it. The subsequent halachot in that chapter describe the process of nullification. Here the Rambam is emphasizing that although it is permitted to benefit from the article afterwards, the fact that it was once worshipped - or served as an accessory to an article worshipped - prevents it from being offered as a sacrifice. one should not bring logs from it for the arrangement of wood on the altar.32Similarly, the branches of a palm tree that was worshipped should not be used as a lulav (Hilchot Lulav 8:1). Similarly, when one bows down to an animal, just as it is disqualified [as a sacrifice] for the altar, its wool is disqualified for use in the priestly garments,33See the conclusion of the tractate of Kinnim which mentions how a sacrificial animal can be used for these purposes.There the Mishnah states that the wool is unacceptable for use as techelet. The Kessef Mishneh notes that although in Chapter 3, Halachah 14, the Rambam ruled that even though wheat was worshipped, the flour made from it is not disqualified for use as a meal offering, because it underwent a change. In this and the other instances mentioned below, although the color and the form of the article may have undergone a change, that change does not alter its fundamental nature and it is still disqualified for the altar and its service.Such wool is also disqualified for use in tzitzit or for any other purpose associated with a mitzvah. See Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 11:8). its horns are disqualified for use as trumpets,34I.e., as shofarot that are sounded together with the trumpets (Hilchot Taaniot 1:4). its thighs are disqualified for use as flutes,35Among the instruments sounded in the Temple service were flutes (Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 3:4-6). Apparently, the thighs of sacrificial animals were hollowed out and converted into such instruments. and its intestines as strands [for the lyres].36Which were also employed in the Temple service (ibid.). Everything is unacceptable.37Because it was an integral part of an entity that was worshipped.
Anything that is connected with the name of a false deity should not be employed in the service of the Sanctuary even though it is permitted to benefit from it.38This general principle summarizes the concepts mentioned in the previous halachot. The Rambam now goes on to discuss other reasons why animals were forbidden as sacrifices.What is meant by a present given to a harlot?39Which is forbidden to be used as a sacrifice as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 7. When one tells a harlot, "This entity is given to you as your wages."40I.e., in exchange for intimacy. This applies to a gentile harlot, a maidservant, a Jewish woman who is forbidden to the man41The Rambam is explaining that here the emphasis is on the halachic meaning of the term zonah ("harlot") and not its popular meaning. The point is not that the present is forbidden because it was given in exchange for intimacy, but that it was given in exchange for intimacy with a woman who meets the halachic definitions of that term. That definition is given in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 18:1: "Based on the Oral Tradition, we learned that the term zonah used by the Torah refers to one who is not a native-born Jewess (thus excluding a gentile woman or maidservant) [or] a Jewish woman who engaged in relations with a man she was forbidden to marry, violating a prohibition that is universally applicable" (excluding the prohibited relations the Rambam mentions). as an ervah42Incestuous and adulterous sexual relations for which one is liable for karet (Hilchot Ishut 1:5). These forbidden relationships are mentioned in Leviticus, Chapter 18. or by a negative commandment.43The nine forbidden relationships mentioned in Hilchot Isut 1:7. If, however, a woman is unmarried, the present given to her may be used [as a sacrifice] even if the man is a priest.44I.e., although he is engaging in intimacy out of lust and in exchange for payment, the woman is not termed a harlot, as Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 18:2 states: "Whenever a person has relations with an unmarried woman, even if she is a harlot who wantonly makes herself available to everyone... she is not deemed as a zonah... for she is not forbidden to marry [the people with whom she engaged in relations]." Similarly, if a person's wife is a niddah,45I.e., she has experienced menstrual bleeding and has not purified herself afterwards. a present given to her may be used [as a sacrifice] even though she is an ervah.46For such relationships are also punishable by karet (see Hilchot Issurei Biah 4:1). Nevertheless, the fact that a woman is in the niddah state does not prevent the consecration of a woman from taking effect.
If a man married one of the women forbidden to him because of a negative commandment,47The consecration of such a woman is binding and she is considered as his wife (Hilchot Ishut 4:14). whatever he gives her for the sake of intimate relations is considered as "the present [of a harlot]"48Because he is forbidden to marry her and thus the present meets the criteria mentioned in the previous halachah. and is forbidden [to be offered as a sacrifice]. A present given [by a male to] a male [for the purpose of intimacy] is forbidden [as a sacrifice].49See Temurah 29b. If a woman gives a present to a male for the purpose of intimacy, [it is not considered] "a present [of a harlot]" and is permitted [as a sacrifice].50The Radbaz explains that the Rambam's intent is that although in a strict halachic sense, there is no prohibition against offering such an article as a sacrifice, it is an abomination unto God and should not be offered.
When a person tells a colleague: "Here is an article for you. In return for it, have your [Canaanite] maidservant spend the night with my Jewish bondsman," it is considered "a present [of a harlot]."51There are two points expressed by this halachah: a) that, as stated above, a Canaanite maidservant is considered as a harlot;b) that even though the present is not being given by the person engaging in the intimate relations, the present is still forbidden as a sacrifice. [The above applies] provided [the Jewish bondsman] does not have a wife and children. If, however, he does have a wife and children, he is permitted [to engage in intimacy] with a Canaanite maidservant, as will be explained.52Hilchot Avadim 3:3-4. This also applies if one tells a harlot:53I.e., one might think that the law applies only with regard to a bondsman and his master, for the master has authority over the bondsman and has certain responsibilities toward him, but not with regard to two free men who are not associated in this manner (Kessef Mishneh). "Here is an article for you. In return for it, engage in relations with so-and-so who is Jewish." [The present is considered as] "a present [of a harlot]."
If a person made an agreement to give a harlot one lamb and [instead,] he gave her many - even if he gave her 1000 - they are considered as "presents [to a harlot]"54And not an ordinary gift (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh). This applies even when he does not explicitly say that he gave them to her because of the relations they shared (Radbaz). and are all forbidden [as sacrifices] for the altar.If he gave her a present and did not engage in relations with her, but told her: "Let this be in your possession until I engage in relations with you," it becomes forbidden [as a sacrifice] when he engages in relations with her.55Because it was given to her in exchange for relations. It is not significant whether it was given before the relations or afterwards. If she had it sacrificed before he engaged in relations with her, it is acceptable56Because they had not engaged in relations yet. We do not say that since it was designated as "a present for a harlot," it is forbidden as a sacrifice (Radbaz). and if she was obligated to bring a sacrifice, she has discharged her obligation, provided when he gave it to he told her: "When you accept my [proposition], you acquire it from the present time."57Thus she was the legal owner at the time it was sacrificed. If he did not tell her so, [it is not acceptable] because she cannot bring an article that does not belong to her58If he did not make such a stipulation, he remains the legal owner of the animal. It is in the woman's possession as security, but she is not its owner. as a sacrifice.
If she took the initiative and consecrated it [for a sacrifice] before he entered relations with her and afterwards, he engaged in relations with her [before it was sacrificed], there is an unresolved doubt59Temurah 29b considers this question and does not reach a conclusion. whether it is considered "the present [of a harlot"] - because he engaged in relations with her before it was sacrificed - or whether it is not considered as such, since she consecrated it before relations.60And from the time an entity is consecrated, it is considered as having been given to the Temple. Hence, it could be considered as if it already had been sacrificed. Hence, it should not be sacrificed,61Instead, it should be left to pasture until it contracts a disqualifying blemish. but if it is sacrificed, it is acceptable.62As evident from Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 7:20, this is the ruling whenever there is a question whether an substance offered as a sacrifice is acceptable.
If he engaged in relations with her, but did not give her anything, and then afterwards - even many years afterwards - he gave it to her, it is considered "the present [of a harlot"].When does the above apply?63The principle under which this halachah operates is that for a "present to a harlot" to be forbidden as a sacrifice, it must be acquired by the woman at the time of relations even though it does not come into her full possession until afterwards.(Temurah 29a). With regard to a gentile woman64I.e., if the gentile woman later desires to offer this animal as a sacrifice, it is not accepted from her. Although we do accept animals brought by gentiles as burnt offerings, the animals must be acceptable. whom he told: "Engage in relations with me in exchange for this lamb," for she does not have to draw it into her domain [to acquire it]65According to Scriptural Law, an exchange is completed when an exchange is made. Hence, at the time the two engaged in relations, the lamb became the woman's property. Nevertheless, our Sages ordained that movable property is not transferred to the legal domain of the recipient until he acquires it through meshichah, physically drawing it into his possession (Hilchot Mechirah 3:1). Our Sages, however, did not impose this decree with regard to gentiles and transactions with them follow the original guidelines of Scriptural Law (see (Hilchot Zechiyah UMatanah 1:14). Hence a gentile harlot became the legal owner of the lamb directly after the relations. Hence it is considered as "the present of a harlot." The fact that it was not given to her until years afterwards is not significant. or with regard to a Jewish woman when the lamb was left in her courtyard and he told her: "If I do not give you money on this day, [the lamb] is yours."66Because a person's courtyard can acquire an article on his or her behalf when it is placed within (Hilchot Zechiyah UMatanah 4:8). Hence, while the women is holding the lamb in lieu of the money, it is considered to have entered her possession. If, however, he told her : "Engage in relations with me in exchange for this lamb" without any further explanation and then engaged in relations and sent her the lamb afterwards, it is permissible [to be sacrificed; it is not considered] "the present [of a harlot]."
Only the actual physical substance of [the article given] is forbidden as "the present [of a harlot]" or "the exchange [for a dog]." Therefore [these prohibitions] apply only to articles that are [in essence] fit to be sacrificed on the altar, e.g., a kosher animal, turtle doves, small doves, wine, oil, and fine flour. If he gave her money67Or other entities. and she bought a sacrifice with it, it is acceptable.
If he gave her grain and she had it made into fine flour; [he gave her] olives and she had oil made from them; [he gave her] grapes, and she had wine made from them, they are acceptable, because their form has changed.68The finished product is considered as different from the raw material from which it is made.If he gave her a consecrated animal as her present, it does not become forbidden to the altar.69For a consecrated article is not considered as his personal property. Hence, it is not his to give her (Temurah 30b). Even if he designated her as one of those to eat from his Paschal sacrifice70To partake of a Paschal sacrifice, one must designated to partake of it from the outset. or his festive offering71This refers to the festive offering brought on the fourteenth of Nisan to accompany the Paschal sacrifice. See Hilchot Korban Pesach 4:11. as a present, the consecrated animals are not disqualified, for the Temple already acquired them at the time they were consecrated.72Although the owner retains the right to allow others to partake of the offerings, they are not considered as his private property. Instead, he is giving them the right to partake of consecrated property, not his own possessions. Similarly, if he gave her an entity that did not belong to him, he did not disqualify it, for a person cannot cause an article that does not belong to him to be forbidden unless the owner despairs of its recovery.73For at that point - since the owner has despaired of its return and it has departed from the possession of the thief - the harlot becomes its legal owner (see Hilchot Geneivah 5:3). Accordingly, it is disqualified as a sacrifice.If, however, he gave her doves, even though they are consecrated, they can be considered as "a present to a harlot." This concept was conveyed as part of the Oral Tradition.74I.e., the Rambam understands Temurah 30b as deriving this law from the exegesis of a verse. According to logic, we would apply the principle: A person cannot cause an article that does not belong to him to be become forbidden.The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam regarding the interpretation of the above passage. He maintains that it is speaking about ordinary doves. Nevertheless, since blemished doves are acceptable as sacrifices (Chapter 3, Halachah 1), one might think that a present to a harlot is also acceptable. Therefore, the Torah must teach us that this is not the case. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh favor the Ra'avad's understanding of the passage.
What is meant by "an exchange for a dog"?75Which is forbidden for the altar, as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 7. A person tells a colleague: "Take this lamb in exchange for this dog." Similarly, if he exchanged a dog for several animals or fowl, they are all forbidden [as sacrifices] for the altar.
When two partners divided [their goods], one took ten lambs and one took nine lambs and a dog, [the lambs] that are with the dog are permitted [as sacrifices], but [there are restrictions with regard to] the ten given in exchange for them. If the value of one of them is equivalent to the value of the dog or greater, it should be set aside and it [alone] is considered as "the exchange [for a dog]." The remainder are permitted [as sacrifices]. If the value of each of them is less than the value of the dog, they are all forbidden.76For a certain portion of each one is being given in exchange for the dog.
If [the entity given in] exchange [for the dog] underwent a change, for example, he exchanged a dog for wheat and ground it into flour, it is permitted.77For the article being offered is not considered as the article exchanged.The present [given] to a dog78I.e., a person sodomized a dog and separated a lamb as a fee. and an exchange given for a harlot79I.e., a person gave a colleague a lamb in exchange for a maidservant that was a harlot. are permitted. "A present to a harlot" and "the exchange for a dog" are permitted to be given to the Temple, for they undergo a change.80I.e., the articles donated to the Temple treasury are sold and the money used for improvements. Thus the distasteful article itself is not becoming part of the Temple. The actual substance of a present [to a harlot] should not be used as beaten metal for the Temple, as [implied by Deuteronomy 23:19]: "For every vow," [which is interpreted81See Temurah 30a.] as including sheet metal.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
Even the slightest amount1For the prooftexts says "No...." Although setting an entity afire is significant only if one sets afire an olive-sized portion (as stated in Halachah 3), if one mixes a small amount of a leavening agent or a sweetener together with other substances the size of an olive, one is liable for setting the mixture on fire. of a leavening agent and sweet entity2Divash, the term used by the prooftext and the Rambam, means "honey." Here it is interpreted in a broader sense applying to date honey, bee-honey, and sweet sap from other fruits. is forbidden [as an offering] for the altar, as [Leviticus 2:11] states: "For no leavening agent or honey shall be kindled... [as a fire-offering]."3Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 98) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 117) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. One is liable only if he set them afire together with a sacrifice or for the sake of a sacrifice.4If, however, he sets them afire for the sake of fuel, he is not liable as stated in Halachah 3.Whether one sets afire these entities themselves or a mixture of them, he is liable for lashes for each one individually. If he set afire both of them at the same time, he is liable for only one set of lashes, because both of them are mentioned in the same prohibition.5Although one is liable for lashes for each individually, since both transgression are mentioned in the same verse, one is liable for only one set of lashes. The Ra'avad differs and maintains that he is liable for two sets of lashes. The Kessef Mishneh explains that the standard printed text of Menachot 58b appears to follow the Ra'avad's understanding, but a more comprehensive understanding of the issue would favor the Rambam's view.
If even the slightest amount of these substances fell into the incense offering, it is disqualified.6The Jerusalem Talmud (Yoma 4:5) states that honey would greatly enhance the aroma of the incense offering. Nevertheless, it is forbidden by Divine decree. If one set [the mixture] afire in the Sanctuary,7On the Inner Altar where the incense offering is brought. If he would offer the incense on the Outer Altar, he would not be liable for lashes, because that is not the place where it is burnt (Kessef Mishneh). he is worthy of lashes. Setting an entity afire is significant only if one sets afire an olive-sized portion.
If one brought a leavening agent or a sweetener on the altar alone8I.e., not together with a sacrifice. as kindling fuel, he is exempt, as [ibid:12] states: "They should not be brought to the altar as a pleasant fragrance." [Implied is that] they should not be brought as "a pleasant fragrance," i.e., as a sacrifice, but they may be brought as kindling fuel. Even if one set afire an entity that is not ordained to be set afire9As explained in the following halachah. together with a leavening agent or with a sweetener, he is liable since it is part of a sacrifice.
What is implied? When one causes [the following entities] to be consumed [by fire on the altar]:10All of the entities the Rambam mentions are sacrifices or portions of sacrifices that were intended to be eaten and not offered on the altar. the meat of a sin-offering or a guilt-offering,11See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 7:1; 9:1, which outlines the portions of the sacrifices that were eaten. the meat of sacrifices of a lesser order of sanctity,12Ibid. 10:1. the remains of the meal offering,13Ibid. 12:9. what is left-over from the omer14Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 7:12. or from a sin-offering from fowl,15Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 7:7. the showbread,16Ibid. 12:3. the two loaves [offered on Shavuot],17Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 8:11. the log of oil brought by a leper18Hilchot Mechusrei Kapprah 4:2-3. - if one were to cause an olive-sized portion of any one of these entities to be consumed on the altar or on its ramp with a leavening agent or a sweetener,19From the exegesis of Leviticus 2:12, the Sifra and Menachot 57b derive that the altar's ramp is equivalent to the altar in this context. he is liable for lashes. Even though none of these entities are fit to be consumed by fire on the altar, since they are called sacrifices, one is liable for them, as [indicated by the initial clause of the verse cited above]: "You shall offer them as a first-fruit offering to God."20The verse speaks about the two loaves offered on Shavuot and from them, inference is drawn to other sacrificial entities.
Similarly, it is forbidden21Although the Rambam considers this prohibition as Scriptural in origin, he does not consider it as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot, Moreover, the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain that although this prohibition is derived from the exegesis of the verse cited above, since it is not explicitly stated in a verse, lashes are not given for its violation. to offer on the altar22Here the prohibition applies only to the altar and not to the ramp. any entity from all those listed that is not fit to be consumed by fire, e.g., the meat of a sin-offering or a guilt-offering, the remains of the meal offering, or the like. According to the Oral Tradition, we learned that when there is an entity from which a portion is designated to be consumed by fire, it is forbidden to have the remainder [of that entity]23Which was designated to be eaten and not consumed. consumed by fire.
A person who has the limbs of an impure24I.e., non-kosher. Conversely, in this context, "pure" means kosher. animal consumed by fire on the altar is liable for lashes despite the fact that the prohibition against offering it is [merely] derived from a positive commandment.25And generally, lashes are given only when a negative commandment is violated and not when a positive commandment is violated. [This is derived as follows:] The Torah teaches us to partake of pure animals26As stated in Deuteronomy 14:6; see Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 2:1. and to offer pure animals as sacrifices.27In the verse stated at the conclusion of this halachah. One may conclude that an impure animal should not be eaten and should not be offered. Just as one is liable for lashes for partaking of an impure animal [although it is a prohibition] derived from a positive commandment as explained in the appropriate place,28Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 2:1-2. There the Rambam explains that "with regard to the camel, the pig, the rabbit, and the hare, [Leviticus 11:4] states: 'These you may not eat from those which chew the cud and have split hoofs.' From this, you see that they are forbidden by a negative commandment, even though they possess one sign of kashrut." And he concludes "Certainly, this applies to other non-kosher domesticated animals and wild beasts that do not have any signs of kashrut." Thus although other non-kosher animals are not specifically mentioned in the prohibition, since they are included in the converse of the positive commandment, we conclude that the negative commandment applies to them as well. so too, he is liable for lashes for offering it.29The Ra'avad objects to this ruling, maintaining that just as one does not receive lashes for offering an animal with a blemish, so too, he does not receive lashes for offering an impure animal. His objection appears to be based on the principle that punishment is not given for transgressions that are derived by logical inference. Accordingly, since the obligation for lashes is explicit, even though it could be derived by logical inference, we should not make such a conclusion. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain the Rambam's perspective: these cannot be considered as prohibitions derived from logical inferences, because they are forbidden due to the positive commandment. Logic only expands the scope of the person's liability. When, by contrast, one offers the limbs of a kosher wild beast,30All sacrifices are brought from behemot, domesticated animals, or fowl, not from chayot, wild beasts. he violates a positive commandment, but he is not liable for lashes. What is the source that teaches that he violates a positive commandment? [Leviticus 1:2] states: "You shall offer your sacrifices from the domesticated animals: from cattle and flocks."31The term tzon, translated here as "flocks," can be used in reference to both sheep and goats. This is the intent here. From this, one can derive that one should not offer wild beasts as sacrifices. A prohibition derived from a positive commandment has the status of a positive commandment.32This is a general principle, applicable in many different contexts. See Chapter 3, Halachah 8, Hilchot Ishut 1:8, et al.
When one steals or obtains an object through robbery and offers it as a sacrifice, it is invalid33The Radbaz quotes Bava Kama 66b which explains that this refers to an instance where a person steals an animal set aside as a sacrifice and offers it as that sacrifice. It reaches that conclusion for it is obvious that if the animal was not consecrated beforehand, its offering is not acceptable, for a person cannot consecrate an object that does not belong to him. and the Holy One, blessed be He, hates it, as [Isaiah 61:8] states: "[I am God Who...] hates a burnt offering [obtained] through robbery." Needless to say, it is not accepted. If the owner despairs of its return, the sacrifice is acceptable.34When it comes to questions of monetary law, the owner's despair of the object's return is not enough to cause it to be acquired by the thief (Hilchot Geneivah 5:2-3; Hilchot Gezelah Va'Avedah 2:1). Nevertheless, it is possible to say that according to Scriptural Law, the owner's despair is enough to effect the transfer of the property, further requirements are Rabbinic in origin and the Sages did not apply their decrees with regard to a sacrifice (Kessef Mishneh). Alternatively, with regard to questions of monetary law, a change of possession together with the owner's despair is sufficient to effect the transfer of the property (Hilchot Geneivah, loc. cit.). Similarly, in this instance, consecration of the animal is comparable to a change of possession (Lechem Mishneh, gloss to Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 18:14). [This applies] even35The Rambam's words imply that certainly the concept would apply if a burnt-offering was involved, but even when a sin-offering is involved, the principle is applied, implying that a sin-offering is a more severe issue than a burnt offering. The Ra'avad differs and maintains that the word "even" should be omitted, implying that the two types of sacrifices are of equal standing.(A similar concept applies with regard to the conclusion of the halachah: The Ma'aseh Rokeach suggests amending the text to read: "How much more so does this apply with regard to a burnt-offering?!" I.e., according to the Rambam, the sin offering is considered more severe, while the Ma'aseh Rokeach maintains that the burnt offering deserves more weight.)The Kessef Mishneh explains that the Rambam uses "even" in reference to the first clause, even though the priests partake of such a sacrifice, it is unacceptable. if it is a sin-offering and thus the priests partake of its meat.For the sake of the enhancement of the altar's [honor], it was decreed that if it became public knowledge that a sin-offering was obtained through robbery, it does not bring about atonement even if the owner despaired of its return, so that it will not be said that the altar consumes stolen property.36The Radbaz asks: How can our Sages rule that the sacrifice is unacceptable and require that the person bring another offering? Since according to Scriptural Law, he has fulfilled his obligation, bringing the second sacrifice is in fact transgressing, for he is slaughtering an ordinary animal in the Temple Courtyard (see Hilchot Shechitah 2:1). The Radbaz answers that from this we see the power of the Sages: that if there is a significant reason - as in this instance - their decrees can nullify the validity of the first sacrifice. Hence, when the person brings the second sacrifice, he is bringing a sacrifice required of him, not an ordinary animal. Similar laws apply with regard to a burnt offering.
When a person steals an animal consecrated to be offered as a burnt- offering37But not a sin-offering, for a sin-offering must be brought explicitly for the sake of the person receiving atonement (Radbaz). by a colleague and has it offered without any further explanation,38I.e., he did not specify the reason for which it should be offered. the original owner receives atonement.39I.e., it is as if he had the animal sacrificed himself.
Meal offerings and wine libations may not be brought from tevel,40Produce from which the agricultural obligations of terumah and the tithes were not separated. See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 10:19-21. from chadash before the omer was offered,41This refers to produce from the five species of grain which is forbidden before the offering of the omer on the sixteenth of Nisan or the passage of that day. See ibid.:2-5. or from miduma.42A mixture of terumah and ordinary produce which may be eaten only by a priest. See ibid. 15:13; Hilchot Terumot 13:1-2. This is unacceptable, because the offerings must come from produce which is permitted to every Jew, not only a priest (Pesachim 48a). Needless to say,43The substances mentioned in the first clause, though forbidden at present, will ultimately be permitted, while those in this clause will never be permitted. Moreover, it is forbidden not only to partake of them, but also to benefit from them. they may not be brought from orlah44Produce that grows during the first three years of a tree's growth or replanting. See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 10:9-10. or from mixed species in a vineyard,45When a species of grain or vegetable is sown together with a vineyard, both plants become forbidden (ibid.:6-8). for that would be a mitzvah that comes as a result of a sin which God despises.46This is a principle applicable in many other contexts as well. For example, Hilchot Lulav 8:1 speaks of being unable to fulfill that mitzvah with a stolen lulav. If one brings such [an entity as a sacrifice], it is not sanctified to become fit to be offered as a sacrifice, but it is sanctified to be disqualified as are other consecrated entities that are disqualified.47I.e., once it is consecrated, it may never be used for ordinary purposes again, but must be destroyed like consecrated property that was disqualified.
As an initial preference, none of the meal offerings should be brought from chadash before the two breads [are brought on Shavuot], for [Leviticus 23:17]48In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 10:6), the Rambam uses the previous verse in that Biblical passage as a prooftext. refers to them as "the first fruits unto God."49Implied is that these breads should be the first offerings brought from the new flour. Although it is permitted to be used by an ordinary person beforehand, it should not be used for sacrifices before then. If, however, [such a meal offering] was brought, it is acceptable.50Since it is permitted to be used by a private person, after the fact, it is acceptable (op. cit.). Wine libations may be brought from wine that was set aside51I.e., was placed with one's merchandise and was not intended to be used for one's individual purposes. Such wine is forbidden to be used on festivals, but not on the Sabbath. See Hilchot Shivitat Yom Tov 1:17. on a festival.52Although the Rabbis forbade the use of such wine for private use, it is fundamentally permitted. Hence using it for a libation is not considered as bringing a forbidden substance as an offering. The Radbaz states that the Sages never extended their prohibition to encompass sacrifices.
It is a positive commandment to salt all the sacrifices before they are brought up to the altar,53Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 62) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 119) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as [Leviticus 2:13] states: "On all of your sacrifices you shall offer salt."54This commandment is mentioned many times in this text; among the references: Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 2:1; 6:4, 21-22; 7:1-2; Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 4:10; 6:3; Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 11:16. There are no entities that are offered on the altar without salt except the wine libations, the blood, and the wood. This matter was conveyed by the Oral Tradition, but there is no explicit verse to rely on.55Although Menachot 21a explains that this concept can be derived from a verse, apparently, the Rambam does not accept the exegesis mentioned there.It is a mitzvah to salt the meat very thoroughly like one salts meat before roasting it, in which instance one turns over the limbs and salts it.56See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 6:12. If, however, one applies even the slightest amount of salt, even one grain, it is acceptable.
If one offered a sacrifice without any salt at all, he is liable for lashes,57Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 99) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 118) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.The question is raised: Why is he liable for lashes? Lashes are not given for a transgression that does not involve a deed (Hilchot Sanhedrin 18:2). In this instance, seemingly, the omission of salt does not involve a deed. In reply, it is explained that the offering of the sacrifice without salt is a deed and thus warrants lashes. as [the above verse] states: "You shall not withhold salt, the covenant of your God."Even though he receives lashes, the sacrifice is valid and is accepted [Above] with the exception of the meal offering. For salt is an absolute necessity when taking a fistful of the meal offering,58See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 11:16 where this concept is discussed. Salt is not placed on the entire meal offering, only on that fistful which is offered on the altar. as [the above verse] states: "You shall not withhold salt, the covenant of your God from your meal offering."
The salt which is used to salt all of the sacrifices should be communal property like the wood. A private individual should not bring salt or wood for his sacrifice from his home.59Although a private individual may donate wood for the altar (Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 6:9), he may not demand that this wood be used for his own sacrifice.There are three places where salt is stored for the sacrificial service:60See the gloss of Rav Yosef Corcus. in the Chamber of Salt,61See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:17 where the chamber is mentioned. on the ramp [ascending to the altar], and on the top of the altar itself. In the Chamber of Salt, the hides of the sacrificial animals would be salted. On the ramp, the limbs would be salted and on the top of the altar, the fistful of meal [taken from the meal offering], the frankincense [from the Showbread], the meal offerings which are burnt, and a fowl brought as a burnt offering are salted.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
Just as it is a mitzvah for all the sacrifices to be unblemished and of the highest quality,1See Chapter 1, Halachah 1; Chapter 2, Halachah 8; Chapter 3, Halachah 11; Chapter 7, Halachah 11. so too, the accompanying offerings2As will be explained, every sacrifice must be accompanied by a meal offering that is mixed with oil and a wine libation. must be unblemished and of the highest quality, as [Numbers 28:31 states]: "They3The offerings. shall be perfect for you, as should be their accompanying offerings." Implied is that the accompanying offerings should also be unblemished. He should not bring wine libations that have been affected by smoke,4See Halachah 9. nor flour that is worm-infested.5See Halachah 11. Nor should he mix the flour with oil that is foul-smelling or foul-tasting.6See Halachah 14.
Similarly, the wood for the arrangement [of the altar] should only be of the highest quality. They should not be worm-infested.7See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:8 which explains that there was a special chamber set aside in the Women's Courtyard where the priests would check the wood to make sure it was not worm-infested. Any tree that is worm-infested when it is fresh is unacceptable for the altar.8Because then, it is impossible to scrape away the worm-infested portion in a desirable manner. If it became worm-infested after it dried out, one should scrape away the place that became worm-infested. Wood that comes from [a building that was] torn down is invalid. One should use only new wood.9See Chapter 7, Halachah 3.
There is an unresolved doubt when one consecrates invalid wine, flour, oil, or wood to the altar: Are they considered like a blemished animal in which instance, he would be liable for lashes10As in Chapter 1, Halachah 2. or do they not resemble a blemished animal? Hence, he is not liable for lashes. He is, however, given stripes for rebellious conduct.11See Hilchot Sanhedrin 16:3, 18:5, and notes for a definition of this punishment and the situations where it is applied. See also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 8:7).
Fine flour, wine, oil, frankincense, fowl, wood, and sacred utensils that became invalid or impure should not be redeemed, as [can be inferred from Leviticus 27:11-12]: "He shall cause it to stand [before the priest]" and "have it evaluated." Whatever can be caused to stand [before a priest] can be evaluated. These cannot be caused to stand [before a priest]. Therefore they are never redeemed.12As explained in Hilchot Arachin 5:9, blemished animals are the subject of the above verse. They can be "caused to stand before a priest." All of the above are inanimate objects that cannot be "caused to stand before a priest."
When does the above apply? When they became13The fine flour, wine, and oil. Wood, fowl, and sacred utensils may never be redeemed. invalidated or impure after they became sanctified in a sacred vessel, but before they have been sanctified in a sacred vessel, they may be redeemed if they become impure or invalid. Pure objects, by contrast, should not be redeemed even if they were not consecrated in a sacred utensil with the exception of the flour brought as a sin-offering. [Concerning which] it is said [Leviticus 5:6] "of his sin-offering" and [ibid.:13] "concerning his sin-offering," as will be explained.14Hilchot Shegagot 10:12. The verses and the latter source refer to an adjustable guilt offering. If a person was poor and therefore set aside a meal offering as required of one of his financial status and then became wealthy, he may sell the meal offering and use it to buy an animal as is required of him in his new financial position. [From the juxtaposition of the verses, it is inferred that] one may bring a sin offering from the money of his sin-offering. Therefore before it was consecrated in a sacred utensil it is considered as consecrated for its monetary value and it can be redeemed even though it is ritually pure.A separate arrangement of wood should be made for all of the accompanying offerings15The flour, wine, and oil that accompany a sacrifice. that became impure and they should be burnt on the altar.16The Radbaz states that this refers to offerings that became impure while on the top of the altar. If they became impure beforehand, they should not be brought there to be burnt.
[The following laws apply with regard to] the water for the libation of Sukkot17See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 10:6. that became impure and then it was joined [to an acceptable mikveh],18This is speaking about a situation in which the water that was taken for a libation before the Sabbath of the Sukkot and became impure on that Sabbath. We are forced to say this, for if we were speaking of an ordinary weekday, there would be no difficulty in going down to the Gichon Stream and getting new water. On the Sabbath, this is forbidden and the only alternative is to restore the ritual purity of the water (Rashi, Meiri, Pesachim 34b). as will be explained with regard to [the Laws of] Purity.19Hilchot Tuma'at Ochalin 2:21 which explains that when a receptacle containing water has an ordinary sized opening and is submerged in a mikveh, the water can regain its status of ritual purity. If he purified it and then consecrated it, it may be used for a libation. If, however, it was consecrated and then became impure, since it was disqualified, it should remain disqualified.20Even though the water regained its purity, it is no longer acceptable as an offering. This is a Rabbinic stringency (Pesachim, loc. cit.; see Halachah 8). Instead, water for the libation should be taken from the basin (see Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 10:10).
When olives and grapes became impure, they should be crushed less than an egg-sized portion2157 cc according to Shiurei Torah, 100 cc according to Chazon Ish. at a time.22The rationale is that as stated in Hilchot Tuma'at Ochalin 4:1, impure food will not cause other foods or liquids to contract ritual impurity unless the impure food is the size of an egg sized portion. The liquids that emerge from them are acceptable for the accompanying offerings. For these liquids are considered as [distinct and] set aside in the foods and it is as if they are not from their body.23I.e., were the liquids to be of the body of the fruit, they would be considered impure like the fruit itself. It is, however, considered as if they are distinct entities (ibid. 1:2) and they do not have the possibility of becoming impure until they emerge from the fruit. Hence, if there is less than an egg-sized portion, the liquids will not become impure.
Our Sages established an additional safeguard with regard to consecrated objects: When seeds became impure, even if they are sown, [the produce] that grows from them is not acceptable for the accompanying offerings, for sowing produce is not effective [in restoring ritual purity] for consecrated entities.24Even though it is acceptable with regard to terumah.Similarly, with regard to wood and frankincense, even though they are inedible, they can become impure like foods with regard to the sacrifices.25In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 4:5) the Rambam writes that the only unfashioned wood which ever contracts ritual impurity is wood used for the altar. [In such an instance,] the wood and the frankincense become disqualified for the altar because of this impurity and they should not be offered.
These are the types of wine that are invalid as [libations] for the altar: sweetened wine,26Wine sweetened due to exposure to the sun; alternatively, wine to which a sweetener was added (see Hilchot Shabbat 29:14). smoked wine,27Wine stored in a utensil with a foul odor [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 8:6)]. wine cooked over fire or in the sun until its flavor was changed by the cooking. The types of wine [to be listed] should not be brought [as libations] as an initial preference, but if they were brought, they are acceptable. They include: wine which was warmed in the sun,28This improves the flavor of the wine. See Rav Kappach's translation of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.). but its flavor did not change due to the cooking and similarly, raisin wine, wine from the vat that is less than 40 days old,29Grape juice that has not fermented. wine from [grapes grown] on trellises, wine from a vineyard in an arid region or in a dungheap, wine from vines in which other produce was sown between them, or wine from a vineyard that was not tilled.30All of these types of wine have an inferior flavor.
Wine that was left uncovered31As explained in Hilchot Rotzeach UShemirat Nefesh 11:6-8:10, when wine was left uncovered, it is forbidden because it is possible that a snake might have deposited venom in it. Hence, it is forbidden for the altar. is not acceptable [as libations] for the altar. If one draped a vine over a fig tree, its wine is unacceptable for a libation, for its fragrance has changed and [Leviticus 23:37] states: "Sacrifice and libations," [equating the two]. Just as [the appearance of an animal offered as] a sacrifice may not have changed,32See Chapter 3, Halachah 5. the wine for libations may not have changed.
When the majority of fine flour has become worm-ridden or the majority of the kernels of wheat have become worm-ridden33Even slightly worm-ridden. and [flour] was made from them, it is unacceptable. If the majority of one kernel of wheat became worm-ridden, there is an unresolved doubt [with regard to its acceptability]. Whenever flour dust remains in the fine flour,34In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Avot 5:14), the Rambam defines solet, translated as "fine flour," as the flour of substance that remains in the process of refinement and kemach, translated as "flour dust," as the dust that is cast off. it is unacceptable.
How is the matter checked? The treasurer inserts his hand into the fine flour. If dust clings to it as he removes it,35Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 8:2). it is unacceptable until he sifts it again.Fine flour from wheat that grew in an arid land, a dungheap, in an orchard, on land that was not left fallow and tilled should not be brought as an initial preference,36All of these types of flour are of inferior quality (ibid.). if it was brought, it is acceptable.
When wheat kernels were collected from cattle feces and then sown in the ground, there is an unresolved doubt if their disgusting characteristic has departed because they were sown37And the grain growing from them is an entirely new entity. Were they not to have been sown, flour made from them would not be acceptable. or they are still considered as disgusting. Therefore one should not bring meal offerings from [such flour] as an initial preference. If he brought, they are acceptable.
These are the oils which are unacceptable: oil from olives soaked in water or of pickled38In vinegar or in brine. or cooked olives, oil from olive dregs, or foul-smelling oil. All of these are unacceptable. In contrast, oil from olives that were planted in a dungheap, in an arid region, which had another crop sown between them, or oil that was produced from olives that have not ripened and are still immature39As explained above, fruit grown under these conditions is of inferior quality. should not be brought as an initial preference, but if it was brought, it is acceptable.
All of the meal offerings and libations40Both individual and communal offerings [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 8:1)]. are acceptable whether from [produce grown in] Eretz [Yisrael] or from [produce grown in] the Diaspora. They are acceptable from fresh grain41Grown in the present year. or grain from the previous years, provided it is of optimum quality. The only exceptions are the omer offering42The offering of barley brought on the second day of Pesach. and the two loaves [brought on Shavuot]. They must be brought from fresh grain and from Eretz Yisrael.43These concepts are evident from Leviticus 23:10 and, 16-17. See also Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 7:5-6; 8:2.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
Not every entity that is not unacceptable may be brought [as a sacrifice] as an initial preference.1This chapter focuses on one fundamental concept: that ideally the entities used for the sacrifices should be of the highest quality.What is implied? If one is obligated to bring a burnt offering, one should not bring a weak and unattractive sheep and [justify oneself saying]: "It does not have a blemish." Concerning this, can be applied [the words of censure, Malachi 1:14]: "Cursed be the deceiver... [who sacrifices a blemished animal to God]." Instead, anyone who brings a sacrifice should bring from the highest quality.2As evident from Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 16:4, here, the Rambam is focusing on the optimum manner of fulfilling the mitzvah, not on the letter of the law.
This is the practice that was observed in the era of the Temple: They would bring rams from Moab, broad-backed sheep3Because of their fat (Rav Yosef Corchus). from Chebron, calves from Sharon, young doves from Har HaMelech, wine from Korchayin and Chalutin, flour from Michmash and Yochanah and oil from Tekoa.4All of the names mentioned here are regions or cities in Eretz Yisrael. Each respectively was renown for the quality of the particular item associated with it.
All virgin wood5I.e., wood that has not been used for any other purpose first. is acceptable for the altar. They would not bring wood from olive trees or grape vines [in consideration of] the settlement of Eretz [Yisrael].6Oil and wine are considered basic necessities and hence, the trees and vines from which they derive should not be cut down for use as fuel for the altar. The Radbaz explains that olive trees and grape vines also frequently have knots and produce smoke that is undesirable. They would frequently use boughs of fig trees that grow in forests of unsettled areas,7Which do not produce edible fruit [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 2, 3). This atoned for the Sin of the Tree of Knowledge which was a fig tree [Rashi (Yoma 58a)]. those of nut trees, and those of fast-burning8Our translation is based on Rashi's Commentary to Tamid 29b. Literally, the words would be translated as "oily trees." trees. The logs that Moses made [for the altar in the Sanctuary] were a cubit long and a cubit wide.9For this was the size of the pyre. Their thickness was like that of the leveling rod for an overflowing se'ah. In future generations,10Even though the size of the altar as a whole was increased. [logs] of the same measurements were used.
What would they do when sowing wheat for meal offerings and accompanying offerings?11I.e., the practice to be described delineates the optimum manner of preparing flour for the meal offerings. Flour which was prepared in another manner may also be acceptable. They would leave half a field fallow in the first year12Leaving the field fallow improved the quality of the grain it produces. and sow the other half.13Plowing it each time [see the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 8:2)]. In the second year, he should leave the portion he sowed in the first year fallow and he should sow the second half seventy days before Pesach.14Although this falls on 5 Shvat which is in the midst of winter. "the sun already has the power to shine upon it" (Rashi, Menachot 85a) and improve its growth. If the field had not been tilled, he should plow it twice and then sow it. He should choose the kernels of wheat carefully15To remove any other seeds and to select the highest quality wheat (Radbaz). and then he should strike them16In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 6:5) the Rambam interprets this as striking the wheat powerfully with one's hand so that the dust will be removed from them. and tread on them17Crushing them with his feet to crack the shells (ibid.). until their shells are removed.
All of the wheat used for the meal offerings must receive 300 blows and be tread on 500 times. He should give [the kernels] one blow and then tread on them twice; give them two blows and tread on them three times. Thus they will have received three blows and will have been tread on five times. He should then repeat the pattern until he completes all 300 blows and 500 treadings so that much of the shells will have been removed. As a stringency, extending and drawing back his arm is considered as one blow. After this process, he should grind and sift the flour very thoroughly.
Wine [should be made by] bringing grapes from vines growing at foot level from vineyards that were tilled twice a year.18This is also the optimum manner to prepare wine. Wine prepared by other means is also acceptable. He should crush the grapes and collect [their juice] in small jugs. They should not be stored individually or in pairs, but instead in groups of three.19The Radbaz explains that the more barrels are stored together, the less each one is exposed to air. Hence, there is less deterioration in the flavor of the wine. The jug should not be filled to its rim in order that its fragrance will be perceived.20If the jug is filled to the brim, the vapors from the wine will have no chance to rise. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 8:6). He should not bring [libations] from the wine near the rim, because of the specks resembling flour21In that source, the Rambam explains that in the wines that he is familiar with, this phenomenon takes place only in the superior wines. He supposes that in Eretz Yisrael, this phenomenon would occur only with the inferior wines. that rise to the surface of the wine, nor from the bottom, because of the dregs. Instead, he should take from the middle third and from its middle portion.
A treasurer would sit [and watch] as the wine flowed from a hole on the side of a jug [of wine]. If he sees dregs flow out, he stops [the flow of wine] and does not complete the purchase.At what point [in the aging process of wine] should it be brought? From 40 days after the grapes were tread upon22Until then, the fermentation process will not be complete. The Radbaz writes that although the Rambam's wording does not imply this, from the beginning of the fortieth day onward, the wine is acceptable. until after two years and even slightly longer than that. If one brings wine that is even older, it is acceptable, provided its flavor has not spoiled.23Once its flavor has begun to spoil, however, it is unacceptable. See Chapter 6, Halachah 10.
There are nine categories of oil, depending on the process in which they were prepared. What is implied? When one picks olives at the top of an olive tree, selects them one by one,24Apparently, the Rambam is speaking about a situation when the majority of the crop are not ready to be picked and the ones he selects are those of the highest quality. crushes them and puts them into a basket, the oil that flows from them is considered in the first category. If, afterwards, he loads a beam upon them [to press them],25I.e., one of the techniques of pressing olives was to put them under pressure from a heavy beam. This would squeeze out more oil from them,. the oil which flows from them is of the second category. If he loads [a beam upon them] a second time,26Readjusting the beam will apply greater pressure and squeeze out more oil. the oil which flows from them is of the third category.When he picked olives in a mixture,27Without separating the good from the bad. This is speaking about the stage when most of the olives are ready for picking. Thus the ones he picks are not necessarily the most choice. brought them to the roof, selected them one by one, crushed them, and placed them into a basket, the oil which flows from them is of the fourth category. If, afterwards, he loads a beam upon them [to press them], the oil which flows from them is of the fifth category. If he loads [a beam upon them] a second time, the oil which flows from them is of the sixth category.When he picks olives28These are olives which grew late and never ripened sufficiently. and loads them in the vat until they begin to decompose, he then takes them up [to the roof], dries them, crushes them, and places them in a basket.29Although they were crushed and thus dregs will be produced, they were not, however, pressed with a beam, which would produce more dregs. The oil which flows from them is of the seventh category. If, afterwards, he loads a beam upon them [to press them], the oil which flows from them is of the eighth category. If he loads [a beam upon them] a second time, the oil which flows from them is of the ninth category.
Even though they are all acceptable [to be brought] with the meal offerings,30Menachot 86b states that the Torah allowed the inferior types of oil to be used, so that the price of superior oil would not rise and thus be prohibitively expensive for the people at large. there is nothing that surpasses the first category.31For the olives are superior and they are not pressed, so that few dregs will be included. Afterwards, the second and the fourth are of equal quality.32The second category uses superior olives, but they are pressed, so that they will have dregs. The fourth uses inferior olives, but they are not pressed, so there will be no dregs. After them, the third, fifth, and seventh are of equal quality.33Even though the olives of the third category will have been pressed twice, because they are of a superior quality, they are equal to those of a lower quality that were pressed less. Similarly, those of the seventh category, though pressed only once are of inferior quality to those of the fifth category. After them, the sixth and the eighth are of equal quality.34Even though those of the sixth category have been pressed twice, they are of a higher quality than those of the eighth. There is nothing inferior to the ninth.35For they are both of a lower category and have been pressed twice.
Only the first, fourth, and seventh categories are acceptable for the Menorah, for [Exodus 27:20] states: "crushed for the light," i.e., for the Menorah,36"The light." only that which flows after [the olives] are crushed alone37I.e., excluding oil produced by pressing. are acceptable. They are all acceptable for meal offerings.38Even though the Rambam mentioned this point in the previous halachah, he mentions it again here to emphasize that this concept is also derived from the exegesis of the verse. It is necessary that the oil flow from crushing only "for the light," and not for the meal offerings.
Since all of these categories of oil are acceptable, why were they listed as separate categories? So that one would know the superior category that nothing surpasses, those which are equal, and those which are inferior. In this way, one who desires to gain merit for himself, subjugate his evil inclination, and amplify his generosity should bring his sacrifice from the most desirable and superior type of the item he is bringing.39See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 16:3-4. For it is written in the Torah [Genesis 4:4]: "And Abel brought from his chosen flocks and from the superior ones and God turned to Abel and his offering."The same applies to everything given for the sake of the Almighty who is good. It should be of the most attractive and highest quality. If one builds a house of prayer, it should be more attractive than his own dwelling. If he feeds a hungry person, he should feed him from the best and most tasty foods of his table. If he clothes one who is naked, he should clothe him with his attractive garments. If he consecrates something, he should consecrate the best of his possession. And so [Leviticus 3:16] states: "All of the superior quality should be given to God."40See also Hilchot Terumah 5:1 which states that the finest grain should be separated as terumah.Blessed be God who offers assistance.
